Does the cabinet secretary share my sympathy for authorities such as Scottish Borders Council in this continuing recession, particularly given that the situation is compounded by their efforts to ameliorate the Tories’ bedroom tax? Will he confirm that there may be an opportunity for community councils in my constituency to access the climate challenge fund so that they can set up local recycling projects for green waste? If so, may I arrange to meet his officials to pursue the matter?

My question is a simple one. I do not know what is meant by “the effects of”. If we are to put something in legislation that is then to be reviewed, John Mason will have to tell me what it means.

I do not know what the remit of any review would be if it is just about “the effects of” the measures. That wording is far too broad.

The First Minister will be aware that this is the third week of an outbreak of norovirus in the Borders general hospital in my constituency. Is he kept regularly informed of progress in eradicating the outbreak and is he satisfied that everything possible is being done to bring the matter to a swift conclusion?

Is the minister aware of the work of Wilma Gunn, a former constituent of mine who established Scottish Heart at Risk Testing following her son Cameron’s tragic death from cardiomyopathy and who has campaigned with some success to secure defibrillators in public places? Furthermore, does he agree that her recent award of an MBE is very well deserved?

The Justice Committee requested time for the debate, and I thank the Parliamentary Bureau for allowing us to have it. All members of the committee were concerned about the lack of opportunity to take evidence, which comes from the extremely flawed process of dealing with LCMs on substantive measures that come to the Parliament. That is not the Government’s fault; that is the LCM process. I think that the Government was put between a rock and a hard place, but the committee, representing the Parliament’s scrutiny of the LCM, was also put between a rock and a hard place. The LCM follows a previous LCM on the Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Bill, which is a bill for England and Wales. The LCM is an addition to something that went before. Most LCMs are not contentious. That included this one, but sometimes we come across something that is under the radar, and the forced marriage part in the LCM was under the radar. Substantial examination was needed to give parties affected in Scotland a chance to have their say. We now hear that a further amendment is coming by way of an LCM on vulnerable parties. The process is most unsatisfactory. The committee has put down a marker. We asked the witnesses to come before us in a very short timeframe. Those who work on the ground in Shakti Women’s Aid and in Scottish Women’s Aid told us that people need to be reassured before they make a formal statement that the protection that they seek—we have protection orders available—can be obtained in the family courts, so their families will not be prosecuted. Our concern is that the approach in the LCM might be counterproductive. We have good legislation—legislation that does not apply in England and Wales and which is civil but which has a criminal penalty for breach of orders—that has been bedded in for only one year. Seven forced marriage protection orders have already been put in place, which is good news. We felt that the approach in the LCM came too fast on the scene. As I have said, the problem is that the Scottish Parliament is not in control of the timetable. However, we are where we are. We hear members express reluctance around the chamber. We all want to get to the same place, but are we going about that in the right way? If we have learned one thing in here, it is that legislating in haste means litigating and repenting at leisure. There is also the law of unintended consequences, which we certainly do not want to see. One concern is that, if a civil action is in process and a criminal action is then brought forward, the prosecution will take precedence, generally speaking. I hear what the minister says about prosecutorial guidance, but that will have to make things very clear, as it is not the victim or the person who reports the situation who is in charge of the process; it is the Crown Office. I think that the views of parties who might use civil process, if they find that the way that they want to go, should be listened to before the criminal process is embarked on.

I compliment the Parliament on discussing mental health and suicide prevention. In my long time in the Parliament, we seem to have raised those issues many times, which we have gone some way towards destigmatising. We have provided funding to the voluntary sector, which I will discuss later. It is refreshing to be in a debate that has been mostly—apart from a wee hit or two from Jim Hume—devoid of party politics and point scoring, which is as it should be. I welcome the Government’s suicide prevention strategy, which continues the earlier work on harm reduction, early intervention and destigmatising. I recognise the work that my colleague Kenneth Gibson has done, which he is humble about. In 1999, when I had no idea what he was talking about, he raised the issue of high suicide rates among young men. He has pursued the issue for years, and it is only those of us who have been in Parliament for 14 years who recall that. Kenny Gibson has kept to the subject, as others have done, for a very long time, and I compliment him on that, because we are catching up with him. I want to focus on the third sector, which is important and informed because of its grassroots contribution, as is illustrated in my constituency, where face-to-face help is provided. That is important, because there can be clever websites and clever things to do, but sometimes people just need someone right in front of them, with a cup of tea, to talk to and to listen to them. No website can provide that. I also want to talk about the role of education in the campaign—raised by many members, but begun by Nanette Milne—for the responsible use of social media, which definitely has an increasing part to play. Penumbra in my constituency promotes mental health and wellbeing, aiming to prevent mental ill health for people who are at risk. It provides support and practical, accessible help, based in the community and right in the middle of Galashiels in big offices, which destigmatises the issue right away. The premises are cheery, with well-painted, fresh rooms and coffee and tea. That says something about mental health issues, which—if we are honest—we all know affect many people, including many friends and relations, at some time in their lives. Health in Mind provides befriending services, offering six-monthly matches, operating initially in Midlothian and the Borders. Clients get six months with a befriender matched to them, to get them out and about, busy, out of the house and out of their cocoon. It helps them to get confident again with the outside world and to build their self-confidence and self-esteem, which can be so easily vanquished. For anyone, redundancy can take away self-esteem with the click of their fingers, as can a broken relationship, when all the cockiness and self-esteem that they once had disappear. It can happen to anyone. The befriending services help to rebuild people’s confidence so that they can cope with what many of us cope with every day without any problem—although we could all be there. New Horizons, founded in 1993, is an informal meeting place and self-help group where people help one another to get through their problems. It even leads to romance. It led to a marriage—I met the couple who had met there and then married. As a side issue, the bedroom tax affects people with mental health problems. One of the members at New Horizons told me that she cannot share a home because of her mental health condition but that she was being asked to have someone else in the spare room or be taxed on it. Together, those charities play a collective role not only with one another but by contributing to the planning of mental health services across the Scottish Borders. In Midlothian, we have midspace, the online mental health and wellbeing information service for people who want to know where to go for services. It points them in different directions for treatment and care. Other members have mentioned SAMH, which in my area is focusing on employability, which is important. While I am on the subject, let me point out that it is extremely difficult for somebody with mental health issues to disclose them to an employer. They do not want to put it in a form or mention it; they can say that they have had chicken pox, but they will not say that they have had a breakdown at some point in the past, because they fear that they will be written off and not be able to pursue their career any more. There are still issues with employers. Not all who may commit suicide are mentally in a position to access services, as I have said; neither are they identified by the system earlier on. Out of the blue, somebody can commit suicide triggered by redundancy, the end of a relationship, failing an exam or not getting the marks that they thought they would get. There can be no warning. I move on to the role of education. We have dealt with that, to some extent, in relation to social media, where there can be venomous bullying and distressing attacks on Facebook or in blogs and tweets. As has been said before, there have been highly publicised examples of individuals who committed suicide substantially as a consequence of online comments. We know that it is the bad things that are said about us that we keep reading. The nasty things are the ones that we cannot get out of our heads in the middle of the dark night when we remember a horrible comment that we have read. Do not look at those comments on the internet about me, by the way. They are there; they are there about us all. The nasty ones are the ones that we keep picking at, so if someone is vulnerable, they are the ones that they will remember. They bite into our souls. Lewis Thelwall, aged 19, of Port Talbot was bullied to his death because false rumours were put on the internet about him. He was vulnerable so he took the comments to heart and killed himself. In Fife, 17-year-old Daniel Perry became involved, in his innocence, in a scam. He was threatened with blackmail. People—anonymous users—on the social media website ask.fm actually urged him to kill himself. The same website had been linked to other youngsters’ deaths. He was sent messages saying: “you need to let a blade meet your throat”. Who are these people that put such things online? Daniel was warned that he would be better off dead if he did not transfer the cash. Of course, he took the warnings to heart and he hid everything from his family. The thing is that his mother said: “He was not the type of person who let things get him down”. Presiding Officer, I was told that I had a generous six minutes. Do I still have time left?

I ask the minister, who has indicated the issues that he is dealing with, why the ministers for education and children are not also involved in the mental health strategy. I want education to be included in the suicide prevention strategy. I know that some schools deal with Facebook, sexting and tweeting and all that, but others do not. I know that we all think that we are clever clogs at technology but we are way behind youngsters. Why are we not in schools and looking at responsible use of the internet? That has implications for those who put things on the internet, because they will be there for ever—when they go out to look for a job, the things that they have said and done online will still be there—and it has consequences that other people might regret for the rest of their lives if they are party to actions that lead to someone else taking their life. I therefore ask the Minister for Public Health to advise in his summing-up whether he is discussing these particular issues with the ministers responsible for education and children.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Some members said that some suicides are not detectable and come out the blue. On suicides being preventable, will the minister—before he runs out of time—address the need to educate children and young people about their social media responsibilities? Perhaps we could have avoided some young people committing suicide had there been discipline in use of social media.

I congratulate Paul Martin on securing the debate, although it follows extremely tragic circumstances, which he narrated. I note that the First Minister sat through Paul Martin’s speech and I welcome the First Minister’s establishment of the consultative forum on how to reduce, if not eliminate, dog attacks. Such attacks are horrendous and avoidable. I stress that they are the fault not of the animal but of the owner. Under the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Act 2010, we shifted to considering the deed, not the breed. I note what Paul Martin said about a restricted breeds list, but in that lies the inherent problem of defining a breed. Many of the dogs that are bred for aggressive purposes are crossbreeds—crosses of lurchers with bulldogs and so on—and are not breeds of dog. One problem with the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991 was that it listed four breeds of dog that were not the breeds of the dogs that then carried out awful attacks. Legislating involves difficult issues. We need to consider measures carefully. The attack on Kellie Lynch, which has been mentioned, brought about the 1991 act. That was legislating in haste and has proved not to be effective legislation—it is not the only example of that. A plethora of legislation deals with the important issues that Paul Martin has raised. We have the Dogs Act 1906, the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982, the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991, the Control of Dogs Order 1992, the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, the Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Act 2006, local authority byelaws and the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Act 2010. There is lots of legislation out there. As part of the review, I want us to consider whether that legislation is effective and whether there is an opportunity, in reassessing it and perhaps considering new legislation, for a consolidation act. Instead of having all the legislation scattered to the winds, can we bring it together to deal with breeding, licensing, the sale of dogs, ownership and so on? The clock is not showing how long I have spoken for, so it is difficult to tell how much time I have. I went into the microchipping debate that Claire Baker secured. I am absolutely for universal microchipping, but have issues with its being mandatory—although again, I am open to argument. Will the bad owners—the people who we know breed dogs as aggressive weapons and use them to tear other dogs apart and for dog baiting—have their dogs microchipped? I do not think so. What would happen to the microchips of stolen dogs that are used as bait? They can be removed, although that is a wretched, evil process. Who will update the microchipping records? We already have that under the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Act 2010, which is very useful but it involves tracking particular owners of particular dogs. Dogs changing hands is a difficult issue. That is not to say that the idea is not good, but the details and practicalities are important if we are legislating. The Licensing of Animal Dealers (Young Cats and Dogs) (Scotland) Regulations 2008 are an example of a piece of legislation that really has not taken us anywhere. Those regulations are supposed to regulate the sale of kittens and puppies under the age of 12 weeks. I have submitted a freedom of information request to every local authority in Scotland and cannot find one application that has been made under those regulations. I do not believe for one minute that nobody is selling or dealing in puppies and kittens under the age of 12 weeks, but they are not applying for licences and being checked. The legislation is gathering dust on the shelf. On the other hand, the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Act 2010—I am not patting myself on the back for it, as the legislation was started by Alex Neil—has been relatively successful. Sometimes with legislation it is a matter of suck it and see. From February 2011 to November 2011, 67 notices were served, and there were 693 investigations. The approach has been going for only two years. In the full year from 27 February 2012 to the same time in 2013, 147 notices were served, but there were 2,080 investigations. What is happening is not good enough, but that is a wee piece of legislation that is working. When we are considering what to do about these horrendous attacks, we must consider what works and what is sitting on the shelf. I have no idea of the time, because nothing is working.

I have the shortest of paragraphs. I welcome the continuing debate. The nail has been hit on the head about education, assessments in the home and assessments of lifestyle so that the right people get the right dog for the right reasons and look after it properly.

Will the member take an intervention?

On a brief point of information, the intervention currently takes place not after an attack has happened but at a much earlier stage, when people are concerned for their wellbeing and safety. The notices are used long before an attack takes place.

The member mentioned Dundee, and I have the figures in front of me. She is quite right that there have been no dog ASBOs, as she called them. However, the good thing in Dundee is that although there were only two investigations in the first six months, in the following full year there were 136 investigations. I do not think that we should underestimate the significance of dog wardens turning up and investigating an issue. It is a bit of a warning shot in the first place.

I did not!

Ah. “Thereby” is tactful. I welcome the opportunity to open the debate on behalf of the Justice Committee and thank all those who provided written submissions and gave oral evidence to the committee. You may feel that you have drawn the short straw, Presiding Officer—perhaps we all have—because I have 10 minutes yet again. I may struggle to fill the time, although I probably will fill it. Fear not—the subject is full of life. On the face of it, it looks like the driest of dry topics—and, my goodness, we have had a few of those in here—but not a bit of it. Although the language is technical and the law is a bit tricky, it is to do with day-to-day problems that cause real distress and angst for people. First, here is the tricky bit. There will be a test afterwards. I should say in passing to my colleague Colin Keir, who is lurking somewhere behind me—I am sworn to non-disclosure of this, so I am breaking a promise—that his request for an explanation in pictures is, regrettably, not practicable in the chamber. So, let us take a deep breath. Title conditions are legal obligations that appear in the title deeds of land and buildings. They burden one property for the benefit of another property and survive changes in the ownership of the properties concerned. Often, they appear in the title deeds of groups of properties, and the owners in question have mutual rights to enforce the conditions against each other. The word “burden” should not frighten the horses; I will give an example. Members may have been there themselves. If they have not, I am sure that they will have had constituents who have been in this pickle: when communal repairs to the roof or stairwell of a tenemented property are urgently needed, but only those who are affected—let us say the top-floor flat occupants—feel the urgency as they watch the damp patches spread across the ceiling and hear the drip, drip, drip of unwelcome rainwater in the eaves. If there is no factor to instruct—more of that later—the situation is even more trying. The six or eight tenemented properties may share the liability for the cost of the repairs to the roof, but because of those tricky little title deeds and those burdens, saying it is easy, while getting the money for the work to be done is quite another matter. We can add to that mix the difficulty in getting repairs agreed and paid for when some of the properties in the tenemented building are owned by people who exercised the right to buy those properties from the local authority, while other properties are rented from housing associations. Mixed ownership makes it even more difficult to get any kind of agreement, no matter what it says in the title deeds about getting the leak in the roof fixed. It should be an advantage to have a factor who is employed to manage all that for everybody in a tenement or a bigger development where there are shared liabilities for repairs and maintenance of what I will call common property—which means roofs and stairwells, although it can include walls, fences and so on. If people have a good factoring service that they pay for, that is all well and good, but it is very difficult for people to switch factors if they are not happy with the service. Why is that? It is because—this is what it says in those tricky little title deeds—it can require the agreement of two thirds of the people who own the properties. The first problem is that not all tenement flats are occupied by the owners. When there are absentee landlords, who does one tell or ask for agreement? It is tough enough in any event to get agreement, let alone to know who to ask. The first step would be to make it easier, one way or another, for those who require information to identify the landlords. The committee’s view is that the Government should legislate so that factors could tell everybody else who owns the various flats. That is not easy, however, because it would breach data protection rules. I know that the Government is not keen to do that; it would be helpful to know why because it is a big issue for people. It would also be helpful if the Government would tell us what it would do. I move on to another tricky issue; this one is worse. Section 53 of the 2003 act gives neighbours a right to enforce burdens in title deeds—do members remember what those are?—against each other, in which there is something called a “common scheme” and the properties are “related”. I will test the Presiding Officer on that later. The phrase “common scheme” and the word “related” are very vague. After all, a person will know that the roof above their block of flats or the common stairwell that they share with each other in their tenement might give them a responsibility to pay for their maintenance and repair. However, the trouble is that they might also be liable for some other common scheme of maintenance, perhaps at some distance, in the development in which they live. That might involve, for example, open areas that are not right next door to a person’s block of flats, above their head, or the stairwell and are not identified clearly in those tricky title deeds. What on earth does that mean a person is responsible for? That has caused a lot of problems. The matter is so tricky that we asked the Government to invite the Scottish Law Commission—who are just the chaps and chapesses to deal with tricky legal issues when one does not know what to do—to review section 53 as part of its work programme. Thankfully, it has accepted that recommendation, so I hope that, in due course—as the lawyers would say—the matter becomes so clear that even I and perhaps Colin Keir and John Lamont will understand it.

If only John Lamont had waited until to the end of my riveting speech—I will come to that. I know that this is riveting stuff—I have said so several times and I need to keep on saying it—so members will be sorry to see me sit down, but this is the final straight, unless of course John Lamont is hungry for more. The issue concerns land maintenance companies such as Greenbelt Group Ltd. I will not malign the company; the matter does not apply to it alone, but I merely use it as a convenient name that is publicly recognised as a company in this field. Speaking of fields, that is sometimes what residents find around their front door instead of the paid-for manicured lawns and well-tended shrubs for which they pay land maintenance companies a fee. It is quite common on a modern estate to have open green land that is owned by a company that then charges for its maintenance. However, the trouble arises when the company does not maintain that bit of green space but the bill still lands in the homeowner’s letterbox. As with the reluctance of those who are not immediately affected by roof leaks, those who are distant from the thriving weeds and overgrown shrubs are not keen to get involved in taking the maintenance company to task. There are rules set up—those might be in a deed of conditions binding all the people on a big estate, which may be 60 to 100 people, to share such costs—that require them to set up an owners association to deal with the maintenance company, but they do not bother to do that. Consequently, everything gets stuck in individual disputes, amounting on occasion to the refusal of a homeowner to pay his or her bill, which certainly gums up any prospect of replacing the maintenance company. Our recommendation—although we accept, especially in the current stringent climate, that it is a long-term goal—is that local authorities take over and see to the maintenance of such green spaces, much in the way that they eventually do the maintenance of roads in such developments. The committee felt that some mechanism for resolution is needed now—perhaps mediation—to resolve disputes in the interim. Intriguingly—a word that only lawyers and former lawyers would use in the context—land maintenance companies might not be legally entitled to charge, being both the owners of the land and imposing the burden for maintenance while asking other people to pay for it. It is arguable that being able to look at the land and walk over it is not a benefit. There was a delightful and slightly mischievous interchange between Professor Rennie and Professor Reid on whether land maintenance companies can charge at all, which is discussed on pages 18 to 20 of our report. I commend it to all who are with me so far. I could expand on that, but I do not have the time and—hey!—I do not want to spoil a good read. However, it is a rallying call to some chirpy lawyer out there to bring forward a test case, particularly if they can find the required man or a woman of straw who might access legal aid to fight one of the big boys. I come to Mr Lamont’s point. I offer a word in the ear of prospective house purchasers, which is already imparted by lawyers, I think. The excitement and drama of purchasing a home—some of us have been there—should not drown out the voice of the lawyer in the purchaser’s ears telling them in plain English, I hope, about liabilities for the roof. For instance, the person who owns the top flat might be liable for all the roof maintenance. The lawyer should also tell people what the deed of conditions might mean to their monthly bank balance. It is better for the home owner to attend to a few loose slates or a leaking gable before they invest in an unnecessary replacement kitchen. Although the law needs to be overhauled in some areas and tweaked in others, it is also a home owner’s responsibility to ensure that the fabric of the house is not neglected for the sake of some more glamorous gadgets. I am 33 seconds over. That is not bad. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Justice Committee’s 8th Report, 2013 (Session 4): Inquiry into the effectiveness of the provisions of the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003 (SP Paper 338).

2. I declare an interest as chair of the cross-party group on animal welfare. To ask the Scottish Government, in light of the recent discovery of six badger carcases near Peebles, whether it is content with Police Scotland’s resource allocation for detecting and preventing wildlife crimes. (S4T-00552)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary shares my and my constituents’ shock and disgust at the horrendous discovery on their doorstep. Notwithstanding the additional resources allocated by Police Scotland, recent evidence shows that badger baiting is on the increase, with 40 incidents in 2013. However, in 2012, there were only two prosecutions—one was a fine; the other was then an on-going prosecution. When badgers are slowly savaged to death, the dogs also sustain horrific injuries. Given that and the partnerships that the cabinet secretary mentioned, is he aware of any liaison between Police Scotland and the veterinary community to assist in tracing the criminals if dogs are taken there?

I fully accept that serious and organised gangs are involved. To return to the difficulty of tracking them, I understand that bull lurchers, which are big, muscular, powerful dogs, are being bred to make the baiting even more savage. Are there any resources—the cabinet secretary may not know but Police Scotland may be able to tell us in due course—for a whistleblowing capacity within the Scottish wildlife crime unit, so that people can report sightings of this new dog specifically bred for the purpose of badger baiting?

4. To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government will commemorate the passing of 25 years since the Lockerbie disaster. (S4F-01794)

I thank the First Minister for his reply and endorse his comments with regard to our thoughts for the victims’ families and indeed the victims themselves. I should declare that I am a signatory to the justice for Megrahi campaign and, like many others, am concerned that the wrong man—and possibly the wrong nation—was in the dock. Will the First Minister now write to the Prime Minister requesting a joint inquiry, under section 32 of the Inquiries Act 2005 and the concordat between both Governments, into all aspects of that atrocity? If the Prime Minister does not agree, will the First Minister’s Government take the lead and instigate an inquiry here into the devolved issues, such as the policing and Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service actions, which might at last kick-start a full United Kingdom inquiry, which, I respectfully suggest, is what the victims’ families really require?

I am pleased to recognise that section 1 of the bill refers to a victim as someone “who is or appears to be a victim”. We must always remember that, until court proceedings are concluded and the case is proven, the prime witness is an alleged victim. They might be a victim to the police and to everybody else but, in court, they are the alleged victim. That is important. We are maintaining the principle of being innocent until proven guilty—the presumption of innocence. The burden of proof is on the Crown and the standard of proof is beyond reasonable doubt. I welcome the bill, because it goes without saying that victims, alleged victims and witnesses often find what goes on in court mystifying. Although a culture change has occurred and there have been moves to make courts more user friendly, if I can use that expression, that has not been good enough. I recall, when I was a civil practitioner, being in the criminal court and not knowing what was going on. I saw the procurator fiscal and the defence having a wee chat in the well of the court. The mumblings went on and I presume that plea bargaining was being done in the middle of things. Goodness knows what the public made of that. It is equally important not only that information is given to someone from the start, when they go to the police station to make a complaint about an alleged offence, right through to the release of the convicted person, but that it is provided in plain English. We in the chamber are also guilty of getting into technospeak, and it is very important that people can understand the information and feel that they can ask for an explanation of what is going on. I do not think that the notion of having a single point of contact—worthy though it seems to be—is practical. What happens if that single point of contact is ill or on holiday and not available? The idea of developing a hub is good, but the personal touch is always important.

I accept that there is as much variation among witnesses as there is in the features on our faces, so I find the part of the bill that deals with vulnerable witnesses interesting. Some witnesses can be tough cookies—they will know the inside of court like the back of their hand, possibly better than the judge or the sheriff—so we must not think that all alleged victims or witnesses are sweet little people. However, it is important that we protect those who are by far the majority: the people who never thought that they would be in court but find themselves there giving evidence and find out that it is not like it is on the telly. I am finished, Presiding Officer—I have done it with time to spare. Thank you.

I will leave the stats to be battled out on the front rows, but it is of concern that the demarcation of jobs continues to this day. The issue is much more complex than being just one of Government policy or even legislation. There is much more in the culture that stops girls taking science—and I speak as someone who took science and maths at school and got the prize in fifth year. Members are surprised, but then I have many surprises. I will focus on the Labour amendment, much of which—apart from the obligatory reference to the United Kingdom—is reflected in what Scottish Government policy is now and will be in the future. I do not know why Kezia Dugdale’s amendment says that the Government debate should be “centred on the real, lived experience of women, not the constitution.” I was not aware that the constitution was some kind of pure, self-contained, detached concept that has nothing to do with political change. That is not what it is all about; it is not self-determination for its own sake.

I have only four minutes—I am sorry. The constitution is a means to an end, and the end is to deliver the kind of society to which I think both Kezia Dugdale and I aspire. We want a society that frees up women so that—to use that exhausted phrase—they can reach their potential. While I recognise the Scottish Government’s march to universal childcare, post independence I would want to see support, through a tax system or care allowance, for a woman or man who wishes to stay at home to be a full-time parent or carer for their children until, say, the children reach nursery school age. I would like to see that balance. I speak as a real, live woman—sometimes too real and too live for some. I have had three professional careers: as a secondary teacher, as a lawyer and now as a politician. I have two degrees, two sons and a divorce. I have had a busy life. However, I was lucky. My father had four daughters and a son, and he made it plain that we should all have opportunities. At the time, girls left school at 15 and aspired—at least on a working-class estate—to do nothing higher than become a clerk or a secretary. I was the first to get to stay on past 15 and I was the first to go to university. Decades on, it is very disappointing that there are glass ceilings that are not only not broken but not even chipped. Kezia Dugdale’s solution is to await a Labour Government riding on a white horse to rescue us all from the baddie Tories—real or in Lib Dem clothes. I am not sure whether Mr Miliband would be that white knight but, even if he was, that argument does not bear the scrutiny of history. The trouble with me is that I have been around for a long time. I had eight years of Labour in power here with the Liberal Democrats and decades of Labour Governments at Westminster and I am underwhelmed by what they achieved. The rich got richer and the poor—mostly women—got poorer. Through the deft financial management of Brown and Darling, the most recent Labour Government took us to the brink of bankruptcy. The continuing recession probably hits women more than anyone else because they are in low paid, low valued, often part-time and—to their employers—disposable jobs. Labour, or a coalition of Tories courtesy of the ever-obliging Lib Dems, will not make a jot of difference to Scotland’s women, even in the unlikely event that England decided to go with good old Ed. With independence, all the parties in Scotland have a chance to put forward their manifestos and bring forward their policies to provide women with the opportunities that should have been open to them during all the years that I have had those opportunities. That liberation of women in Scotland would, in my view, propel the rest of the UK to imitate it.

I thank the Presiding Officer for his forbearance, as it is the second time today that he has had to listen to me. I thank all those who signed the motion that allowed the debate to take place, and I welcome to the public gallery representatives of various trusts and community initiatives from across my constituency. I remind them—not that they need reminding—of the reception afterwards, to which the Minister for Local Government and Planning has said, lest he forget, that he will come, albeit briefly. The minister also pledged in an answer to me last week in this very spot that he would set up an information website to assist communities to establish community trusts and to access funding. There will be a questionnaire at the reception for representatives to fill in to inform the website’s structure—there is no such thing as a free nibble on my watch. What are development trusts and community initiatives, why do they exist and what do they do? When I entered the Parliament 14 years ago I had no idea, and no answer to any of those questions, but, as my granny would say, “Ye ken noo”. The motion refers to a sample of those trusts and initiatives that I have come across in the past 14 years, such as Auchendinny, which was building its community centre while the other building was quite literally falling down. It looks smashing now, and fit for a “Grand Designs” visit. The same goes for Silverburn’s community hall, which was reclaimed from a disused water storage building. Silverburn is a small community, but it has a lot of get up and go. In fact, the team from “The Beechgrove Garden” has already been there to see the community garden that has been established. The Newlands project arose when the people of Romanno Bridge and the surrounding area were galvanised when their local school was threatened with closure and they took it into their own hands to keep the school and add community facilities. They fought for funding from the lottery—which was just over £800,000; not a hill of beans—and from other sources such as European funds. That process was—as they and I know—pretty painful and stressful for them, but they got there. There are other projects such as Gorebridge Development Trust, which is, as a community hub, well on its way from drawing board to build, and has secured more than £1 million of lottery funding. Penicuik Development Trust has its fingers everywhere, and has secured some funding to restore the lost garden of Penicuik. Not content with that, it has prepared a business case to establish a paper-making museum in Penicuik, which members should all know was the home of paper-making so long ago, and it does so much more. I should also mention the great Polish map of Scotland at Eddleston, and the restoration project—for which, again, initial funding has been secured. All those projects not only give pride to a community but can generate income for the local community through local people working locally. Lamancha has a community centre with an exotic barbecue hut, which I invite members to visit. When I say “hut”, I mean a posh Nordic version with a lock door, proper seating, places for candles and a proper barbecue centre. These people know how to do it and how to build within their communities—and those are only a few examples. The projects have a lot in common. They are community based with a dedicated team of activists who are often working quite thanklessly and are in for the long haul, facing obstacles and learning pretty hard on the job, especially with regard to securing funding. Ultimately, all of them have achieved community success, and I know that those that are still at the drawing-board stage will also achieve community success. I know that they have done it through blood, sweat and tears—quite often literally, as it took huge acres of stamina out of the parties to stick with that work.

Absolutely. When I talk about the few working very hard, it really is the few—sometimes it is only when the building is actually going up and they are about to cut the ribbon to open it that the community realises what has happened on its doorstep and begins to become engaged with it. Of course, that is not the end for the trust. Such buildings have to be used; the trust has to get resources and it has to get revenue in from the community using the building. However, I know that trusts can be extremely successful at that. Quite often for these development trusts and community trusts, their job just continues into a different phase once the building is up and running. I have huge regard for the people involved. I am not just saying that. I have a really huge regard for people who take up the cudgels for their community. They tough it out and they stick with it and they are not getting paid to do it; they are not getting press recognition and quite often nobody is patting them on the back. They are doing it because it is the right thing to do for their community. They give a project a kick-start and say, “This matters where I live.” They build for their communities—real buildings. I have visited Newlands community centre; I have visited Silverburn’s community centre; I have been to the Lamancha hub; and I have stood right where the great Polish map of Scotland was before they made it a health and safety issue—we are not allowed to do that now. I have been to those places. The lost garden of Penicuik is a wonderful project but it needs a lot of work and I can see how people in the early stages in particular have a really tough time. I know that other people will speak about community trusts in their areas. All the community trusts and development trusts should take pride in what they build: it is a tangible example of their efforts. Not many politicians can say that. Even after 14 years here, I cannot point to a building that I have put up or a community that I have contributed to in that way, but the trusts have, so my congratulations to them all. I say to those communities that are a bit wary of doing such projects, speak to the development trusts and community trusts in your area, see what lessons they have learned and take something on for your community. The reward will be in seeing a building go up that the community will use for generations to come.

The Liberal Democrats know all about selling out.

4. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government will take to avert the reported pressures on social care budgets undermining care services for older and vulnerable people. (S4F-01715)

I am aware—as we all are—that the cuts to our budgets are having huge impacts across this area. In my constituency and elsewhere, because of pressures in the here and now, carers looking after their elderly and vulnerable clients are increasingly close to breaking point. Will the First Minister and his Cabinet colleagues consider whether, in very pinched budgets, we can find some funding to assist in the here and now?

3. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body whether it plans to use committee rooms for exhibitions on a regular basis. (S4O-02656)

I am delighted to hear that, because the key remit of the corporate body and its staff is to ensure that the Scottish Parliament can operative effectively and that members can carry out their duties. However, recently, the Justice Committee was relegated to the chamber to take key evidence. I sat on the Labour benches, committee members sat where corporate body members are sitting now and the witnesses sat where Jackson Carlaw is sitting. We had great difficulty while a committee room was allocated for an exhibition. It appears to me that the key priority was the exhibition. In case I am considered to be particularly grumpy or a spoilsport, I point out that it crossed my mind that the chamber would make an excellent venue for Cirque du Soleil—just a suggestion—and that that might even determine the safety of the beams.

I agree that the exhibition was excellent, but that is not the question in point. The question in point is that the key priority is to allow MSPs to carry out their duties effectively. By deposing the Justice Committee from a committee room and placing us in the chamber, those priorities were changed. Frankly, I do not want it to happen again.

I, too, had better welcome the minister to his position, or I will be in trouble. In my constituency, there are several town centres—such as Penicuik—that require a helping hand. Given the constraints on the public purse in Government and in local authorities, will the minister consider providing an information website that is dedicated to helping communities to establish—if it is appropriate—development trusts, social enterprises or whatever to lever in lottery funding, for example, to regenerate their town centres?

It is a cliché to ask, “Where were you when Kennedy was assassinated?” but some of us have a reply. I asked some colleagues. John Pentland was in a house listening to the radio. He could not be more specific than that—or perhaps he was just being evasive. Roderick Campbell pled the fifth amendment. Nanette Milne was in the medical school library at Foresterhill in Aberdeen. Mini-skirted Mary Scanlon was back-combing her hair in Montrose, ready to go to the Locarno to dance to Brian Poole and the Tremeloes. It was cancelled. Elaine Murray was playing with her junior chemistry set and listening to the radio. I was in the Cameo picture house, also in a mini-skirt, watching a Jacques Tati film. The film stopped. We thought that the projector had broken, but then, across the black screen came the words, “John F Kennedy has been assassinated.” Stunned to silence, the cinema emptied without people having been given any instruction to leave, and I felt that the world was a very bad place. Why? When JFK became President, it seemed that a new world had a chance. He was charismatic and refreshing, with his stylish wife and charming children. The court of Camelot, as the White House and the entourage became known, seemed a breath of fresh air and promised so much to the impressionable teenager that I was: an end to wars, for a start. Wars have continued even up to today, of course. I recall what became known as the Cuban crisis: the 13-day confrontation in October 1962 between the Soviet Union and Cuba on one side, and the United States on the other. That crisis is now generally regarded as the moment in which the cold war came closest to turning into a nuclear conflict, and is the first documented instance of mutual assured destruction, which is aptly shortened to MAD, being discussed as a determining factor in a major international arms agreement. MAD—how appropriate. I truly thought then that world war three was inevitable. That was a chilling moment. The Camelot court was not, of course, as clean as a whistle and the idyllic family was not so idyllic, but those were the days before the internet, texting, 24-hour news, satellite broadcasting, and people documenting events with their mobile phones. When I review the reality of the Kennedy years—some good, some bad—with the benefit of historical appraisals, I recognise his achievements, but sometimes it is chalk and cheese. However, that does not detract from the promise that was snuffed out so brutally. We can compare the election of JFK with the election of Barack Obama, not simply because of the means of reaching the electorate and the funding but because some of the hopes that rested on the shoulders of JFK seemed to transfer to and come alive again with the current first family. However, the current personable and eloquent President, though exuding some glamour and style to western eyes at least, has had a much tougher time from his electorate and the fourth estate. That is not necessarily a bad thing, although the results might sometimes depress us, but how would JFK and his family have fared today by comparison? The assassination of JFK remains a seminal moment in international history, and it was followed five years later by the assassinations of Martin Luther King and Bobby Kennedy in the same year. Those three murders put a brutal stop to the influence of three substantial figures and, for the very young Christine Grahame, the promise of a different and better world.

Does the cabinet secretary recall my reference, in a recent debate on the counters proposal, to the established use of diary cars in, for example, Midlothian? Police take non-emergency 101 calls and fix an appointment, at a time and place suitable to the caller, to take a statement. Is that happening in other parts of Scotland? It seems a very good idea.

I congratulate Colin Keir on securing the debate and declare from the outset that my speech will be a completely panda-free zone. I lived just over the hill from the zoo—note that it is “I lived” and not “I am”—and so I was a frequent visitor there in my youth. I commend it for the transition from holding big animals in captivity—the polar bear and so on—to conservation. The Victorian and Edwardian concept of a zoo as a collection—as if animals were non-sentient objects—has gone, at least from Edinburgh zoo. Perhaps only the colony of penguins, which seem to be as happy as Larry, is a highly visible legacy of that past and of the great whalers that brought penguins to the zoo and who sailed with Christian Salvesen. Indeed, like the penguins, the Salvesen family, which might not thank me for the comparison, still has strong connections with the zoo. I have connections of an entirely different kind with the zoo. Here is my zoo story, so bear with me. In around 2000, I was a member of the zoo, so when my mother died and my brother Tony and I were commissioned by the family to find a venue for her funeral tea, we bypassed the usual hotels and halls and plumped for the mansion house—the members’ house—which is slap bang in the middle of the zoo. My mother’s whole life had been devoted to family—children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren—and we thought that the zoo was an appropriate choice for her funeral tea. The funeral itself, as you would expect, was very hard going, with many tears. To compound that, it was a beautiful and warm late April day, with clear blue skies and blossom everywhere. After the service, to mourners’ surprise, we asked them to assemble in the zoo car park and then to go on to the members’ gate at the top. There, I announced to the attendant that we were the funeral party. He skimmed his eyes over this troop draped in black and said “I think I worked that out,” which broke through the gloom. Hearts lightened, we sashayed past the meerkats, who took a good look at us, as did the usual tourists, and we then had a grand buffet in the mansion house, with its splendid view over Edinburgh to the Pentlands. When the children had had enough, their parents took them on a tour of the zoo. “Some funeral party!” I thought; it was inspired and a real tribute to mum’s endless kindness, especially to children. Well, whisky flowed and though one or two people drifted off, the hard core of the family dallied late into the afternoon, finally straggling down the hill past the somewhat startled flamingos. It was, indeed, very quiet except for the sounds of the animals and birds, but for some reason—perhaps it was the whisky—we did not notice. Then a chap flew past us on his bike, almost a blur apart from his checked breeks. We thought nothing of it and dallied even longer in the late sun, admiring the animals on our casual descent. Man on bike reappeared breathless, having pedalled furiously back up the hill. “Are you the funeral party?” he asked. Well, we were used to this and smiled and confirmed, “Yes, we are the funeral party.” “Well, I’m the cook,” he said, “and you’re locked in the zoo. It’s closed.” Of course, he fetched some keys from somewhere, but I like to think to this day that it would have confirmed to mum what a daft bunch of folk she had raised. So, you see, Colin Keir: in the list of events and attractions that you said the zoo offers, funeral teas—and the whisky and consequences thereof—were omitted.

I congratulate Claire Baker on securing the debate. Although I supported her motion, she will be aware that I have lodged what I hope she sees as a friendly amendment. I will refer to that later because it is pertinent to the debate. I share Claire Baker’s call for a Scotland-wide debate, beyond these walls and this bubble, with the Scottish public. However, we need to keep within realistic funding packages, as we know that we have tight constraints. I also share the sentiments in the “Unfinished Business” report that “Scotland’s landscape ranks amongst the best in the world”. Some of that sits right on the Parliament’s doorstep. We take Arthur’s Seat for granted and, not far flung from here, the Pentland hills have what is called a stunning landscape signature, which lets people know that they are approaching the capital city. As you are aware, Presiding Officer, my amendment “notes what it”— the Parliament— “considers the important distinction between national and regional parks, such as Pentland Hills” and “Clyde Muirshiel”. The distinction is relevant. A national park area has substantial protection. There are structured and audited governance arrangements as well as substantial central Government funding, although private funding is levered in. Sometimes the restrictions are not always popular with the residents, but they should always remember that they are lucky to live in a national park area. It is a privilege to live in an area that is for the use of generations to come. Regional parks are substantially different from national parks. The first regional parks were set up in the 1960s and the one that I am interested in—the Pentland hills regional park—was established in 1986. Its governance is much looser than that of the national parks. It simply involves a coming together of the local authorities that bound it to fund it in cash or in kind by providing wardens or funding to do the same things that are done in the national parks, such as ensuring that the public can use it responsibly, repairing paths and assisting businesses. Its governance is not really structured and it does not have central Government input—the input comes through local authorities, whose funding is at a pinchpoint. The problem with the Pentland hills regional park is that when it was set up—which was at the time of regional authorities—the Borders Regional Council and Strathclyde Regional Council areas did not fall within it, with the result that only 43 per cent of the park is protected. I publicise the fact that I intend to lodge a bill to extend the boundary of the regional park to take in the southern part, which would bring in another two local authorities. Before I scare the horses, I make it clear that I am making a distinction between a national park, where planning is rightly regulated, and a regional park, which has very limited protection. I know that some parties in the Pentland hills regional park are frightened of the park becoming a national park in one leap, but the protection that regional park status brings should be there, even though it is less than the protection that national park status brings. I have no intention of altering the constitution, as such, of the Pentland hills regional park, but I would like the debate about national parks, which Claire Baker has rightly brought to the chamber, to embrace regional parks and, indeed, national areas of scenic beauty. We have a very mixed bag of designations and definitions. If we are to protect Scotland’s landscape, we must bring those together in any debate that we have so that we understand how they interlock and the different functions that they have. We must also talk about them in language that the public will understand so that we all benefit from the landscape around us, particularly as the built environment encroaches on it more and more. I congratulate Claire Baker on securing the debate. I hope that she does not mind me introducing the issue of regional parks, because I think that the two types of park are strongly linked, and not many people know about the distinction between regional parks and national parks.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister or his officials engage with the Pentland hills regional park consultative forum? He will be happy to hear that it is not looking for money. Will he engage with the forum on the way forward to allay its fears about what a regional park means, as opposed to a national park? Will the minister’s officials do that if he is too busy?

I congratulate Dennis Robertson on securing the debate. Decades ago someone said that a woman cannot “be too rich or too thin.” That was Wallis Simpson, the Duchess of Windsor. Not so long ago, someone said: “Nothing tastes as good as skinny feels.” That was Kate Moss, super model. The slogan was put on t-shirts and ads until it was banned by the Advertising Standards Authority. More recently, even the Duchess of Cambridge was complimented on how slim she had got so soon after the birth of her child. The same media had previously directed abuse at the Duchess of York, who happened at one time to be rather voluptuous, because she was not slim enough. The model, Sophie Dahl, had a curvaceous plus-size figure, but the change in having such a model created a hoo-hah. To conform, she slimmed down to a size 10, if not a size 8. The voluptuous Nigella Lawson, who licks her fingers when she is making chocolate cake, has lost two stones. Very rarely do we see a female television presenter who is not very slim, if not thin—and I am told that television puts half a stone on a person. I watch Downton Abbey. The women actors on that programme are almost androgynous in build—every single one of them. Practically every image that young girls see—whether on advertisements, on television, in plays or in the media—implies that to be slim is to be good is to be successful. Members should not take only my word, as someone who is a media watcher. By the way, I may not be Marilyn Monroe, but I relate to that era—bring it back I say. The Royal College of Psychiatrists, in its 2010 report on eating disorders and the influence of the media, talked in relation to visual imagery about “The promotion of the thin body ideal. Pre-teen or underweight models are used as the predominant image with a lack of diversity in body size, shape, age and ethnicity ... The portrayal of physical perfection as attainable ... and the norm through extensive use of digital enhancement or airbrushing.” Jackie Baillie referred to that. It said: “There is a lack of reality-based imagery.” Magazine content is exactly the same. Body critical articles, particularly those targeting celebrities for having eating disorders or having put on weight, show photographs of them in bikinis, with a bit of a tummy, even after they have just had a child. Such critiques force women to take a certain view of themselves and underrate their other qualities. The Royal College of Psychiatrists in its 2010 report recommends the following: “Use of role models throughout the mass media that cover a diversity of weight, shape, age, disability and ethnicity. Cessation of the use of underweight models. Raising awareness of use and extent of digital manipulation of images through use of a kite mark.” That is very important, because young girls look at magazines and think that people really look like that—well, they do not. The problem perhaps starts with seeing slimness or the cult of thinness as a goal or an achievement. We are all guilty of doing that. We congratulate someone on losing weight—we do that in here. How many MSPs would admit to having been on a diet or have said that they are on a diet, should be on a diet, have come off a diet or have failed on a diet? People do not always diet for health reasons. In fact, it is rarely for such reasons; rather, it is to do with vanity, self-esteem and receiving the praise that follows from our colleagues. However, taken to extremes, as Dennis Robertson rightly mentioned, dieting has disastrous consequences—it exacerbates an emotional and mental predilection to take it even further than the rest of us. I commend Dennis Robertson for bringing the debate and I commend Debenhams for using size 16 mannequins—though why it stopped at size 16 I do not know, as there are lots of women out there who are more than a size 16. However, I offer one word of caution. We have been here before with the shops and with models, so let us watch that there is not a relapse on the promise and that the change is not just for the time being. Rather like Sophie Dahl, we could then be back on that diet.

In the list of influences, the cabinet secretary has not mentioned the commercial advantage to companies of all the dieting fads, medicines and pills out there. It is in the interests of those companies to keep the issue on the boil, as it were, so that people will continue to purchase those products—and fail—because there is a lot of money to be made from them. Perhaps the cabinet secretary should also mention that influence.

4. Unfortunately, this question, which I must read out, is quite long. To ask the Deputy First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on Shelter Scotland’s statement that around 5,000 children will be housed in temporary accommodation over Christmas and that the law must be changed to enable families to challenge inadequate temporary accommodation. (S4F-01655)

Given that the bedroom tax and welfare cuts will undoubtedly exacerbate the position, and given that research by Shelter Scotland has shown that children who are in such temporary accommodation are two to three times more likely to be absent from school because of the disruption, will the Deputy First Minister accelerate her discussions with COSLA and local authorities to ensure that the use of temporary accommodation is very limited? It is damaging to children and has many consequences.

I shall say this very slowly: I am amending parts of my speech.

Heavens. It says in my notes, “Welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate”. I think that that might be going a bit too far. I speak on behalf of the Justice Committee, which was the lead committee in considering the bill. Like the minister, I thank all those who gave written submissions and oral evidence to the committee. I will get in a wee moan first. The difficulty is that the minister gets to speak first, which completely undermines all the issues that we raised in our report. I wish that it was the other way round, but I have no power. As the minister says, the purpose of the bill is to create a system to improve the independence of tribunals and facilitate improvements in the quality of service to tribunal users. It is a worthy but somewhat dry and technical bill, so I have dressed to distract. Given that I am, yet again, allocated vast deserts of time—10 minutes—when there is not much to say except repeat, and repeat and repeat, I have huge sympathy for those who follow. I would call this a tumbleweed debate, but there was a worse one in 2000 on the reform of district courts. Look it up. Nothing could have been drier than that. Stewart Stevenson (Banffshire and Buchan Coast) (SNP) rose— I am sure that Mr Stevenson will tell me about an even greater tumbleweed debate.

I liked the last bit, but the idea that I was around in 1693 is a bit wounding. By way of introduction, I will take members on a brief journey through the mixed landscape of tribunals. For the purposes of the debate, and indeed the legislation, those tribunals will be in the devolved areas, which of course is only 2 per cent of the total. They include the Additional Support Needs Tribunal, which considers references made by parents and young people against decisions by local authorities regarding additional support for learning needs. In certain circumstances, it will hear placement requests. I know that things have improved since then, but some years ago I attended one of those tribunals with a constituent, only to find the council armed to the gunwales with solicitors, and parents having only me on their team—and a silenced me, at that. It was not very balanced and was quite intimidating. There is the Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland, which, as the minister said, considers issues of compulsory detention under the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003—taking away individuals’ rights. There is the private rented housing panel, which sets about resolving issues between landlords and tenants, and the home owner housing panel, which aims to protect home owners by providing minimum standards for property factors and, broadly, land managers. I know that members are familiar with all these tribunals, but many people do not know about them until they have to use them. They have a problem, they go on the internet and they find out that the tribunals exist. It is all pretty nitty-gritty, basic and practical stuff, which quite often involves the citizen and the state, in the form of the local authority or indeed any other organisation. At the other end, as the minister said, is the Lands Tribunal for Scotland, which is really more like a court in its processes and culture. As I have said, the tribunals are very disparate; many of them have evolved over time. That is a good reason for the bill to draw them into some structure or order, while maintaining the range of processes and the culture of the informal of some and the very formal—perhaps of the Lands Tribunal—while building in accessibility and maintaining a firm line between tribunals and courts. That is important. The committee supports the general principles of the bill. However, we highlight a number of areas, which the minister has already sabotaged, that could be improved to ensure that a balance is achieved between streamlining the current system without losing individual expertise within the existing tribunal. Reserved tribunals are not included in the new structure. The United Kingdom Government has put on hold plans to devolve reserved tribunals for the time being. I repeat—my first but not last repeat—that devolved tribunals account for only around 2 per cent of Scottish tribunals. Witnesses, including the Faculty of Advocates and Citizens Advice Scotland, recommended that those reserved tribunals also be included to ensure the effectiveness of the system and make the process clearer for the user. On judicial leadership, we welcome the designation of the Lord President as head of the Scottish tribunals and agree that that would bring strong judicial leadership across the system. However, as I said, we had concerns about the appointment to the post of president of tribunals, which will happen through what I think is called the signing. I am not sure whether another term was used.

Thank you. The president will be responsible for the efficient disposal of tribunal business. Currently, only a senator of the College of Justice can be assigned, but some witnesses felt that that was overly restrictive. I add that that does not in any way reflect on the proposed assignment of Lady Smith, Queen’s counsel. We welcomed the bill’s objective to secure a greater degree of tribunal independence, which will be brought about by the new structure. That is particularly the case for valuation appeals committees and education appeals committees, to which I have referred. Some witnesses raised questions about the nomenclature that is used to describe legal members of tribunals. I think that we made a bit of a fuss about that, but I just threw that bit in to see whether members were awake. The Lord President argued that legal members should be referred to as judges to afford them the same status as court judiciary. On the other hand, the Law Society of Scotland and Employment Tribunals (Scotland) argued in evidence that that would make tribunals too court-like. What was the word that we agreed on? I have forgotten. Was it “courtified”?

I will need to develop adjectives and adverbs now. We concluded that how legal members of tribunals are referred to was a matter for individual tribunals to determine and therefore recommended that provision be made in the bill to give tribunals that flexibility. The bill also allows judicial members to act as members of the first-tier and upper tribunals, if authorised to do so. If members do not know what we are talking about with regard to upper and first-tier tribunals, they will need to look at the briefings on them, or somebody else in the chamber will explain—I am looking round at colleagues. [Laughter.] However, I am not too hopeful, given that sound. We were concerned that allowing judicial members to act as members of the first-tier and upper tribunals would lead to over-judicialisation—I think that that is a word—of the tribunals and make them more formal. We were also concerned that the court judiciary might not have sufficient specialised knowledge and experience of tribunal work to carry out the proposed role. We were concerned, too, about the possible impact on the diversity of appointments to tribunals and that perhaps the current gender and other imbalances within the judiciary would be replicated. I think that Margaret Mitchell might develop that issue. I have a feeling that I have pressed a button there. The committee concluded that the nature and characteristics of tribunals should be protected, but we recognised the benefits of the provision on membership of first-tier and upper tribunals. We therefore concluded that the provision could be applied effectively using the president of tribunals’ discretion, with possible consultation with the relevant chamber president. As I said, I will leave others to explain about chambers. The definition of a tribunal is a tricky one. Because there is an issue about protecting the particular characteristics and nature of tribunals, a number of witnesses suggested that the definition of a tribunal should be included in the bill. I will give members an example, as I have 10 minutes for my speech. The Scottish Committee of the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council has a definition of a tribunal: “A body which resolves disputes between citizens and state and between private parties by making binding decisions according to law, does so by a process of adjudication which is specialised, relatively informal and less adversarial as compared to the model of adjudication applied by the courts and is independent of both the executive and the legislature and of the parties appearing before it.” That is one proposed definition. I know that the minister’s response to the committee, which I have taken the trouble to read, referred to section 2(3) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. Other members might wish to develop that point. The bill’s challenge is to strike a balance between establishing a unified tribunal structure and retaining the unique features of tribunals of different kinds. It is also important to have the perception that that is being done. Some of our witnesses were concerned that the perception might be that all the tribunals were the same. On practice directions—I am getting through my speech—we welcome the minister’s commitment to lodge an amendment to review the provision in section 68(5)(a) that enables the issuing of practice directions for the purpose of “the application or interpretation of the law”. We did not like that bit. If I remember correctly, the Lord President did not like it either, so I am in a good team in supporting that amendment. Are members still with me? They are all awake, which is quite a big plus. The committee supports the bill. We welcome its objectives of bringing about a greater degree of tribunal independence as well as ensuring the greater accessibility of tribunals to users. We identified issues that to some extent the minister has addressed. I am sure that other members of the committee are itching to pick up on some of the aspects of the bill that I have not had time to cover. I look forward to hearing other contributions in the debate and to the inventiveness of colleagues in trying to say something additional in the next two hours.

Mention them again.

Will the member take an intervention?

It is to challenge your history.

I may blunder, but I was not aware that the divine right of kings pertained to the Scottish kings. I thought that it was an English concept and that Scottish kings were appointed by leave of the Scottish people following the declaration of Arbroath. Lewis Macdonald is nodding, so I have an ally.

It feels like it, too.

Crumbs. Graeme Pearson said in a Justice Sub-Committee on Policing meeting: “I indicated that the business case might well justify some offices closing or amending their hours. My position is not that there should be no closures”.—[Official Report, Justice Sub-Committee on Policing, 31 October 2013; c 259.] Fair enough; I have said it. I think that we all accept that there is a background of swingeing cuts to the Scottish budget, and that that is reflected in the budgets that we have to apply. Police Scotland therefore had to look to cut £64 million from the budget this year. It is almost there, but it has more next year. What do the public want in a time of austerity? If a choice—it is about choices—has to be made between police counters being serviced when there is little usage of them and the police being visible and acting on the streets of our towns and villages, I think that we can all predict the answer. The question is: are police counters necessary in all circumstances? When did members last use a police counter? If we look at the usage figures from the earlier police review and the consultation, we will see, frankly, that it would be hard to justify keeping them all open, as people use mobiles, emails, texting, 101 and 999 in emergencies.

I do not have enough time. I want to deal with Kezia Dugdale’s point. In a recent meeting with the divisional commander for Midlothian, Jeanette McDiarmid, we had a discussion about the availability of police officers if somebody dials 101. She raised the whole profile of the diary car. Somebody will phone up, say that there has been an incident, and it will be determined that it is not urgent. They are asked when it would be suitable for the police to call, they are put on a list in the diary, and one police officer—two are not always needed—goes out at the person’s convenience to their home. If they are working or picking up children from school, that visit is done at their convenience. It is a face-to-face approach. The importance of keeping contact with the police beyond reporting incidents is also important. I think that Margaret Mitchell raised the issue of the public simply being able to go in and tell the police about things that have happened. It is a good thing that the police go out, as I do. I do not sit in my Galashiels office; I do surgeries in supermarkets such as Tesco three Saturdays a month. I collect intelligence and hear from people. The police are thinking of doing their surgeries in supermarkets and libraries to be in touch with the public where the public are and at their convenience, rather than asking them to have to travel to the location of a police counter. In my patch, it has been proposed that some hours will be marginally reduced, such as in Penicuik, Peebles and Galashiels, and that there will be two counter closures, in Lauder and Melrose. Despite the publicising of the proposals, I have had not one email of concern about them from any constituent. I received one email that sought clarification as to whether it was the police station being closed or the counter, but the sender also praised the fact that they were seeing police in their village as they had never seen them before. As for the visibility to which Margaret Mitchell referred, Gorebridge in my constituency has no counter availability but the big police station is highly visible, with a big “Police” sign, and it is very busy. I know that because I have been on shifts with the police officers. The police have briefings in the station before going out. The folk in Gorebridge are not unhappy about not having a police counter. We could go the way of England, with police officers disappearing like snow off a dyke and money being spent on 41 police commissioners, elected on less than 20 per cent of the vote and with annual salaries of between £70,000 and £100,000 a year. I think that the Scottish people would prefer to see us spending our money on police officers on the beat, on crime detection and reducing crime across the piece and, frankly, keeping the peace.

I, too, congratulate Alison Johnstone. Of course we say yes to there being too many fatalities and serious accidents, yes to Government initiatives and yes to improving safety for cyclists on and off our roads, but I say no to strict liability. Or is it strict liability? I will be pernickety. We are moving from strict liability to stricter liability to presumption of liability. My understanding is that strict liability means that there is no defence. It is used in product liability—for instance, if somebody opens a can of beans and there is a bit of a mouse inside. It does not say that there is a bit of a mouse on the ingredients in the can of beans. That is strict liability. I think that Alison Johnstone is referring to a presumption of liability. If we are going to talk about the law, we should be specific. We have a muddle of terms being used. I also say to Kevin Stewart, who has left, that the sentencing of someone in a criminal case is based on the degree of culpability, not the consequences of what they do. Somebody could run into a lamp post without due care and attention and kill nobody or do the same and kill somebody. The consequences are different but the culpability remains the same. We are thinking of trying to shift the onus from the facts and circumstances of every case as to who or what is liable. We seem to be forgetting contributory negligence, which is often split 50:50 or 75:25. How will that be worked in? Let us examine the principle. If we extend it to a collision between a cyclist and a pedestrian, the presumption of liability would be on the cyclist. Why not go further? Why not extend it to a collision between a Mini and a minibus, a minibus and a Megabus, or a panda car and a pantechnicon? What principle is in operation? This is a serious issue. Is it about the greater power of the vehicle?

I am talking about a principle in law. The principle here is that, in a collision between a more powerful user of the road and a less powerful user of the road, the presumption goes in favour of the less powerful. If that is the principle in operation, we should look at applying it elsewhere. Scots law operates on principle. By the way, Cycle Law’s briefing referred to UK law. Much of the law in Scotland on delict and negligence is Scots law, which is very different indeed. Let us take a multiple collision. A car shunts into the back of another car, which shunts into a cyclist, who shunts into another cyclist, who shunts into a pedestrian. Where does the presumption land there? Where is the presumption of liability in that particular incident? Answers on a postcard. Let us think about the other unintended consequences. I am just testing the principle. All motorists carry compulsory insurance. If we introduce a presumption that the cyclist is not liable and the presumption of liability falls on the user of the road—the motorist or the lorry driver—insurance premiums will rise because all these issues will be brought to the insurance companies to deal with. Will it therefore follow that all cyclists will require to have third-party insurance so that we can have a knock-for-knock negotiation, as happens at the moment? All I am doing is raising the issues. Having been knocked off my bike by a motorist, I have no difficult whatsoever arguing about the lack of safety on the road, whether in urban areas or in rural areas, where one can turn a corner and find cyclists riding four abreast and one has to watch what one is doing. That is not the issue. The issue is about changing the law and the consequences of doing so to the law and to insurance.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

4. To ask the First Minister, in light of the specialist crime division’s responsibilities for organised crime, counter terrorism and intelligence, what its role will be in relation to the National Crime Agency, which sets the United Kingdom’s overall operational agenda for tackling these matters. (S4F-01616)

I thank the First Minister for his reply, from which I take some comfort that the operational independence of Police Scotland through the specialist crime division is not compromised. In the light of the referendum next year, have there been discussions about the relationship between the rest of the UK and Scotland post-independence in combating, for example, international terrorism?

I, too, welcome the debate, and I congratulate Jim Hume on securing it. I welcome members of the Scottish Youth Parliament from the Scottish Borders—they happen to be in the Parliament today, and I think that they are listening to the debate. I declare that I was once a volunteer lawyer who gave advice at a CAB. You see? Lawyers do give free advice sometimes—hold the front page. The public, and indeed politicians, are not fully aware of young people’s need for free advice across a whole spectrum of areas. The inhibitions that we all share when it comes to asking for advice—let alone knowing that we need it or where to find it—can be worse for the young. The outreach work that has been developed in Roxburgh and Berwickshire in the constituency neighbouring mine is very much to be welcomed. It is an excellent development, and I am delighted to hear from Jim Hume that it might be extended to other parts of the Borders. I scanned the Citizens Advice Scotland website specifically to see what issues were on it. There is a myriad of them, and they are complex. I will quote from the page on “Young people and consumer rights”, and we will all learn something. The section on betting and gambling says: “If you are under 18 you may not enter a public betting shop or gaming club. You can go into a licensed bingo club or other premises where bingo is played, as long as you don’t take part in the game. If you are under 18 you can take part in prize bingo at fairs and amusement arcades as long as the prize does not exceed £15.” How do people know that? Who is to know that? It is so complicated. Much to do with age and what is prohibited or allowed is very complex. Perhaps gambling is a serious issue, but let us take the more serious issue of firearms and other weapons. Again, there is guidance on the CAS website, which says: “If you are under 17 you cannot purchase or hire any firearm. If you are under the age of 15 you cannot have in your possession an assembled shotgun unless supervised by someone of 21 or over, or unless the gun is covered with a securely fastened gun cover”— I hope that members are still awake— “that prevents it from being fired.” Things are very complicated. I do not use Twitter, but I use Facebook and other social media. It is important that the young can access that information, as well as outreach information, through social media. Problems around access to benefits and housing are perhaps unfortunately more prevalent among young people now. Who knew that we would look to our 16 to 25-year-olds to have to know such stuff? When I left school just a couple of decades ago, I walked straight into a job. I was 16 and a half and had had enough of school. I walked along Chambers Street, knocked on the doors of four insurance companies and was offered a job at every one. Those days are gone. Unfortunately, straight from school or even university or college, young people have to know how to access benefits. Young people have entitlement—wonderful. The CAS website has information on young people and benefits. However, it explains that “Young people under the age of 25 are entitled to 20% lower Jobseeker Allowance ... payments” and that they have lower benefits all round. Of course, I and, I am sure, many members in the chamber think that that is a scandal. Lower benefits are not an issue for older people or for people who suddenly find themselves unemployed. Although some of the information to do with firearms, for example, is complex but necessary, the issues to do with young people, benefits, access to housing and rights are, regrettably, very serious. My colleague Alison McInnes, who is in the chamber, knows that, in the Justice Committee, we find the complexity of what can and cannot be done at different ages a mystery. It is time that that mystery was resolved. Citizens Advice Scotland’s report “Being Young Being Heard: The impact of the recession on young people in Scotland” is an excellent document. I thank Jim Hume for the debate.

For the sake of people who are involved or are becoming involved in the IPTR process, it would be helpful if it could be given more clarity shortly. Are we talking about months? When will the new system be up and running? I appreciate that it is early days, but it is important to narrow that down.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

As other members have done, I welcome the reforms that have been announced and, in particular, I welcome the tone of the debate. Members have mentioned the £20 million for the rare conditions medicines fund, and how the SMC is to be more transparent and flexible in its approach by holding its meetings in public, and so on. However, I want to focus particularly on the demise of the IPTR process, and the introduction of the peer approved clinical system. It is incumbent on the cabinet secretary to give deadlines or timescales for that, because time is of the essence for people who are listening to the debate. I welcome the more flexible approach to the critical test for authorising drugs that are not readily available on the NHS. Ken Macintosh and other members mentioned the postcode lottery of IPTR, and the critical test moves away from that. The process causes difficulties for people, but there will be advocacy in the new system. The test of exceptional circumstances, which is almost impossible to meet, is moving to what I believe—and hope—will be a person-centred approach that will be of more benefit to applications for drugs that fall outwith what is usually available. The debate shows Parliament at its thoughtful, compassionate and responsible best, but we have not shed our critical faculties—we need to ensure that what the Government has announced actually happens. We owe it to all the people outside here. I have to say to Duncan McNeil that the Health and Sport Committee’s report is excellent. I am glad that I came into the debate because I have read it from cover to cover. It is sound and it tackles some hard issues. The area is a sensitive one and the committee did not shy away from it. More important is that the report was unanimously agreed. The Public Petitions Committee here started out being more of a meet and greet, but it now has substance and gets things done. It got the Borders railway agreed, and it has brought this announcement. It really has arrived; other Parliaments should look to what it achieves for the people by bypassing the politicians and making them pay attention. I am not looking for promotion, but the cabinet secretary is a man who gets things done. He has got into the job and is achieving things, but we still have to find out whether he will get a good report card. Most of all, I congratulate the constituents who have turned up at all our surgeries who have been looking for IPTRs and have had to struggle against the system. I will talk about one of my constituents—Ian Morrison. He will not mind my mentioning him, because he has been mentioned in Parliament before. He tried everything on his own. Like others, he trawled the internet and websites, and went on a very steep learning curve. He went to politicians from across the political spectrum. I do not blame him—who would not do that? He had to find out for himself how to deal with the situation. His application was at first rejected, but it was successfully reviewed. Having been diagnosed with bowel cancer two years previously, he eventually accessed cetuximab. Where is he today? His wife is in the gallery and he is in the shop, minding it. Ian Morrison had to go about it the hard way, including going to websites, finding out about voluntary organisations, going to every politician he could think of and so on. He is now directing other people who are in the same situation to politicians and others who might help. Of course, it should not be like that, and we all know that. I thought that it was a case of “Well done, Ian Morrison”, and that was it. However, on Friday, a man of 40-odd walked into my surgery with his wife, with a three-month-old baby in a carrier and a toddler at home. I thought that it was just another ordinary meeting and asked what was happening, but we had a wee bit of chat and I heard that he had been diagnosed with bowel cancer on 1 August this year and his life had been turned around. From having an ordinary life in which he built houses, he now scans the internet and websites, and is going to everybody, including me, to try to find out what he can have from the system. What struck me was that his surgeon and consultant did not tell him anything about IPTRs. He is now fighting the system to try to get second opinions and to see what is available to him. That is what would happen to any of us, but it should not be like that. I therefore very much welcome the change in culture that the new system will bring, so that people who suddenly have such news landing on them out of the blue will find something in place that is helpful, accessible, fair, just and open. We know that it will not mean that everybody will get everything they want, but at least that will be the case for the right reasons and the position will be the same across Scotland. What I want to hear from the cabinet secretary in his closing speech is what will happen to people like my constituent between now and when the new system is in place, because every week and every month counts for such people, as the cabinet secretary and I both know. In the transition period, we need to know whether the new system’s culture and way of looking at applications will be applied to IPTRs. Will we find it being individual-centred? Will we find the test being material benefit, not exceptional circumstances? If that starts from the minute we walk out of here, this Parliament will have achieved something.

I very much welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment, but I do not think that the public have access to SPICe. Many questions have been posed, so as far as the cabinet secretary is able to answer them in that timescale, it is very important to put the answers in a publicly accessible area—perhaps the Government’s website—so that those who are interested in the debate, including the many beyond here, can see those answers for themselves.

While operational policing is of course a matter for Police Scotland and ultimately for the chief constable, has the cabinet secretary been made aware—I have been made aware of the issue across my constituency—that, if divisions are ranked on issues such as stop and search and targets become the be-all and end-all, the unintended consequence could be an erosion of the operational discretion of officers, which in turn could undermine the good will that community officers work so hard to achieve on the beat?

Presiding Officer, I wish that you had not prefaced the debate in that way as I got to my feet. Why is it that I always get extra time when I have not got much to say, whereas when I have lots to say I get two minutes? Let me say for a start that I want to grumble. I want to grumble to the Parliamentary Bureau—I have made this grumble before—about its scheduling of justice debates for Tuesday afternoons. The Justice Committee barely finished at 1.15 pm today, having had to strike from its agenda item 5, which was consideration of a draft report on the Tribunals (Scotland) Bill, so we are labouring. I know that Mr FitzPatrick has left the chamber—just as well—but we do not want justice debates on a Tuesday afternoon. We have had hardly a chance to look at the issue. I speak for myself, although I am sure that the other committee members are thoroughly engaged with that.

Perhaps. We will see. Actually, I am positive about the issue. Just because legislation—or, indeed, anything or anyone—is old, that does not necessarily make it bad or in need of reform. However, in the case of the 1974 act, it is fair to say that the legislation is past its sell-by date. I am with Graeme Pearson in being able to say that I agree with the cabinet secretary on the issue—someone must write that down in big print. However, I note that the formal consultation began barely one month ago, so I plead with the cabinet secretary not to land the Justice Committee with another bill, as we have plenty to go on with just now. It is true that the 1974 act is complex. In my briefing for today’s debate, I was given a flow chart showing how it operates. It makes one dizzy, trying to follow all the various routes that show what should and should not be disclosed. If ordinary people are asked whether they have a previous conviction that should be disclosed, I do not know how they understand it. One in three men and one in 10 women have criminal convictions, but do they know when they should disclose them? By the way, I say to Jackson Carlaw, whom I saw checking that figure, that I am not one of those. In teaching, for example, which is a former profession of mine, all criminal convictions are required to be disclosed, even if the conviction was for a small breach of the peace at the age of 17.

Does Jackson Carlaw want to confess?

Ah. How kind. In any event, we have even changed our views of what is and is not a criminal. To take a simple example, the lad who is convicted of a knife crime was only a knife stroke away from being the victim and, similarly, the victim was only a knife stroke away from being the person who was convicted. We understand the complexities of how people get into a life of crime. That is not going soft on crime; it is understanding that it is a complex matter. I am glad to say that we have got away—or at least some of us have—from wanting an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth. We need to look carefully at injustices. For example, as the cabinet secretary said, a person who has had a sentence of more than 30 months has no escape and has to declare it. I do not understand why. However, it is essential that we protect the public at large, and some sections of the public require specific protections; we require specific protections in relation to people who work with children, in healthcare, in licensing and in some other trades. The system has to be fairly subtle. We have to get the balance right and we have to take the public with us, because the public do not want to hear that people who have committed crime are coming out of prison and, within a short time, are scot free and do not have to declare it. We have to take the public with us, as well as the stakeholders—to use that awful expression. Those are the technicalities. On the pragmatic side, I want to mention one issue that has already been referred to. I fear that there will be a lot of repetition in this debate, Presiding Officer, so fasten your seatbelt. The Justice Committee has examined purposeful activity in our prisons. With Alison McInnes, I went to the young offenders institution at Polmont, where provision of purposeful activity is patchy, although to give the institution its due, I say that things are moving and changing. I think, however, that the effort to provide education for some young offenders is very poor indeed, because it involves their sitting at a desk for two hours. We do not make people in second year or even fifth year at secondary school sit at a desk for two hours, so we certainly will not get a young lad or lassie who is alienated and has separated themselves from society doing it. There must be more creative ways to get people to improve their literacy and numeracy. That is a big issue in our prisons. As my colleagues do, I have huge regard for the new chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service, Colin McConnell. He is a reformer and he is going to get some brickbats, because he says things that people do not like to hear. For example, when he talked about access to telephones—my goodness! One would think that he was going to let prisoners have a free for all and speak on the phone willy-nilly. What he was trying to say—he does not need me to say this, but I will—is that we need to normalise people. We should make them realise that they are in for punishment, but we try to normalise their lives, keep them connected with their families and communities and get them to do normal activities so that, when they come out, they are not totally alienated. By the way, the process must continue when people come out. The education process, the normalising and the attempt to rehabilitate must cross over. I think that one of the Justice Committee’s witnesses talked about the prison walls being “permeable”. In other words, there is not a solid wall. People should come through and get their throughcare and support throughout. Graeme Pearson is right that some of the things that we need to do are simple. It is about having somebody at the prison gates—not a bad guy, but a good guy—who can provide somewhere to stay for the night. In Cornton Vale, when some women are released, there is somebody there with a taxi from the 218 centre in Glasgow saying, “I’ll take you to this place now.” The person is supported immediately. Those are simple things, but the opportunity can be lost within 24 hours of a person’s being discharged. Although the consultation is excellent, we have to look at the whole package and at what is happening in our prisons—we cannot take our eye off that proverbial ball. In a way, one of the more important things is to take the public with us so that they understand that, when we are looking at rehabilitation and perhaps at changing the way in which people have to declare previous convictions, we are not going soft, but are instead being honest.

I took a very short break and listened to Sandra White’s speech on the intercom in the building, so I have not missed a precious word.

I note that the member referred to people normalising their lives after the conclusion of their sentence. The point that I made in my speech—which I know the member will have followed avidly—is that the idea is to normalise them within prison. Part of my point about access to telephones and family life and so on is that there should not be that barrier.

I fully concur with the member on continuity and the need for housing. He will recall that medical treatment that is provided in prison sometimes stops as soon as someone is out of the prison gates because they do not have a general practitioner and they have nobody to go to. That is another issue, particularly when people have resolved their addictions.

It is a long time ago, but I think I convened the Justice 1 Committee during that period, which also supported and recognised the value of the specialist facilities at Peterhead.

That is already happening in the young offenders institution Polmont, where we saw employers doing that. Work is being done with a view to the young men leaving prison and taking up employment.

Will the member take an intervention?

First, I agree with Sandra White that the requirement for corroboration is not sacrosanct and that debate is welcome. I ask members to have regard to the rigorous and robust interrogation of the arguments for and against its abolition or retention. That rigour—it is rigour rather than bad manners—will be applied to all those who give evidence to the Justice Committee in the coming months for our stage 1 report. Secondly, with respect, members may make their own inquiries but only those on the Justice Committee or those following it blow by blow—hourly, in my view—will have fully scrutinised all aspects of the cases for and against. Thirdly, although I appreciate the popular view that the abolition of mandatory corroboration will bring the prospect of greater justice for victims of sexual abuse, rape and so on, if passed it will apply to all criminal cases in which there is no statutory penalty in both the sheriff courts and the High Court. I hardly need to say that corroboration does not mean two witnesses. Indeed, corroboration can come from the same source. For example, corroboration for an alleged rape victim can come from his or her demeanour, which may be emotional or psychological. As I understand it, the law of corroboration is very broad. The Conservative motion is correct in listing those who oppose the abolition of corroboration, just as the Labour and Government amendments are correct in naming those who support the proposal, but that does not take us forward in determining whether the proposal is good or bad. The chief constable of Police Scotland favours the proposal, whereas the Scottish Police Federation does not. It is the evidence that they produce that must be tested. It is not a case of one list being better than another list. That demonstrates that the issue is complex and contentious—and rightly so. The Conservative motion is correct to indicate that corroboration cannot and should not be examined and evaluated in isolation. There are also the matters of jury size and majority, the three verdicts that are available in Scotland, the abolition of the double jeopardy rule and the restrictions that are now placed on the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission regarding referrals to the High Court. I am sympathetic to a wider review and, in particular, to giving a role to the Scottish Law Commission, which has the disinterested expertise to examine all those interlocking issues. However, the call for a public inquiry is inappropriate. In part, the Government’s amendment presents a difficulty for me because I cannot accept the assertion that the Carloway review on corroboration was “thorough”. First, the proposal is Lord Carloway’s alone. Secondly, the review was not thorough. I refer members to the evidence that was given yesterday regarding the criminal cases that he asked to be reviewed in order to determine whether those would have been prosecuted without corroboration and whether a guilty verdict would have been obtained. It was concluded that 67 per cent of that sample of 141 sexual cases from 2010 would have been prosecuted successfully. Who came to that view? Two prosecutors—one active and one retired. That is it. Forgive me, but I cannot say that that amounts to a rigorous examination of evidence. I return to what I started with—the role of the committee. The Labour amendment does not move matters forward. It is superfluous, so I will abstain on it. For the reasons that I have stated, I will also abstain on the Conservative motion. I will abstain, too, on the Government’s amendment. We are here as politicians and legislators. Let us not consider the proposal to abolish corroboration with our politician’s hat on; let us behave like responsible legislators. Whatever the outcome at stage 3, what Scotland needs is a bill that improves justice for complainer and accused, not one that is supported because it is politically popular.

I refer the cabinet secretary to the closure of Peebles sheriff court and to page 6 of the document “Proposed Joint Feasibility Study to Review Future Delivery of Justice Services in the Scottish Borders”, which states: “all opportunities to provide a technology solution will be investigated.” Can I take it that that will not be in place of the proposed justice centre in Galashiels?

Hope and optimism were mentioned. That reminds me of Alistair Darling on “Good Morning Scotland” today, disowning negative no campaigning and then breezing on to advance a bleak future for Scotland in which we would be all but cut off from our trading partners, cut off from our English relatives—that was news to me, being half English—and cut off from the expertise of the UK Government. He stopped just short of cutting us off from the rest of the world and prophesying a plague of locusts. I think that I will nickname him Chicken Licken, and his unionist pals Turkey Lurkey and Ducky Lucky. For those who are unfamiliar with the tale, the ending is a happy one. Despite dire, unfounded warnings, the sky does not fall in.

I wish you were away. I will tell you the story later, Deputy Presiding Officer. It is very wholesome. Let us take head-on the proposition that we are indeed better together. Is that really the case? First, did we in Scotland get the Governments that we voted for? For 62 of the past 67 years, Scottish MPs, as an entity, have had no practical influence over the composition of the UK Government. The clarion call from Labour over the years has been to vote Labour and keep the Tories out, but that does not stand up to the test of time. Today in Scotland we have 41 Labour MPs, 11 Liberal Democrats MPs, six SNP MPs and one Tory MP, but we have Tory policies that are supported by the Tories’ pals, the Liberal Democrats. We have the bedroom tax, cuts to benefits for the most vulnerable, privatisation of the Royal Mail, food banks and, on the plus side, we have Trident! So much for democracy and the protection of Labour. However, we all know that “It’s the economy, stupid”, so what is the track record of UK Governments on our economy? I look back over the voting years that I have notched up to the early days, when I voted Labour. The first time that I did so was in the 1960s of Harold “Gannex-coated, pipe-smoking” Wilson. For the period when he was in power, the rich got richer and the poor got poorer—sound familiar? Oh, and there was the wee matter of the devaluation of the pound in 1967 to cope with a domestic economic crisis and the famous phrase that was coined at the time about breaking away from the straitjacket of—wait for it—“boom and bust economics”. Callaghan did not do much better in 1978-79 and the winter of discontent. There was 30 per cent inflation and the streets of Scotland and the rest of the UK were littered with uncollected waste while hundreds of thousands of people took to the streets in protest and bodies were unburied—all that while the oil revenues flowed in. Then came Brown and Darling, sub-prime lending and banking collapse, with Darling, the no man, telling us of doom and gloom. Well, he certainly knows doom and gloom when he sees it; he took us right there. What about Labour’s partners in the union, the Tories? Surely they cannot be as hopeless with our money. Well, yes, they can, Alex Johnstone. Remember black Wednesday in 1992? The breaking news then was “UK crashes out of the ERM.” The Tory Government suspended Britain’s membership of the European exchange rate mechanism and Chancellor Norman Lamont spent billions trying to prop up sterling. I think that the phrase for that today is “quantitative easing”, which to you and me is printing paper money. Today, there is Danny Alexander—I must not forget the Liberal Democrats, though I try to—Chief Secretary to the Treasury, pronouncing that austerity, cuts to you and me, will continue until 2020. Of course, those cuts are borne by the poor, not the rich. In the meantime, the oil and gas revenues have been producing wealth and revenue for the UK Exchequer for 40 years and they have decades to go. Do we have an oil fund worth trillions—that sounds a lot to me—like that of Norway, a small, independent country that discovered its reserves at the same time as Scotland’s were discovered? Of course not. That Norwegian fund has 1.78 per cent of European stocks and is said to be the largest stock owner in Europe. It can be choosy and authorises only ethical investments. The Norwegians have so much money that they have to think of more ways to invest—talk about money in the bank for a rainy day. Compare that with the dismal report card of UK Governments over decades: oil and gas revenues squandered, the rich getting richer and the poor, poorer, and more of the same. If I was offered a guarantee that I would get the Government that I voted for and the chance to have my nation’s wealth under proper stewardship so that it could be used for investment in Scotland’s people and a more just society, it would not be a hard choice. Independence for Scotland is just that guarantee. All the rest—the daily diet of negatives from the no campaign—is a desperate distraction from that simple truth.

Can I be an instrumentalist?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his references to the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Act 2010—the bill proposal was initiated by Alex Neil and continued by me. As the cabinet secretary knows, there have been more than 1,000 investigations in the period of just more than a year since the 2010 act came into force. However, Jenny Marra has a point. The act is not well enough publicised, to ensure that there is intervention at an early stage, before a dog gets to the point at which it is dangerous. Does the Government have plans to publicise the act? Can it help in any way in that regard?

The minister is well aware of the many cycling events and things that can happen in the Borders in the likes of Gala, Walkerburn and Glentress. With the opening of the Borders railway, is the minister in dialogue with anyone with regard to the storage of bicycles on trains?

On welfare cuts, I refer to child benefit—that excellent universal benefit with almost 100 per cent uptake. It has been slashed by the Westminster coalition leaving families in Scotland with one child some £650 a year worse off and those with two children £1,100 worse off. If the First Minister’s Government had power over welfare, what would he do about child benefit?

On the question of cost, what does it cost for local authorities to keep an up-to-date database?

I thank Malcolm Chisholm for referring to the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Act 2010, although I think that the trouble on cyclepaths is to do with the owners, rather than the dogs. I congratulate Claire Baker on bringing the issue to the Parliament, although I did not sign her motion, and she is going to find out why. As members know, I piloted the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Act 2010 and I convene the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on animal welfare. I have a lot of time for the Dogs Trust and a huge amount of time for universal voluntary microchipping. The system has great advantages for good owners. I can give a brief personal example of how the system works. I ask members to picture me, a few years ago at 3 o’clock in the morning on 2 January, as I was tucked up in bed. I heard a yowling outside the window and found a little Staffordshire terrier peeking through the hedge. I have two cats, which were in a state of terror as I brought the Staffordshire terrier in. What was I to do with him? I was leaving for Ayr in the morning, so I could not keep him. I eventually phoned the police—not the emergency line. Hours later, they turned up to question me, and they took the dog away to keep it overnight, so that the owner would be able to find it. I think that the most embarrassing question that I was asked was not “How old are you?” but “What do you do for a living?” There I was, sitting in my pyjamas with this dog, and my cats climbing the walls. I said, “I’m a politician.” That made the officers’ day. Anyway, the dog was microchipped. However, the owners did not come to get it for a week. I wondered why they had not come earlier, and I was told that it is quite common for people to dump a dog over Christmas or new year or when they go on holiday, so that someone else pays for the dog’s board and kennelling. I am concerned that bad owners do that all the time, and in my view, bad owners will not microchip their dogs anyway—they certainly would not want their dogs to be tracked. The Dogs Trust supports compulsory microchipping, but I was interested to learn that the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals does not. The jury is still out for the SSPCA, and it is still out for me. In a perfect world I would support compulsory microchipping, but we live in an imperfect world, with imperfect dog owners. For example, Claire Baker talked about dogs that come from breeders. What about a dog that someone just passes to their next-door neighbour? Dogs that change hands without going past a breeder, good or bad, will not necessarily get microchipped. What about dogs that are dumped? A person who dumps a dog that they have had enough of, because it is not a lovely wee fluffy puppy any more, will not necessarily have had the dog microchipped—and they will certainly not want the dog to be tracked to them. What about a dog that has been microchipped but has passed through several owners? Unless the new owner keeps the database up to date, the microchip will track ownership to a person who has nothing to do with the dog. There are issues. I am not saying that compulsory microchipping is a bad idea. I am just saying that there are issues.

I have only two minutes. I am just suggesting tests. I am not trying to prevent the idea from going forward; I want us to consider the law of unintended consequences. Mike Flynn, who is senior inspector at the SSPCA, said: “We support voluntary micro chipping of pets but not necessarily compulsory chipping. There is no point in making it compulsory unless there was a system and legislation in place, to ensure that the details are kept up to date and transfer of ownership is recorded (the same as if you sell a car).” There are issues to do with tracking. Mike Flynn also told me: “we already get abused and emaciated animals being dumped by cruel owners in a effort to avoid detection, if all dogs and cats were micro chipped, some of these people may try to remove or destroy the chip to avoid detection.” Someone said that a microchip cannot be removed—yes, it can. It damages the dog. A person could cut off a dog’s ear or take a bit out of it, to remove the microchip. It would not be done nicely, but it could certainly be done. All I am asking members to do is to think of the law of unintended consequences—my favourite phrase. Claire Baker’s intentions and the intentions of the Dogs Trust are excellent, but there are issues that mean that it would not be easy to legislate for, or indeed to police, compulsory microchipping and get at the bad owners.

Will the member give way?

Given the amount of time that is available to me, I will truncate my remarks. This is not the way to do it. I fully appreciate why the corporate body felt it necessary to bring forward its proposal. However, we should all be allergic to on-the-hoof legislation, as it tends to assist not justice, but the law of unintended consequences. On very rare occasions, when there is urgency, it may be unavoidable, but such urgency has now gone—I concur with Patrick on that. Let us look at the motion that is before us. It says that for “any period during which a member of the Parliament is imprisoned” the deduction of 90 per cent of their salary is mandatory. No discretion is provided as to the nature of the conviction or the length of the conviction—it might be one month or one week. In addition, I heard the word “remand” used. Being on remand can involve innocence—many people on remand are innocent. What happened to innocent until proven guilty? No discretion is provided in relation to whether a 90 per cent deduction is suitable in all circumstances. Does that mean that MSPs can do 10 per cent of their work behind bars? Is availability for work the test? The corporate body kept talking about “performance of functions”. Someone who is seriously ill cannot perform their functions. I would not want that test to apply in those circumstances. If that is the test, it should not be applied only in the circumstances that we are discussing. What principles are being applied? Should it be possible to exercise discretion in relation to the penalties that are imposed? Even sheriffs exercise discretion. My contention is that the Parliament should not agree to the proposal without considered examination, let alone proper debate—Patrick Harvie and I have had four minutes to respond—but should remit it to the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee or an ad hoc committee to consider principles and process. We might arrive at the same amendment to the scheme—so be it—but it will have been properly considered. Let us not agree to the motion simply to be seen to do something or to appease certain segments of the media. I know that members across the chamber are being whipped. What is proposed is just wrong. I am breaking the whip, and I am asking members who share my unease to break the whip. If they cannot vote against the motion, I ask them to abstain. Let us do this properly—we have time to do it properly.

As I heard a groan from my colleague Colin Keir MSP, I will try not to use up the five minutes—I had not even started. The Justice Committee is breaking new ground today—we are that kind of committee. This is the first time that a committee has brought a motion to the chamber on a breach of the subsidiarity principle. Before I get into the nuts and bolts of the matter, I will comment on the timescale for consideration of European Union legislative proposals. The committee had one meeting in which to consider, and decide on, an extremely complex proposal, which could have had serious ramifications for the Scottish criminal justice system. It was fortuitous that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice was able to come along to our meeting at very short notice—I thank him for that—to assist us in our scrutiny. I understand that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee will, in due course, look into the handling of EU legislative proposals that raise subsidiarity concerns. I make a plea—I am sure that other campaigners feel the same—that that committee examine the timescales for scrutiny as part of its inquiry. It is late in the day, so I will not go into the details but, for those members who do not have an in-depth knowledge of EU matters, the subsidiarity principle is that, unless the EU has exclusive competence, action should be taken at the lowest level of governance consistent with the subject matter and objective. The proposal that was before us would establish a new body—a European public prosecutor’s office—to tackle EU fraud. The motivation for that was EU fraud. The European Commission has identified that suspected EU fraud amounts to around £425 million a year but suggests that the actual amount could be much higher, and we agree. The Commission believes that member states are not able to identify, investigate and prosecute EU fraud effectively and, therefore, that a European public prosecutor’s office, operating supranationally, is needed to protect the EU’s financial interests. In fairness, I should say that the UK Government does not intend to participate in the proposal and, therefore, it will not affect the UK directly. That said, the precedent that it may set in establishing a supranational body dealing with criminal matters was, in itself, worrying. The EPPO would have had exclusive competence to investigate, prosecute and bring to judgment those connected to offences against the EU’s financial interests. We understand that that power could be extended to include other related offences. Given the fact that the EPPO would be able to direct investigative activity at national level—the Scottish level—and not only in relation to the EU fraud offences, the committee was unanimously concerned that the proposal would cut across the role of the Lord Advocate as head of the prosecution system in Scotland. Our EU reporter, Roderick Campbell—who is handy to my right—will explore that and other issues in a little more detail. We agreed with the Scottish Government that EU fraud could be tackled effectively at member state level. Indeed, that appears to be the case in the UK. We also agreed that the Commission has not made a strong enough case for EU action. Therefore, the committee agreed that the EU legislative proposal to establish an EPPO does not comply with the subsidiarity principle, as set out in article 5 of the Treaty on European Union. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the European Commission Proposal for a Council Regulation on the establishment of the European Public Prosecutor’s Office (COM(2013) 534 final) does not comply with the principle of subsidiarity as laid down in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union.

I will pick up two strands in the current debate. The first is that, somehow, we are marking time and the Government is neglecting its duty to govern Scotland by focusing entirely on the referendum while we are legislation light. Let me take members through a little bit of the Justice Committee’s forward programme for dealing with legislation. On 3 and 10 September, we will consider the Tribunals (Scotland) Bill. We will then move on to the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill, which has police powers in it. Next, we will have budget scrutiny and consideration of the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill before returning to the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill, which is a substantial piece of legislation on which we will have many evidence sessions. That takes us up to January. On top of that, we are looking to go back to our inquiry into purposeful activity in prisons and we have a sub-committee on police and fire service reform. We will also conduct a review of defamation law and the community justice system. The list goes on and on. We even have an overspill committee, which Stewart Stevenson referred to, because the Justice Committee—as in previous years—does not have time to deal with all the legislation. I do not see any foot being taken off the legislative accelerator, certainly for the Justice Committee. As far as I am concerned, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice could slow down.

To the best of my knowledge, nowt. We are too busy dealing with law that has to be passed for the benefit of the people of Scotland under the restrictions of devolution. It is a nonsense to say that we are not working as we have before. I turn to the second strand. As someone who has been a socialist all her life, when we debate things such as punitive payday loans, the bedroom tax and food banks I share exactly the same concerns as Labour members. However, we cannot do anything substantive about those things in here. Yesterday, Johann Lamont commented: “Today, Wonga has announced profits of £62.5 million. Where are the funds for a loan guarantee fund to stop people falling into the hands of the extortionate legal money lenders?”—[Official Report, 3 September 2013; c 21883.] I support credit unions. I am a member of a credit union and contribute to a credit union. However, that does not deal with reserved legislation on punitive rates of interest and does not deal with legislation on advertising and the regulation of broadcasting, which is at the heart of the problem. Beyond that, it does not deal with the poverty that has driven people into those positions, including people in work—because nearly 50 per cent of the people who are in poverty are in work. There are not the deserving and the undeserving poor; they are all in it together, to use that abused term.

I have just gone through the Justice Committee’s timetable and I regret to say that we have little time to pause, let alone look at other matters. However, I heard what Margo MacDonald said about the law of usury. The Government must look at that significant issue, but we do not have all the powers that are needed to deal with everything else that goes with that matter, such as the macro-economic climate that is driving Scots down further into poverty and making a bigger gap between the haves and have nots. I want what Labour members want, but we will not get that fiddling around the edges in here. I am tired after 14 years of pretending that we can do something real in this Parliament about the matter. Malcolm Chisholm had it in a oner when he said: “Finally, where is there anything about the bedroom tax, except rhetoric against laws from London? It is the classic example—the best example of all—that emphasises what we cannot do and forgets what we can do.—[Official Report, 3 September 2013; c 21919.] He is absolutely right. We cannot do anything about matters such as the bedroom tax, but we get the fall-out, the illnesses, the bankruptcies, the homelessness, the despair and the pressures on the NHS, the justice system, our councils, individuals, communities and the whole nation. Why are we pretending that we can do anything about the matter? Without independence, we do not have the ability to get the Governments that we vote for. There is not one Labour MP in the UK Government—it is a Tory Government with a few Liberal Democrats. We must have a Government that Scotland votes for and which puts forward her priorities. We may share what those priorities are in the chamber, but they will never be delivered until we have independence.

As the cabinet secretary is aware, I have huge concerns about the abolition of corroboration. I maintain that position and ask him to consider the position of many of us in the Parliament—perhaps even among SNP members—with regard to considering corroboration in the context of reviewing the position on the not proven, proven and guilty verdicts, rather than taking it on its own.

I advise the cabinet secretary and Margo MacDonald that the Justice Sub-Committee on Policing should be dealing with the impact of the single force on local policing after the recess, when members will be able to raise issues with the committee.

I feel that my voice may echo around the chamber. I thank all the members who signed the motion that has allowed the debate to proceed and those who have relinquished a trip to somewhere in the north to be here. The debate is timely, given that the quincentennial anniversary of Flodden will be on 9 September this year. That is a date in my diary, as it is also my birthday—not my quincentennial birthday, although I sometimes feel that old. As an aside, I think that we are all taught history when we are too young, but perhaps these days it is livelier and is given the immediacy of real life and made relevant to our lives. Although a king, James IV was first and foremost a man of flesh and blood who breathed, loved and died, as we all do. He was a real person. He was also a political beast, as monarchs were then; some would say that they are political beasts, with a small P, even now. He was astute—he made alliances—and educated. He survived and died in violent circumstances. If members will forgive me, this will be a potted and selective history. James IV was born in 1473 and, at the age of 15, rode at the battle of Sauchieburn, at which his father was killed. It is said that he wore an iron belt as penance from that date until his death on Flodden field in 1513, at the age of 40. Even for monarchs—with the exception, perhaps, of Elizabeth Tudor—life then was short. In that time, James IV achieved much. He spoke Latin—at the time, it was the international language—French, German, Flemish, Italian, Spanish and some Gaelic, and he took an active interest in literature, science and the law. He even tried his hand at dentistry and minor surgery. With his patronage, the printing press came to Scotland, and the Royal College of Surgeons in Edinburgh, St Leonard’s College in St Andrews and King’s College in Aberdeen were founded. He commissioned building work at the royal residences of Linlithgow palace, Edinburgh castle and Stirling castle, and he developed a strong navy that was led by his flagship, the Great Michael, which was said to be the largest vessel of the time. However, James IV is remembered most because of the massacre at Flodden. Even to this day there is a poignant moment in the Selkirk common riding when, each year, the casting of the colours in the square testifies to the fact that, of the 80 Selkirk men who left to fight at Flodden, only one returned—Fletcher. The casting of the colours replicates the legend that he cast a captured English flag about his head to show that all the others had been cut down. To this day, the casting of those colours to the rhythmic drumbeat silences the crowd. Flodden itself, which I first saw on a bright, breezy July day, is not an historic monument but a war memorial. That is an important distinction. On that July day, the long grasses in the fields below where the slaughter took place rippled like green water, and on the memorial someone had laid a clutch of thistles. At that moment, even though centuries had past, the pain of that day and the waste of lives were quite tangible. It is said that between 1,000 and 4,000 English solders were casualties, and that between 7,000 and 11,000 Scots lay dead, including King James and most of his nobles who were on the field. Such was the concern that the English would march on to Edinburgh that the construction of the Flodden wall was begun. It is possible to see a bit of it just up the road by turning left at the lights to the Pleasance. James’s burial place is unknown, but it is alleged that three artefacts—a sword, dagger and a turquoise ring—that belonged to him were taken from the battlefield. Those are currently in the custody of Mr Cheesman, who is Richmond Herald at the College of Arms in London, with whom I correspond, and although their provenance is not secure, there are sufficient grounds for believing at least that the sword was the sword of James IV. I am grateful to Gary Stewart of the Society of William Wallace, Dr Elspeth King of the Stirling Smith art gallery and museum in Stirling and, indeed, Parliament staff, who are negotiating the terms of loan of those artefacts to Scotland for possible display here and at the museum from the weeks at the end of August until October. I hope that they will be exhibited in the Parliament’s public area in the week of Flodden—fingers crossed. James has another claim to fame. He also married, with consequences that were unforeseen at the time, Margaret Tudor, who was one of Henry VII of England’s daughters. It was called the rough wooing. The marriage of the thistle and the rose took place at Holyrood on 8 August 1503. The match had great significance in the long term. After the death of Elizabeth I of England and the end of the Tudor dynasty, the two thrones were inherited by the great-grandson of James and Margaret—James I of England and VI of Scotland. The Stuarts had arrived. The rest, as they say, is history—quite literally. It now seems inevitable that the marriage of the thistle and the rose—the union of the crowns—would move on to the union of the Parliaments. The threads from that history of 500 years ago gave us the union flag. With devolution, some of that stitching was unpicked. Next year will tell us whether those threads remain or will finally be cut and whether the saltire will fly on its own again. Whatever happens, it will be from the other Holyrood that that event takes place.

As the Presiding Officer says, I speak in this debate on behalf of the Justice Committee, which was the lead committee considering the bill. However, I want to put on record—I feel a letter to the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee coming on—that I have never understood why, in a stage 1 debate, the cabinet secretary or minister gives the Government’s response to the convener’s report on behalf of the committee before the convener has reported to the chamber. It would be much more useful if I got to say my stuff and then—if he will forgive me for saying so—the cabinet secretary gave his response afterwards. Much of my speech has probably been pre-empted, but off I go anyway. The bill has two main purposes: first, to improve the experience of victims and witnesses, which was the focus of the Justice Committee’s consideration; secondly, to create the national confidential forum, which was examined by the Health and Sport Committee and which my colleague Duncan McNeil, along with other members, will speak about. The Justice Committee has already written to the Health and Sport Committee to say that we anticipate that it should consider those provisions at stage 2, as we took no evidence on them and that would seem an appropriate division of the bill. I, too, thank all those who provided written and oral submissions. I also thank the members of the Justice Committee, which it is always a pleasure to chair—that is a brownie point for me. I also thank all those victims who spoke to committee members about their individual experiences of the criminal justice system during a specially arranged private and informal discussion. Key themes from that session were reflected in the committee’s formal scrutiny of the bill and in its report. I know how difficult it was for those people to speak to us about their experiences and to relive the pain that they had suffered five or 10 years previously. We saw how the pain of those events and of their experiences of the justice system was just below the surface. As the cabinet secretary has said—I shall not say that more than once—the committee supports the general principles of the bill. We believe that the bill will provide much-needed support and protection for victims and witnesses. Many people in those positions hope never to be in a court, and of course it is an extraordinarily difficult experience for them. However, our stage 1 report highlights, as it should, a number of areas that could be improved to ensure, in particular—I know that this is a difficult issue—that the rights both of the accused and of victims and witnesses are balanced appropriately. Let me highlight some of those issues. On the definition of victim, like the Faculty of Advocates we are concerned that the innocence of the accused might be compromised. Therefore, we suggested the use of the term “complainer”, which is used in certain sections of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995. The cabinet secretary rejected that in his response, but I think that we still have concerns about the proposal. However, I will leave members to raise that point in the open debate. On the general principles, there was broad support that certain criminal justice bodies should follow those in their dealings with victims and witnesses, but there was some confusion and concern, which we felt will be shared by the general public, about the provision that gives victims and witnesses a right “to participate effectively in the investigation and proceedings.” Victim Support Scotland went so far as to suggest that the provision “should be struck from the bill”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 16 April 2013; c 2596.] There are concerns that such a right would lead people to have expectations that would never be fulfilled and were never intended to be fulfilled. I note that we will look at a more detailed and practical explanation of how victims and witnesses are expected to be involved in the process. Communication with victims and witnesses is very important and is not as effective or as co-ordinated as it should be. Victim Support Scotland told the committee that victims have to tell their story around 16 times during the course of reporting a crime through to the trial process. That should not happen. Therefore, the committee believes that individuals working in the criminal justice system should be properly trained to show sensitivity and respect in their communications with victims. Any written information that is provided must be—these are key words—in plain English. Although continuity in the support that is provided across the system is needed, like the cabinet secretary we do not believe that a compelling case was made for the introduction of case companions or the establishment of a victims commissioner. The issue with case companions is a practical one about how someone could always be available as a case companion to liaise with a witness or a victim. However, we certainly think that there should be continuity in the personnel who keep people informed. Jenny Marra rose— I hope that you are not going to challenge me—it is your report.

The report states: “witnesses asked for continuity in the support provided across the system.” That is the important part. However, I think that we all agreed that allocating one person was just not practicable. It has been suggested that there should be an online hub to give victims access to information on their individual cases. That would not be a bad thing, but it should not replace the human touch, because victims and witnesses need a bit of TLC. It is not good enough just to have a hub. Again, the information should be provided in plain English and not in the legal jargon that the lawyers, courts and police understand but which means nothing to civilians who are engaged in the process. On vulnerable witnesses, there was particular concern that the bill will allow objections to requests for measures to protect child witnesses. We have concerns about the removal of the presumption that child witnesses under the age of 12 should give evidence away from court. That must not have the unintended consequence of children giving evidence in court against their will. We just flag that up as a bit of an orange light. We appreciate that there might be absolutely justifiable practical reasons why the police could not comply with a witness request to specify the gender of their interviewer, but we suggest that, where that is not possible, a full explanation should be provided to the person concerned and should be included in the report to the procurator fiscal, so that everybody knows why that could not happen. We see the possible merits of compensation orders, but we feel that the orders could be counterproductive and that it could be distressing for victims to be offered money from an offender, as it were. We therefore suggest that the issue should be dealt with sensitively by ensuring in the first place that the victim wants that to happen. We have asked the Scottish Government to give further consideration to the merits of the proposal in the bill to introduce restitution orders. We accept that police officers and staff are at disproportionate risk of being assaulted while at work, but we believe that introducing restitution orders for police officers and not for those in other occupations could prove to be divisive. Where would one draw the line? Would we include firefighters, ambulance staff, teachers or shopkeepers? There are difficulties with that, which have already been aired in the press. Just as participating effectively in a case should not lead to heightened expectations, victims should not have heightened expectations about the level of influence that they can have through any representations that they make to the Parole Board for Scotland. A victim might think that they have more influence than they actually have, which would be unfair and wrong. We therefore recommend the introduction of guidance so that no one misunderstands the position. I will leave the issue of road death victims to other members, but we hope that we can get something into the bill on that. We recommended a statutory requirement to give people a right to ask for all information relating to a family member’s or loved one’s death in a road traffic accident, although not necessarily a right to receive everything. Other members can develop that. We support the bill. We have identified a number of recommendations to improve certain provisions with a view to ensuring that the rights of the accused and those of victims and witnesses are balanced appropriately, which is terribly important. I have touched on some of the recommendations and I am sure that other committee members will pick up on some of the aspects of the bill that I have not had time to cover. I look forward to hearing the other speeches.

I simply want Jenny Marra to confirm her position, because she signed up to the words: “On balance, the Committee does not believe that a compelling case has been made in support of the introduction of case companions”. What has changed for her?

Will the member give way?

Will John Lamont give way?

Like me, the member has been in the Parliament for a very long time. He can see why we are a bit taken aback—I think that I speak for the rest of the committee—to find out now that the position of Labour members is that they want a victims commissioner and case companions. That was not dealt with at committee. The objection could have been put in our report, but it was not. The position as I understood it when I stood up to speak for the committee was that the committee was unanimously opposed—at this point, on balance—to having a victims commissioner and case companions. The member knows the process.

4. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government has been in contact with the United Kingdom Government regarding illegal surveillance activities in Scotland. (S4F-01457)

I thank the First Minister for his answer. Will Mr Hague’s reply be published? What is the current oversight system for surveillance in Scotland? Has there been any consideration of changes to the system?

The minister must wonder why on earth I am speaking in a debate on sport—so do I; I will tell her why later. The Scottish Sports Association said: “Primarily, sport is fun.” I have to disagree: sport is not fun, at least not for all of us. I am not at all sports mad. It is well known that my DNA contains not one gene that is interested in sport. I do not even like watching or listening to it, and that includes Wimbledon, so I am a hard case. There are quite a few of us about across the generations. In my youth, it did not matter as much. We ran about the council scheme streets, played peevers, skipping and statues, climbed and balanced on high walls—we had never heard of health and safety—and did “One, Two, Three O’Leary” with our tennis balls. I will provide a glossary later. It was hard for my parents to reel me in at night to take me home. I did not sit in a dark room exercising my digits playing virtual games. I did not know why adults were in the house at all. I was out running about the streets. Therefore, there are huge issues for today’s toddlers and schoolchildren. The word “activity” has slipped into the debate, which I prefer to “sport”. They are not the same. For me, sport was competitive, as it often should be. As someone who dropped her egg right at the start of the egg-and-spoon race, I soon lost interest in that competitive pursuit. That was compounded when, at the age of 11 and a half, a hockey stick hit my bare shin on an ice-cold day while I was playing on a brick-hard pitch. That ended my interest in sport totally. However, I danced competitively as a teenager and practised several days a week because I loved it, so I was fit, those early activities on Scotland’s streets aside. Dancing should form part of the activity that we are talking about, as opposed to “sport”, a word that is anathema to some of us. Although I applaud the opportunity that the Commonwealth games provide to endeavour to engage with our young people, I will say what I have said before: in the previous session of Parliament, when I was convener of the Health and Sport Committee—how much I suited that role—we found no evidence whatever that such international sporting competitions had a lasting legacy. Patricia Ferguson gave the example of tennis rackets appearing on the streets temporarily during Wimbledon. That is what we found, whether in relation to the Olympics in Australia or similar events elsewhere: any benefit was temporary. I hope that the Scottish Government will break the mould, but it will not be easy. As members might have guessed, I am a conscript in the debate and a sceptic, which I think is a very healthy position to take. I want the Commonwealth games to cowp us out of our armchairs and sofas and to get us to do anything that exercises our limbs. As Patricia Ferguson did, I think that we should use the word “activity”, instead of just talking about sport, which will put people off. PE teachers have an important role to play. I got off to a really bad start with mine, not surprisingly. I was asked to vault the horse, after which I propped myself up against the wooden bars. When I was challenged to vault the horse again, I said that I had already done it. “Once was enough,” I muttered under my breath. My relationship with my PE teacher went from bad to worse after that. The attitude of the gym teacher is extremely important for people such as me. I was a bit of a snob in those days. I rated academic competitiveness and achievement way above physical prowess. I was wrong to do so, but that was the attitude that I had. Having disagreed with the SSA’s view that sport is fun, I agree with it when it says that sport—in this case, I mean “activity”—can have “a positive impact on academic performance”. People such as me will never play a decent game of tennis or table tennis. I was all right at skiing, but that was about the only sport that that was true of. People who are not going to be good at such things should not be put off by use of the word “sport”. Although I am quite sceptical, I held a sport summit in my constituency—I called it that because I like alliteration—to find out how we could make our pupils more active. By engaging with Midlothian Council, Scottish Borders Council, sports co-ordinators, the police and other agencies, I found that we had to talk about healthy eating at the same time as looking to have children who were active. Adolescent girls—some of them, anyway—want to look pretty and attractive; they do not want to look sweaty on a hockey pitch. Therefore, activities such as dancing and aerobics could appeal to them. I know that it is difficult for others who are sporty to understand, but that is how many of us feel. That is how we are looking at the issue in my area, but we are also looking to engage with local food shops, because there is no point in young people having those activities at school if they then go away and have a bag of chips on a roll. That is my contribution, which is what happens when you are a conscript.

Any time.

4. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body whether it will consider procuring a resident cat as a humane mouse deterrent. (S4O-02228) Members: Miaow!

I am dispirited by that response, given that we already have an established practice of setting nature on unwanted residents in the form of the hawk versus the pigeons, and given that my question was prompted by the experience of a member of the corporate body, who shall remain nameless. Is the corporate body really satisfied that the mice are under control, given the increasing sightings as they flaunt themselves in public in broad daylight? If there are more rodent rompings, will the corporate body reconsider and provide some rather homeless felines with meaningful employment?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will be very brief. Is the cabinet secretary aware that, in 2002, the Labour and Liberal Executive was hell-bent on closing Peebles sheriff court—and that was in the good times, before Danny Alexander got his hands on the purse strings?

I enjoyed that wee trailer for the member’s conference. I, too, congratulate Alison McInnes on securing the debate and congratulate members on its tone. I endorse everything that members have said about the benefits of the concessionary bus pass: social, health, wellbeing, psychological—you name it. The scheme benefits people who would otherwise be stuck in their home and see nobody all day long, because they can get out and meet people on the buses. Indeed, sadly, sometimes people keep warm on the buses during the winter when they cannot afford to heat their homes. We all recognise the merits of extending the national concessionary travel scheme to all community transport, but I think that we also recognise the financial constraints on the Scottish Government’s purse, which we know are set to get worse over the coming years. They will tighten because the Chancellor of the Exchequer in London has announced the cutting of hundreds of millions of pounds from domestic services in England, and those domestic portfolios affect ours because of the Barnett consequentials. We might therefore see less for transport, local government and so on. We know that local government is one of the backers and supporters of community demand transport. I am very sympathetic to the case that the motion presents, and I have said so to the minister. Indeed, I recently visited Tweed wheels in my constituency and Teviot wheels in another part of the Borders, which do excellent work in providing transport to those who are disenfranchised from using their concessionary pass because, as other members have said, there is no regular, scheduled bus service or route to where they live. In some places, services are being withdrawn because of lack of demand. I also visited Age Scotland in Galashiels to support its campaign, but it too is aware of the financial implications. The subsidy for the concessionary bus pass is 60p in every £1 fare, but community demand transport would require a 100 per cent subsidy, which is a different matter entirely—the rub, as others have said, is the cost. As I understand it, Nanette Milne’s estimate of £11 million is based on current usage of community demand transport. However, if that transport were to be made free at the point of need, demand would go up. There is no doubt at the moment that people are self-denying and not using the service because is too expensive. Age Scotland admitted to me that it will need to get more robust figures. However, I have sympathy with the proposal to raise the age for the concessionary pass so that, as we go along, it falls in line with the increased age for the state pension across the United Kingdom. I agree with Alison McInnes that that should not be done retrospectively and that there should certainly be no means testing for it. There are always winners and losers from means testing, and the losers would be those just above the level that a means test would set, because they would lose their pass. I therefore do not agree with means testing. It is interesting to note that not everyone who has a bus pass uses it, which happens for a variety of reasons. In conclusion, I congratulate Age Scotland, as well as Tweed wheels, which does a grand job in taking people to doctors’ surgeries, GP clinics and so on. However, what we require—from either Age Scotland or the minister, if he can tell us—is an indication of the cost. We need to know that, as well as the savings that could be made if the age of eligibility for the concessionary bus pass were raised.

I say to the convener and members of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee that it was a delight to appear before them—and not as the accused, for a change. I am relatively content, on behalf of the Justice Committee, that we have moved in this direction. Historically, I made and laboured the point to the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee and its predecessor committees that I certainly did not want to see another justice 2 committee. I fought—and lost—that battle as the Justice 1 Committee convener in session 2. Thankfully, the Justice 2 Committee was ditched in session 3. I am pleased to hear that we are not going in that direction. The laudable purpose of establishing the Justice 2 Committee was to assist in processing legislation, but all that happened was that both committees—the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee—ended up with even more legislation, so it failed in that regard. However, I recognise that many deserving bills generated by the Scottish Law Commission have been left for years on the proverbial dusty shelf and that most of them—although not all—will be Justice Committee related. I continue to labour the point. It will not happen on my watch—I am looking the convener of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee in the eye. I am relatively content. I proposed option 2 on behalf of the Justice Committee, which was that bills should be referred by the bureau after introduction, but only after formal consultation with the relevant subject committee. I realise that there has been a bit of a compromise—I think that that is what politics is supposed to be about—in that informal discussions will be held between the convener of the newly named committee and the subject committee, to see whether any issues arise. As we know, the thing about the unexpected is always to expect it. Paragraph 14 of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s report makes clear that should new substantive issues arise on a bill that has been referred to the new committee, it will be referred back to the bureau. How many of us have been here? I am looking at the criteria, which I will reprise. They include: “where there is a wide degree of consensus”— I am laughing— “amongst key stakeholders about the need for reform and the approach recommended”. Beam me up, Scotty. I am thinking back to the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill, on which apparently there was a huge degree of consensus. When it came to the committee, lo and behold there was not. Criterion C is: “which does not have significant financial implications”. How many of us have sat in a committee, taking evidence at stage 1, and said, “Wait a wee minute. We’re told that this is the bill’s financial implication, but we’ve unearthed other, unexpected, financial implications”? I am glad that there is that caveat. I welcome the fact that the new procedure will be reviewed and appraised after two bills—I will not call them trial bills—have been referred. I have concerns—I keep those concerns here—that every time we are told that something is dead simple and that there will be no problems, as sure as eggs is eggs we find out that it is not simple and that there are problems. I put that down for my colleague, Nigel Don, the convener of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. We have a healthy working relationship, and I hope that it remains that way. The Justice Committee will ensure that its territory is not poached.

6. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government will consider piloting a domestic violence disclosure scheme. (S4F-01397)

I am pleased that the operation of the pilots in England is being monitored, as I have concerns that, although we all wish to protect women from violent partners, there are issues relating to human rights, the confidentiality of any disclosures and, indeed, the possibility of vigilantism. Does the First Minister agree that the matter is complex and that careful and that full consideration of all the implications of such a scheme would be required?

On housing, I ask the minister to consider revisiting the process for evicting antisocial tenants, particularly where there is mixed-tenure occupancy. In my neck of the woods, with Scottish Borders Housing Association, it is certainly not operating effectively.

4. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on the use of electronic tagging of offenders as an alternative to short-term sentences. (S4F-01377)

Is the First Minister aware that, in Sweden, anyone who is given a sentence of six months or less can apply to be tagged at home under house arrest while being monitored? If there is any breach, they are returned to jail. Is he also aware that reoffending has fallen to 12 per cent and that the cost to the taxpayer is some £40 per day, not the £165 per day of a prison place? Given that the success of tagging there over 20 years, with the First Minister consider following the Swedish model?

I congratulate Aileen McLeod on bringing the debate to the chamber. In answer to a look askance from Alex Fergusson, who seems to be wondering why I am taking part in a debate about the Mull of Galloway, representing as I do Midlothian and the Borders—it is a rhetorical question, by the way—I will give a couple of reasons. First, I was—if I may so call myself—a temporary Gallovidian for some 15 years, living and teaching in Whithorn and Newton Stewart. If I recall correctly, that area was part of the Machars, as opposed to the Rhins. My sons are both Gallovidian born, so I have a personal locus. I often wander down that other peninsula—through Port Logan and Kirkmaiden—to the mull, which is a part of Scotland that is still frequently overlooked by many Scots. It is an extraordinary area, and so far south that I understand that it is level with Durham if one draws a line across the map. It has its own eco-climate, and I used to yell at the television, grumbling about the weather forecast being way out of kilter with the weather that I saw from my window. That brings me, Presiding Officer—if you are wondering whether my speech has only a tenuous link to the motion—to a dramatic visit to the mull one gloomy, wild day. Indeed, when I looked up the history of the mull on the internet, the description began: “Gulls, gales and grandeur of cliff and sea that is unsurpassed”. Just so. The wind in that exposed wild promontory—in the days before health and safety took serious hold—just about whipped me off my feet. Huge grumbling waves lashed the rocks, and the sea and the dark sky in turmoil could not be distinguished one from the other. I was about to give up, when the wild movements of the sea took a different turn, and great grey lumps of something or other caught my eye. Everyone else had returned to their cars. I shouted, “I’ve seen a whale—in fact, I’ve seen lots of whales!”, but my words were lost in the wind. “Ach, it’s just the sea,” came a reply. Then someone came out from the lighthouse, battling against the wind and bending forward, and I heard them say, “You have.” It was a school of whales—the only one that I have ever seen to this day. On that blustery day, out of nowhere, I had a wonderful experience and saw a sight never to be forgotten, and that is why I am talking about the mull here today. That surpassed those sunnier days when the gulls left us in no doubt that we were on their territory and we were being told to leave in no uncertain terms. The mull is a wonderful place, and I am delighted that it is now being held in the custody and care of those who deserve it: the people who live there. The other reason that I wanted to speak about the mull is that I am a great advocate—as we in the Parliament all are—of people power and community commitment. I will tell the people of Gorebridge and Newtongrange in my constituency, who so recently felt powerless but have been proved wrong, to look to the success of the South Rhins Community Development Trust in accessing £338,500—I do not know if there were any pennies—from the £6 million Scottish land fund pot. Money is available for communities. It is a bit of a labyrinth to negotiate—it is worse than those stormy Mull of Galloway seas—but it is well worth negotiating. I congratulate Aileen McLeod on securing the debate but, more importantly—if she will forgive me—I congratulate the community at the mull on securing the fund.

Thank goodness.

I think that Lewis Macdonald will be aware that, with the new governor at Polmont prison, there is a new culture and determination that the expression “purposeful activity”, which includes a range of things from education to rehab and everything else, will be drawn together much more tightly.

This week, I had the good fortune to be briefed by Rob Strachan, the chief officer of Lothian and Borders community justice authority. It is important to state some facts about the general offender cohort in Edinburgh and Midlothian. There are 4,362 offenders. Some 27.9 per cent of offenders are reconvicted within one year. In the Scottish Borders, there are 802 offenders, with a one-year reconviction rate of 26.2 per cent. That is better than the Scottish average, but it gives members an idea of the task in hand. Males are more likely than females to be reconvicted within two years. The peak age for reconviction for men is under 21. It is estimated that 90 to 95 offenders a month are released from prison and return to communities in Lothian and Borders with substance misuse problems. Breaking that life habit is complex and difficult. On prolific and persistent offenders, research points to an average of 10 per cent of offenders being responsible for 50 per cent of all crime. It is the same people who commit all those offences. Past behaviour is the most reliable predictor of future behaviour, as demonstrated by the number of previous convictions and reconviction rates. It is estimated that 200 offenders cost the system in Lothian and Borders at least £12.2 million per year. When we consider that we are paying out £97 million a year to CJAs, we can see that a lot of money is going into the system, and it needs to be looked at again. A different pattern emerges in relation to women offenders. Some 37 per cent of women offenders have attempted suicide. Two thirds of women in prison have a history of abuse. The rate of drug problems among women prisoners in Scotland has been found to be as high as 98 per cent. That group of people has a very different set of complex problems, all of which must be addressed to try to break the habit of reoffending. Not being terribly au fait with CJAs, I was struck by the fact that the membership is made up of councillors. That seems to be a narrow membership, when CJAs need many skills. I therefore welcome what the cabinet secretary said about people from health services, drug addiction teams and housing services—I see that Jenny Marra is nodding. The Justice Committee found when we examined purposeful activity in prisons and throughcare that one of the biggest issues for people coming out of prison is having a home to go to. If they do not have a home to go to and an address, they cannot get a general practitioner. As Alison McInnes and I found out when we were in Polmont, that means that, after all the work that is done in prison on breaking the drug and alcohol habits and on rehabilitation, most of these young men come out and have no GP, which means that their medical records stay where they are and the young men go back into the same cycle. I therefore welcome the refresh of the CJAs. Rob Strachan was clear about the fact that provision is patchy. He knows that there are faults in the system and he is working to address them. For example, he said that he does not have the latest breakdown of the violent offenders profile. I have already raised with the cabinet secretary my view that the MAPPA approach, which has a role to play in the release of sex offenders, should have a role to play in the release of serious violent offenders. Rob Strachan also said that he does not have the latest breakdown of the women offenders profile. One of the problems with women offenders and young offenders is that they are not in a local prison. People who are in Polmont and Cornton Vale have come from all over Scotland, and people who are released from prisons that are not in their locality face even bigger problems than other prisoners do. One of the options that I favour—I do not think that it is in the consultation paper, but that is just me being difficult—is a marriage of options A and C. We need national oversight, national guidance and accountability, whether to a board or whatever, as to how the money is being spent. Good practice must also be shared—when something works in one area, we should let it go somewhere else, while never taking away local delivery. I would like the CJAs to have a much broader membership with responsibility for delivery and to be accountable for what they do to a centralised board or whatever we want to call it. If we address all the other issues that we are raising—such as throughcare, the Scottish Prison Service following what happens to prisoners beyond the prison walls and the fact that, because the NHS now delivers healthcare in prisons, there should be continuity of care when a prisoner leaves—and if we have refreshed CJAs with a broader membership and with real accountability for the money that they spend and how effective they are, we might improve reoffending rates, which are very difficult to bring down, for the reasons that I have touched on. That is not simple; everyone is individual and different categories face different problems. If we had a central organisation to look at strategies and make CJAs accountable, while CJAs said, “I know what works in this area and I know how we could do this,” we would have the best of both worlds. I say to the cabinet secretary that I want something between options A and C—A plus C or A and C jammed together in some way, or maybe we could make it option D.

Can I tempt Mary Fee with option D?

I spoke about enhanced and expanded CJAs with oversight at a national level. I wish that Jenny Marra would refer to my D option, because I think that it could be the solution. I certainly did not say that I wanted to get rid of CJAs.

The member kindly quoted me, but I went on to say that, if I could not get that proposal resisted, I would certainly campaign to ensure that there is a justice centre in the Scottish Borders in Galashiels. That was my bottom line.

As other members have said, the proposed changes, which many of us regret, are in the context of the 26 per cent cut to the Scottish Government’s capital budget. I am indebted to my colleague Roddy Campbell for reminding us that it would cost £56 million to keep some of the buildings in proper form, let alone the costs of heating. Many members will recognise that some sheriff courts are very old buildings that are not fit for purpose, let alone for allowing disabled people access to their forums. I thought that it would be interesting to put the matter in a UK context. It has already been mentioned that 93 magistrates courts and 49 county courts in England are closing. Nobody has mentioned something that is very important in this time of recession, when we all face cuts—and would no matter who was in government. The legal aid budget in England has been cut by £350 million. As a former legal aid lawyer who dealt with matrimonial and family law cases, I am shocked that legal aid will not be available in England for divorce, child custody, clinical negligence, welfare, employment, immigration, housing, debt, benefits and education. If we have a choice to make—this is a general proposition—between having a place and having somebody to legally represent us, we would want somebody to legally represent us. South of the border, 1,000 law firms that deal with family actions, custody and access to children will not do that any more. We will not have that situation in Scotland, but down south, party litigants will try to argue for contact with their own children. That cannot be the right way to go. If somebody said to me, “Choose between giving people legal aid or a place,” I would give them legal aid. That is a general point about choices.

Let me proceed for a little bit, as I want to talk about the point of view of the Justice Committee. In general, the Justice Committee will take evidence from professionals, users and others—as other members have said—and we have already put out a call for evidence. I make that plain now so that people who are not on the website all the time looking at what we are doing can hear it. We will take evidence towards the end of May, before any legislation is put before us. If members will forgive me, I will, as the constituency MSP, move on to deal with the specific issue of Peebles sheriff court. I note what Alison McInnes said, but Peebles sheriff court was going to be shut down by the Liberal Democrats and Labour Governments in previous sessions. I and others successfully campaigned for the sheriff court to remain in Peebles, so we have been there before. Unfortunately, as the convener of the Justice Committee, I cannot have special pleading. I understand Iain Gray’s position in his submission to the SCS in arguing for localism, as I did. As others have done, I made a lengthy submission—as members would expect—that challenged the access to justice and transport issues, among other things. At that stage, there was a proposal that business might be transferred to Edinburgh, but I was not having that because there were would have been complete loss of the important thing that some people refer to as “localism”, but which I refer to as “shrieval knowledge”. Sheriffs know some of the people who come before them in the criminal or civil courts, and they know the professionals around them and what is available. Shrieval knowledge is extremely important to delivery of justice. There is something obvious that I had not really thought of before, but which I now know about. Some people are more terrified of being named and shamed in the local press than they are of anything that the sheriff can do by way of a fine or disposal. Through local coverage that says that so-and-so has been arrested and appeared in court, or that something has happened to so-and-so, everybody kens aboot it. That is terribly important. The local press therefore have a very important role. I am putting my neck on the line here, but as I have said time and again—this is not breaking news for Lewis Macdonald—if Peebles sheriff court closes, I am going to ensure that Galashiels has a justice centre. I want something in the Scottish Borders that represents Borders shrieval knowledge and provides access to justice for people in the Borders and for lawyers. In fact, the lawyers of Peebles support me in my contention. I suggest that other members argue the case as firmly as I have.

I am a realist and I have listened very carefully to what the lawyers in Peebles have said. I had not previously considered the proposal, but they are quite attracted to having a justice centre in Galashiels, which will be much more central for access by many more people because Galashiels has a train station and a bus station.

I am glad to see in the SCS’s response that it has listened to me and to other members in the Borders. It states that, given our views, it will pursue the feasibility of creating a Borders justice centre and that, in the interim, any court business should go to Selkirk. If that is what it takes, that is what it takes. As I said previously, that is my bottom line.

On a point of clarification, Selkirk court is not on any list or in any recommendation and it will remain.

Not surprisingly, my speech will be somewhat different from John Lamont’s. I am pleased that the debate was moved from the day of Margaret Thatcher’s funeral, because I think that, if it had taken place then, the emphasis would have been not on what we said but on why we were having the debate on that day. I want us to consider what we are saying. What does the word “society” mean? The definition in the “Oxford English Dictionary” is: “the community of people living in a particular country or region and having shared customs, laws and organizations”. I thank Joan McAlpine for her earlier exposé of Margaret Thatcher’s political philosophy. Mrs Thatcher always lauded her political philosophy as being the result of an ordinary upbringing living above the grocer’s shop. In my book, that is challengeable. I come from a council estate and a family with five children, and she was distinctly middle class to me. She thrived on division—she was pleased to be divisive—and that self-reliance, for want of a better word, translated, whether or not she knew it at the time, into a culture of selfishness and greed. In the end, by her ruthless destruction of manufacturing and the communities that had grown up around it, as Elaine Murray said, she almost destroyed the communities themselves. I say to Ruth Davidson that, if there was a tapestry, Mrs Thatcher set about ripping it to shreds. The proposition that we should all be house-owning and share-owning citizens has sown the seeds of property inflation. It denuded councils of rented properties, bred a series of champagne Charlies who toasted their bonuses on the streets of London, and rewarded self, not society. The rich became richer and the poor became poorer, and poverty ghettos were created that remain to this day. I recall broadcast images of pinstriped and manicured traders juxtaposed with images of police horses charging their way through miners who were desperate to save their pits, not just for themselves, but for their neighbours and communities. Throughout Scotland, a slash-and-burn economic policy destroyed our manufacturing industries—our coal, steel and textile industries—and all but destroyed the communities that serviced them. There was no investment of precious North Sea oil revenues in modernisation in the same way that, in Germany, for example, there was investment. It is no wonder that in Newtongrange, Gorebridge and mining communities elsewhere in my constituency, Mrs Thatcher’s death has not been met by the establishment’s policed deference and a deal of hypocrisy but by celebrations. To be frank, splendid though the Scottish mining museum in Newtongrange is, the key word is “museum”. We have far too many industrial museums. Despite Thatcherism’s ravages of Scotland’s manufacturing and the squandering of oil and gas revenues on the millions condemned to unemployment during Mrs Thatcher’s reign—it was a reign—communities such as Newtongrange, Gorebridge and Galashiels remain as proud of their identity and defend their communities as never before. Across Scotland, the injustice of the poll tax galvanised not just those who could not pay but those who could. The bedroom tax, which is a recasting of the poll tax, will do the same. We cannot help ourselves in Scotland. We are a community—the community of Scotland and of our cities, towns, villages and streets. That is reflected in our mainstream political parties, despite our differences—and those differences are not always large. That is why our NHS remains our NHS and has closed its doors to privatisation; why our elderly have free personal care and concessionary bus passes; why people who are sick do not pay prescription charges; and why people do not pay to go to university. We pay tax so that we have a health service and universities not just for ourselves or our children or our grandchildren but for our neighbours near and far. The irony of the better together campaign is that that is the opposite of the reality. How can Labour activists and politicians sit beside Tory activists and claim that they are better together? Indeed, how can they sit with the Liberals, who have provided a bouquet of fig-leaves for a Tory chancellor who is one of the many Westminster Cabinet millionaires? Of those who can attend the coalition Cabinet meeting, 23 out of 29 are millionaires, yet we are grandly told by these people what is good for us and for the benefits system. They are not one of us. The coalition sets the deserving poor against the undeserving poor. Live on £53 a week? That will be cold baked beans all round, breakfast, noon and night. Give me the people of Newtongrange, Gorebridge, Gala, Peebles, Melrose, Walkerburn, Innerleithen, Broughton, Auchendinny and all any day. They know the meaning of community. Give me an independent Scotland and with it a Labour Party—and even a Liberal party—that is at last free to practise what it preaches.

Will Gavin Brown give way?

I want to provide some clarity on the spending on benefits in the UK by the Department for Work and Pensions. The total benefits bill for 2011-12 was £166.98 billion, 47 per cent of which—£74.22 billion—was spent on the state pension, as opposed to pension credit. To me, the state pension is an entitlement, not a benefit. It is something that pensioners such as me have contributed to throughout our working lives. Therefore, the perception about the benefits bill—to which George Osborne’s rather obscene language of the shirkers against the workers relates—is very wrong. Much of the rest of the DWP’s benefits bill goes on people who are in work but on low pay. Let us set that to the side. Let us also set to the side the idea that pensioners are somehow just a burden; I say that as someone who is herself a demographic challenge. Not all pensioners are sitting at home with their carpet slippers on, crocheting—I am talking about the men when I say that, of course. Not all pensioners are a problem. They range in age from 60 right up to 100. Pensioners provide free childcare to families, which enables people to go out to work. They are carers for their own elderly parents, which saves the state money. Pensioners who work in B & Q, Tesco or Asda pay taxes, as well as having the time to help us to buy the right things and not to rush our purchases along the conveyer belt, which is always a plus. Pensioners man voluntary sector desks and shops and carry voluntary sector collection tins, all of which contributes to society. Therefore, I do not want to hear any more expressions of the idea that pensioners are a burden. Many pensioners are a huge asset, in what they give to society and in what they provide financially.

I am coming to that. That case can be made, but I wanted to bring some balance to the debate. I feel that because so many members are so young, they had the wrong idea about my generation and older generations in general. The most important thing for the Government to do is to set about achieving solidarity and cohesion—that is the Government’s jargon; I thought for a minute that Tommy Sheridan was coming back, but “solidarity and cohesion” is not the name of a new political party. The purpose of the solidarity policy is to increase the overall income of those in the lower income groups in particular, and the purpose of the cohesion policy is to get rid of the postcode lottery of poverty. In my view, means testing does not help with that, either in principle or in practice. With means testing, there will always be winners and there will certainly be losers. I support the provision of free prescriptions on a universal basis because of the evidence. I was the convener of the Health and Sport Committee when the policy was being considered. We received evidence that more than 95 per cent of people were already not paying for prescriptions, which meant that only a small proportion of people were paying for them. There was an exemption list of illnesses and diseases, whereby people who had those conditions did not have to pay for their prescriptions. We asked the professionals how we could make the exemption list fairer, but doing so was not possible: as soon as a condition was added to it, another one came along. It was the professionals who told us that we should just get rid of prescription charges. The system was unfair and its administration was costly and not worth doing. For the rich person who probably pays for special treatment anyway, free prescriptions do not matter; they can put the money somewhere else. The reality is that it was not worth keeping the prescription charging system going, for the reasons that I have given. I also support the provision of the concessionary bus pass on a universal basis. If we changed that, there would be winners and losers.

I would just like to finish my point. I will allow the member to intervene when I get to the end of my section on the bus pass. As others have said, the bus pass is keeping people active socially, physically and psychologically. General practitioners have indicated that there have been huge health improvements among people who can now travel about. Some of them might not be able to afford to heat their houses, so they get on the Edinburgh to Peebles bus, take a wee visit, keep warm, get a cup of tea and come home. The bus pass is a great plus in their lives. It is possible for the rich to take a self-denying ordinance—they can decide to pay for their bus travel or to put their money in a charity tin. In my view, that is a far simpler way of dealing with the issue than trying to means test people, whose means might change over time. How often would people’s means be reviewed?

I will when I finish my point. There is merit in what Malcolm Chisholm says about matching that issue to the changes in the retirement age because, as the increase in the UK retirement age comes through, it may be appropriate not to take from people who have, but to sequence that in over time. It seems to me that that pensioners would agree that that was just. I cannot remember which member wanted in. Do they still want in?

I am not going to personalise my speech. I know that members will contribute to various charities in different ways. That is something that can be done. I want to refer quickly to free personal care in my last minutes. Free personal care removes a huge amount of stress from people. Are we seriously saying that 77,000 vulnerable elderly people should not have assistance for personal care? [Interruption.]

If Siobhan McMahon and Jamie Hepburn are going to have an argument, they should take it outside. In fact, Age UK has shown that it costs £5,000 to keep somebody at home with care, while it costs £25,000 to put them into a care home. When we introduced the policy—it is one of the best things that the Parliament has done—we lost the attendance allowance. I was here at the time and I remember Henry McLeish and various members on the Labour benches trying to get that allowance back. I have discovered that between 2002 and 2011 we lost £270 million. That money has been retained by the DWP. If we talking about justice, that money should have come back to Scotland.

I will be very brief. Does the member accept that the concessionary travel scheme greatly prevents deterioration in elderly people in all kinds of ways and that, because of their great use of the scheme, it should be retained?

As Anne McTaggart knows, we have had a long discussion about this matter. We have been up hill and down dale trying to find a way to get “deciduous” into the bill. The simplest thing is to delete everything else and make the bill refer to shrubs or trees in groups of two or more. It seems frivolous but it is not really. I remember saying at stage 1 that I felt an amendment coming on. Anne McTaggart obviously felt it coming on faster. That is not a problem. In our discussions at stage 2, it was mentioned that, in certain parts of the country, shrubs or trees that we might say are deciduous simply are not. In many parts of Scotland, beech trees retain their leaves. A thick beech hedge can be impenetrable to light and interfere with reasonable living next door. Sometimes in life, but not often, the solution is simple. Amendment 5 is one such case. I am delighted to support it because, if we leave “evergreen or semi-evergreen” in the bill, mischievous people could simply plant—we know that sometimes it is vindictive—a deciduous hedge that does not do what the seed packet says it is supposed to do and does not drop its leaves at all. I am happy to support—and I hope that the member in charge and the minister will support—this simple but important amendment.

Other way round.

I am usually told that there is no time in hand. This is a first. All credit to Mark McDonald, because it is not as easy as it looks to pilot a member’s bill. I have done it myself. Colleagues on the committee can be quite tough on you. He has had enough jokes about a privet member’s bill and cutting it down to size, so he will be glad to know that there are no horrible puns coming in my speech.

Apart from those that I have trailed. I also pay credit to others who have gone before. Scott Barrie worked for a long time on the issue, as did Fergus Ewing as Minister for Community Safety when, if I recall rightly, he tried to pursue it under nuisance legislation. It was difficult to find a way to frame the legislation. It was very important to keep the definition to two or more shrubs or trees. As I said at stage 1—I will repeat it—we know an elephant when we see one and we know a hedge when we see one, but just try to define an elephant. It took a long time to agree how to define a hedge. It was tempting to move into the arena of single trees but that would have been a big mistake. It would have opened up—if I may use a metaphor that does not really fit—a whole can of worms, although I appreciate that single trees can raise issues and, indeed, cause many disputes in our neighbourhoods. At stage 2 I said that the problem has been exacerbated by higher-density housing, together with our expectations about the use of our gardens. My home, which is 100 years old, once had only clothes poles in the garden for drying lots of clothes every day, pre-washing machines and tumble dryers. By the way, this is not the story of my life; the clothes poles predate me. The only deviation at one point was chickens during the second world war. I hasten to add that that was also before my time. What do we do now? We have conservatories, patios, decking and barbecues. We go to B&amp;Q or Dobbies Garden Centres and some people buy and plant leylandii. The garden is called our outdoor living space. And why not? Of course, the genesis of the bill was the growth—quite literally—of the leylandii, which some people do not appreciate when they plant it. Undoubtedly, it is a bit of a monster if it is allowed to grow unfettered. Members who missed or, worse still, heard my perorations on plants, shrubs and trees at stage 2 in the Local Government and Regeneration Committee—Stewart Stevenson referred to them—will be pleased to know that I do not intend to reprise them. However, if they are really interested, they will find them in the Local Government and Regeneration Committee Official Report of 6 March 2013. It is quite the “Beechgrove Garden”. My serious point was to emphasise the fact that deciduous trees and shrubs do not always drop their leaves. I was delighted to second Anne McTaggart’s amendment 5, as per my earlier remarks. The bill is heavy-handed in places with notices and threats. Perhaps it will be enough to send the high hedges police van with big labelling on the outside of it to get the neighbour to do something. However, I hope that the passage of the bill will be a deterrent or, even better, an education to people. I hope that it will get them to think about their neighbours and get the balance right in the enjoyment of their own and their neighbours’ gardens in as much as they both seek a modicum of privacy. I congratulate Mark McDonald and Scott Barrie. Most of all, I congratulate the campaigners from Scothedge. I say to campaigners outside the Parliament that it may take time to get there but, sometimes, we do get there and we do it in a collegiate and cross-party fashion.

I shall attend only in an advisory capacity. Jackie Baillie will be the lady with the pruning shears.

As members know, passing the bill tonight, which I am sure will happen, will not actually bring its provisions into force. At royal assent, only the definitions will come into force, but the bringing into force of the other sections will be in the hands of ministers. Can the minister give us a broad timescale within which the provisions in the bill might become enforceable law? Can he comment on whether people are already being told about the direction in which things are going, regardless of whether its provisions are in force?

Thank you.

I advise the minister that Scottish Borders Council has told me that it will receive £170,000 for the discretionary fund. It is providing a top-up of £60,000 because, as we know, the fund is capped, yet that will not meet even half the need. Does she agree with me that there is no way in which the issue can be resolved without independence?

Ten years on from the beginning of the war in Iraq, the words of Tony Blair that it was our “finest hour” ring as hollow and false as they did on the day that they were uttered. I will address the grave accusations at the feet of the Blair Government that the war was not only illegal in international law—I say in passing that regime change per se is illegal in international law—but proceeded on the foundation of flimsy and, as we know from last night’s “Panorama”, falsified intelligence; that many in the intelligence services across many countries knew that to be the case and said so to those who mattered; that the decision to support a gung-ho US President with an election to face, Stetson on, holster strapped and guns loaded, had been made by Blair on a visit to Camp David before any dossier, dodgy or otherwise, had made an appearance in any of its draft forms; that no post-invasion plans had been given any considered thought; and that it was done not in the name of democracy—Saddam Hussein was not only an old ally of the US but a good customer—but for oil. It was “illegal”—that is not my word, but the word of Kofi Annan and Hans Blix. It was illegal without a second UN resolution sanctioning intervention—that was originally the opinion of Lord Goldsmith, the Attorney General under Tony Blair. How do I know? A memo written on 14 January 2003 that was released under the orders of the cabinet secretary Sir Gus O’Donnell stated: “my opinion is that resolution 1441 does not revive the authorisation to use of force ... in the absence of a further decision of the Security Council.” The memo also made it clear that Lord Goldsmith found the arguments in favour of a war without the UN resolution “unconvincing”. Later, that was—how shall we say it?—modified. The intelligence that there were weapons of mass destruction, including mobile chemical weapon capabilities, was produced by a man whom the German intelligence service regarded as unreliable and was easily disproved by aerial photographs, while evidence from much more serious sources was discounted. Why? Because, come hell or high water, the facts had to be stretched to fit a political decision that had already been taken. Even just before the invasion, Hans Blix declared that there were no weapons of mass destruction to be found. David Kelly, a chemical weapons expert who discounted the existence of chemical weapons, was found dead after brutal questioning by a Westminster committee. As for the warning that weapons could be directed at the west within 45 minutes, everybody who knew anything—and there were lots of such people—knew that that was arrant nonsense. Nothing—not even a million marching against the war—could get in the way of Blair’s determination to give a US President cover. War had been declared long before intelligence was gathered and dossiers were published. It was a bullish Bush agenda. Blair must have turned a deaf ear and a blind eye to anything that got in the way of supporting that agenda. No wonder that the Chilcot inquiry is being muzzled where it matters. What had Blair promised Bush at Camp David? What was the deal? After 9/11, Bush lumped Hussein into the same camp as al-Qa’ida, although the Iraqi President was at the other end of the religious spectrum, and in true Hollywood tradition pronounced an “axis of evil”. It all culminated in the hauling down of that monstrous statue of Saddam Hussein in Baghdad—an iconic moment that was beamed round the world. The US had ridden to the rescue and the white hats had won. Job done. Remarking on the looting and chaos that followed, as there was no plan to keep policing or Government structures in place, Rumsfeld said, “Stuff happens”. The innocent who died or who were mutilated by the bombing were just “collateral damage”. No wonder Sir Mike Jackson, the head of the Army at the time was to describe Rumsfeld as “intellectually bankrupt”. Lord Dannatt, who succeeded Jackson, said: “the real failure was the failure to plan properly”. He added: “Into the power vacuum created, al-Qaida and others moved”. What an irony. So the 2003 invasion was not for democracy and it had nothing to do with 9/11—it was for oil. Before the invasion, Iraq’s domestic oil industry was fully nationalised and closed to western companies. Ten years on, it is largely privatised and dominated by foreign firms, including Halliburton, the Texas-based firm that Dick Cheney ran before becoming George W Bush’s running mate in 2000. It is no accident that Exxon, Chevron, BP and Shell spent more money to get Dick Cheney and George W Bush elected in 2000 than they had spent in previous elections. Almost $1.2 billion in revenues from contracts related to Iraq in the third quarter of 2006 led one analyst to comment: “Iraq was better than expected ... Overall, there is nothing really to question or be skeptical about. I think the results are very good.” No, it was not done in our name. Tony Blair was complicit in the crime. Nor was it in the name of the millions who marched, or the thousands of soldiers, or the tens of thousands of Iraqis who died. It was in the name of oil, big oil.

I seek the advice of the Presiding Officer. I think that the member is required to speak to the motion and the amendments that are before us. It is rather like listening to “Just a Minute”—the member is deviating.

Will Elaine Murray take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Did Lewis Macdonald hear the quotes that I gave from Lord Dannatt and Sir Michael Jackson that there was no forward planning about what to do once they had toppled that statue? That was the problem: they dismantled the structures and allowed rioting to take place and the crooks to move in.

On 26 February, the cabinet secretary referred to “our first national directory of services, which catalogues for governors and community practitioners what is provided, both in and out of prison”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 26 February; c 2381.] How is that progressing?

Thank you, Deputy Presiding Officer. In four minutes I will try to touch on some points, but not all. Alison McInnes is right to raise concerns that the single force could undermine local delivery and local needs. It is a fair enough concern, but for me it is not proven. If I thought that it had merit I would certainly say so. The cabinet secretary has already referred to the policing plans in place for every single ward, which I think is pretty local. Given that local commanders have been designated for all 14 divisions, I do not see 1 April as a big bang. The people of Melrose or Gorebridge will see no difference in local policing. Indeed, it may improve because of increased numbers. In England, many police look enviously at Scotland because of our single force. Every shire having an officer at every level is costly, a waste of money and sometimes leads to bad policing. The police commissioner elections, as already mentioned, cost £75 million with a 14.9 per cent turnout. Surely the Liberal Democrats cannot say that that would be a better solution for Scotland. Lots of chiefs at the cost of Indians—give me Indians anytime. Jobs have been lost in England: 5,000 police officers have gone and another 16,000 are at risk. What do you think the morale of police in England is like? I will give you a topical example of where a single force would be a huge asset. In the Jimmy Savile case, various English police forces had been aware over decades of complaints that Jimmy Savile was committing serious sexual offences. There was no liaison or communication between those forces, so he was able to offend for decades. With a centralised police force, the communication on serious crimes involving predatory and peripatetic criminals would be much, much better and might prevent such events from happening.

Yes, indeed. That is why I am saying that, with a centralised police force, a big incident such as that would be dealt with by a serious crime squad. That is where we really need a centralised police force. Local policing is required for local issues such as vandalism, burglaries and so on that take place in local areas—there are crimes that are specific to areas, such as the theft of sheep and cattle and so on in rural areas—but a single police force would be an advantage on big issues and in cases of predatory, peripatetic criminals. I will move quickly on to staffing. The handling of people management has been a huge issue. The worst thing that can happen to people—civilians or uniformed police—is not to know what is going on. I have raised that with the cabinet secretary privately and in public, and I think that letters should have been written and communications should have been made to people—particularly civilian staff—about what was going on. People need to know that they are not going to be told at the last minute what is happening. I hope that something is in hand to address that.

My last point is to invite you all—you are all coming and can have a wonderful time. I have here a letter signed by Vic Emery and Stephen House—it has no blood and no tears on it; they have signed it happily—and I am chairing a meeting tomorrow at which they will make a presentation about how they will work together and at which you can question them. Alison, I am sorry, but your debate would have been better held after that meeting, because at it you will be able to ask all those questions that you have about local policing and who is appointing whom.

I beg your pardon. I am speaking through the chair again. I expect all the Liberal Democrats to attend that meeting and I look forward to them having the answers to all their questions. The sub-committee, the motion for which will come before the Parliament today, will meet next Tuesday. It will not supplant the Justice Committee. Some of the members of that sub-committee are looking at me now. I am sure that they will give the SPA a hard time.

Will the member take an intervention?

Senior police officers in England have said that the problem in the Savile case was lack of communication between various divisions where incidents took place and complaints were made. My interpretation is that, in Scotland, with a single police force, the information and data that are collected for very serious crimes—to which Graeme Pearson referred—will help to ensure that people like Jimmy Savile are brought to book before they can commit further crimes. The problem in England was that there were too many police dealing with things but not communicating with one another. The single police force will help with communication.

The SFA?

Notwithstanding that, at the meeting last night with Unison and civilian staff, many people were concerned. They do not know what the future holds for them next week or in the coming years. Does the First Minister share my concern that, given that the single combined police force will come into being on 1 April, those matters must be addressed urgently for the sake of those employees and their lives?

Will the member take an intervention?

The minister referred to “a broader role and new responsibilities” for the new food body. Will the minister—or, indeed, a ministerial colleague—therefore take this opportunity to review the provision of slaughterhouses and processing plants and consider whether there are opportunities for more local facilities? I believe that that would enhance traceability and food security. Indeed, the issue might come within the ambit of the new food body.

8. Sorry—[Interruption.]—for the delay. To ask the Scottish Government what educational opportunities there are for people who have retired. (S4O-01836)

We should certainly be in our seats at the right time. Over the years that I have been in the Parliament, I have realised that, although many elderly people now access the internet and use email, many are still frightened of the internet. For some of them, it would give them access to a wider world from their homes—access to information, to family and indeed to online shopping if they are unable to get out. What steps can the Government take to encourage those people to come into the internet world?

I congratulate John Mason and declare an interest as a former court lawyer specialising in family law. Although I am wary of drawing from that experience, which was 12 years ago, I shall do so in part, with the caveat that there has been some progress in balancing and protecting the rights of fathers with regard to their children when relationships end—particularly when they end acrimoniously. I acted for women and men and found faults on both sides, although sometimes they were just on one side. A good family lawyer does not indulge in inflaming dispute, nor does he or she allow clients to use their children as ammunition or bribes. I never did. However, at that time, there were some presumptions that sometimes still prevail, although that might be patchy. There is a presumption that women should have residency rights, and the father should have contact. There is also a presumption that in what I would call—in inverted commas—a “domestic”, the man is at fault and has to be decanted out of the home, leaving the woman with the children. I understand that there is still a protocol between the Crown Office and the police on that. I do not know the details, but I will follow it up. There is no doubt that some men made it hard for themselves. Refusing to pay maintenance for their children unless contact orders were obtempered was always a bad move. The two do not go together. Some women made things hard for their ex-partners because they had the child’s ear and could and did bend it. Neither of those actions are supportable and they are certainly not in the interests of the children. I will focus on education, to which John Mason referred, and access to information, particularly under the Scottish Schools (Parental Involvement) Act 2006. Guidance that was published along with the 2006 act says specifically that both parents have equal status in their relationships with the school unless there is “a court order limiting an individual’s exercise of parental rights and responsibilities.” The guidance also urges schools to engage actively with non-resident parents and requires schools to produce a parental involvement strategy and report annually on its progress. I bet that not many schools do either of those things. I do not want to malign headteachers—I was a teacher, too—but I think that many might well be unaware of that duty on them, given that so few have complied with it. Fathers are further impeded by the Pupils’ Educational Records (Scotland) Regulations 2003—members can tell that I was a lawyer. Paragraph (d) of regulation 6, “Circumstances where information should not be disclosed”, provides that information should not be disclosed “to the extent that its disclosure would in the opinion of the responsible body, be likely to cause significant distress or harm to the pupil or any other person”. I stress that the regulation refers to “significant distress or harm”, not “serious” harm. What could that be? It certainly should not be annoyance, displeasure or inconvenience. Who might “any other person” be? We should bear it in mind that if someone wants to prevent information from being disclosed to the father there must be a court order against the father. There are huge difficulties. Fathers are not even entitled to see school photographs. They get access to information about what is happening to their children only if they have access to the school bag. That is not the way to impart information. I very much object to the term “absent parent”, which I understand that my council, Scottish Borders Council, uses in its forms. The people whom we are talking about are not absent parents. The term is cruel, hurtful and incorrect and should not be used.

I suppose that this question is for onward transmission to Dr Alasdair Allan. Regarding the number of schools that seem absolutely unaware of their duties under the 2006 act, which I referred to, will the minister convey to Dr Allan my request to find out what schools are doing in terms of obtempering their duties to obey the law, and how many of them are doing it?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government regarding the budgetary impact of the so-called bedroom tax. (S4O-01811)

Does the minister share my concern that the bedroom tax will impact substantially on the funding for refuge services in Scotland that are partly funded by housing benefit, and that, together with the higher cost of providing safe accommodation and the introduction of universal credit, it spells misery for many vulnerable and desperate women and children?

I congratulate Chic Brodie on the motion. I also congratulate the Seafield house campaigners. However, I am going to be very parochial: I am going to talk about Melrose abbey and Abbotsford house, both of which—luckily for me—are in Melrose in my constituency. Melrose abbey was built in 1136 and funded by Cistercian monks. Off and on over the decades, it was burned and demolished by the invading English, who were trying to capture Scotland. At one point in its fluctuating fortunes—around 1500—a 100-year reconstruction was completed. People did not move fast in those days. It could be said that it was a perpetually shovel-ready project. Today, even in the ruins, we can appreciate the abbey’s grandeur, elegance and design. Buildings are by people and for people. Melrose abbey also tells the story of Robert the Bruce, whose connection with it goes back to 1326 and one of those rebuilding programmes, courtesy of the English. On his death, Robert the Bruce’s heart was sent on a crusade to the holy land with Sir James Douglas. When Sir James was confronted by a large array of Moors, he cast Bruce’s heart before him with the cry, “Lead on brave heart”. That expression is still occasionally used nowadays, sometimes by me. Later, Bruce’s heart was retrieved from the battlefield, and it is interred at Melrose abbey. I go from a brave heart to the “The Heart of Mid-Lothian”—I think that that is called a link. I am referring to Sir Walter Scott, “Ivanhoe” and the Waverley novels. Scott built his quasi-baronial style home—Abbotsford house—on what was originally known as Clarty land. Now members can see what there is in a name. Scott indulged his eclectic tastes there—much like myself in my wee terraced property—overlooking his beloved Tweed. Indeed, when he was dying, he had his bed moved into a room with a view of the Tweed so that he could die looking at his beloved river. I first saw Abbotsford on a frosty January day when the grounds, trimmed hedges and turrets sparkled in the sunshine, and I loved it from that moment. Inside the armoury hallway and up near the rafters are the clan crests. Believe it or not, next to the Scott crest was that of Grahame, with an “e”—the affinity was complete. Scott’s great-great-great granddaughter died in 2004. She was the last of the family to live in what continued to be a family home until her death. Since then, a trust has taken over responsibility for the house, with lottery and Scottish Government funding to restore it. I say to the campaigners in the public gallery that it is a long haul but that they can get there, as has been done with Abbotsford house. In fact, it has been refurbished and will reopen on 4 July—if the queen is invited, so am I. I have talked about two wonderful historic buildings with stories to tell. When the Borders railway reopens, people will travel from Waverley to Abbotsford at Tweedbank—how appropriate. I might even have a Dandie Dinmont by then.

I declare an interest as a member of the cross-party group on animal welfare and as a member of the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. The unregulated placing of horsemeat on the European market raises serious concerns not only about public health but about animal welfare. Does the cabinet secretary agree that Scotland and the rest of the UK must take every possible step to ensure that we never again provide a market for this heartless trade? If he does, will he ask the European Commission to act now to ensure that all existing animal welfare legislation is enforced in every EU member state and that any meat or live animals imported from third countries meet the same animal welfare standards?

Here is the moral compass.

Further to the answer to Kezia Dugdale and with reference to the Borders railway and the stations in my constituency, what measures are in place not just for disabled access but for those with visual impairment?

The Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill will go to the Justice Committee. I note that the bill proposes separate and distinct police restitution orders. How will they work?

On the definition being crucial, I am somewhat concerned about the proposal that it could be changed through secondary legislation. Does the member share my concern that that may be ultra vires?

For almost as long as I have been in the Parliament—bar a month or so—high hedges and how to cut them down to size has been an issue. I therefore welcome the movement through—my dreadful puns might well end here—a much-needed privet member’s bill. Privet is apparently not an offending hedging plant, but more of that later. Of course, high hedges are no laughing matter. They have caused much distress and dispute between neighbours and have been a problem for many of our constituents over the years. I think that the first parliamentary question on the subject was from Maureen Macmillan in circa January 2000. In question S1W-03655, she asked when there would be a consultation on high hedges. I think that it was a planted question because almost immediately Jim Wallace answered that he was issuing a consultation. Twelve years later, after the petition and the bill proposal that Scott Barrie lodged, we are getting somewhere. Some of the hedges that might have been a problem then are certainly a bigger problem now. It is unfortunate and a pity that no Liberal Democrat member is here to take part in what really is a cross-party debate. Why the delay? In part, it was due to uncertainty about whether to seek a solution through planning law, abatement notices, the law of nuisance or the law of antisocial behaviour. There was also a problem with defining what is and is not a hedge, let alone whether the hedge had to be deciduous, coniferous or mixed. That is the perennial problem with legislation. We all know a hedge or indeed an elephant when we see one, but defining it is quite another matter. The definition in the bill is about as good as it can get. To extend it to include individual trees would be to redefine the bill and make it a high trees and hedges bill. However, I note that the bill applies only to hedges formed of “evergreen or semi-evergreen trees or shrubs” with live foliage. I might have thought that it would include, for example, beech, which retains its foliage although it is not technically live, and the ubiquitous privet. The test is that the hedge interferes with “reasonable enjoyment”. I feel an amendment coming on. While I am on the subject of amendments, I refer to section 34 of the bill, which is no small matter. To allow the definition of “high hedge” in the bill to be changed, extended or modified through subordinate legislation seems rather bizarre, because the whole purpose of having a definition in a bill is for it to be secure. If nobody else is going to dabble in that, I may well do it. That said, I welcome the push for early resolution, which should be assisted by the threat of ultimate statutory intervention. I agree with the proposal to charge a fee for applications, which will certainly act as a deterrent to vexatious applications. On the other hand, where all reasonable steps have been taken pre-application by the party that ultimately secures resolution through enforcement, why should there not be a recovery of the fee from the offending neighbour? That might add complications, but I would like to see flexibility on recovery of the fee. There would be a further element of justice in that. The issue of developers or indeed subsequent occupants seeking to have pre-existing hedges reduced or indeed removed altogether, particularly when it could be foreseen that they would increase over the year, should be dealt with at the application for planning stage. I note what the minister said about planning law. That said, I commend Mark McDonald and all those who went before him—not least Scott Barrie—for pursuing the issue. However, most of all, I commend the campaigners—Scothedge and others—who have rightly been determined to find a remedy for this wrong.

In some developments, conditions, called deeds of conditions, already are put in that prohibit certain fencing and barriers.

Is it on at 3 o’clock in the morning?

My comment is on the same point. If we start with a definition that means that some people are committing an offence, for example, and we later extend that definition, we will say that people are committing an offence that did not exist previously under the same legislation. People must be secure in the knowledge that what the definition says is what it does, and that that will not change.

If someone was warned in a legal letter in that respect, they could be told that if they did not comply they might be liable for the fee costs. I think that that is another point that could be put in at the beginning. It would be like the sword of Damocles, in that people could be told not only that would they be charged for cutting down the hedge or reducing its height, but that they may be liable for the fee costs as well. I do not see why that would be a problem.

The minister will be aware that the historic cremation practices at Mortonhall do not just affect Edinburgh residents. What measures are in place for parents who may have been affected from my constituency in Midlothian and the Borders, who have contacted me directly because they were not aware of what was happening? Are there measures to extend arrangements beyond Edinburgh?

What does the First Minister think of the Westminster Government’s proposal—which is, incidentally, shared by the Labour Opposition at Westminster—that senior police officers need not have any policing experience?

I declare an interest as a former solicitor and member of the Law Society of Scotland. I have sympathy with one little aspect of what Lewis Macdonald said. Here we are, considering another bill that deals with two distinct matters. Labour and the Liberals were guilty of that offence when they were in power, and I regret that we have not cured the problem. The Scottish civil justice council is very much to be welcomed. It will focus on preparing and drafting civil rules and procedure for the Court of Session and the sheriff court, which are terribly important for the effective and just working of civil justice—as my history teacher would say, “a good thing”. At the beginning, the council’s work will be technical and to do with the rules. It will comprise four judges from the Court of Session and sheriff court, two advocates and two solicitors, and the Lord President will have the flexibility to appoint six members, to whom David McLetchie—I regret that he cannot be here today—referred brazenly as Lord Gill’s six-pack. Even Lord Gill was momentarily distracted by that comment. That flexibility will be important as we move on from procedural to policy issues and issues that concern users. On private meetings, I say to naughty Jenny Marra that at today’s Justice Committee meeting she agreed—quite rightly—to take two agenda items in private, because they were to do with housekeeping and allowed us to discuss witnesses. I hope that Ms Marra is not going to say that that was sinister. It was not sinister at all. The background to part 2 of the bill, as members said, is the cost element. The Scottish budget has been cut hugely and the legal aid budget will fall to £132 million by 2014-15. We have to find money somewhere. The situation is much better in Scotland than it is south of the border. We face a 7.3 per cent reduction; the reduction is 17 per cent in England and Wales. It is not fair, but it is where we are as we go into a triple-dip recession. I will not go on about who is to blame for that recession; we are there and we have to look at how we operate. Other jurisdictions, such as England and Wales and New Zealand, have criminal legal aid contributions. I will not go over things that the cabinet secretary and other members said. However, I say to Annabel Goldie that I welcome the discounting of the partner’s income in special circumstances, such as when the partner is a witness to or alleged victim of the crime. It would be most unjust to include the partner’s income in such circumstances. The Law Society broadly welcomed the Government amendment in that regard.

I will concede Annabel Goldie’s point. The financial circumstances can also be volatile in certain cases. That is why I believe that the legislation, in that respect, has to be kept under review. I move on quickly to the refund of contributions, which was raised by Graeme Pearson. The idea is attractive, but it has opened up a huge can of worms. For example, should we look at having full awards of expenses in criminal proceedings? Should the Crown be able to take expenses against an accused when something should never have gone to trial in the first place? I do not think that the issue could be fixed in the bill. The position in which private clients or the Crown are in the same position is worthy of investigation, but we could not simply insert provisions on that really complex matter into the bill. We will have to return to it. As I said, I believe that the wrong choices have been made in England and Wales. The bill is not perfect, but it is a darn sight better than removing civil legal aid from welfare cases, immigration cases and debt cases, as had to be done in England and Wales.

With this bill, we have made the best that we can of a bad financial deal.

3. To ask the Scottish Government when it last communicated with NHS Borders and what issues were covered. (S4O-01731)

Other than meetings, what discussions has the cabinet secretary had about the delivery of paediatric services in the Borders general hospital? It would be detrimental to my constituents if they had to travel to Edinburgh for children’s services.

I will focus on mental health and the wider criminal justice system and will try not to duplicate the contents of Mary Fee’s well-researched contribution. I acknowledge the expertise and commitment of the minister, who was previously in the justice brief; Dr Richard Simpson, who was also previously in the justice brief; and, of course Mary Scanlon, who we know has been committed to the issue since 1999. It is necessary to repeat that for those who are new to the Parliament. We have already heard about how many people in the prison system suffer from mental health issues, but we should also look at the broader criminal justice system. We tend to forget that many victims of crime have mental health problems; in fact, it is reckoned that people with mental health problems are 11 times more likely to be a victim of a crime. Of course, sometimes there is hardly a sliver of difference between the victim and the perpetrator; indeed, sometimes they are one and the same person. I remember that in evidence to the committee, someone in the judicial system said that who got the knife out first determined which side of the fence people ended up on. It is very hard and very wrong to put people into strict categories. Of course, people can come up against the police when they have mental health problems. The police have come a long way when it comes to training officers, but there are still issues around recognising when somebody is not on their medication, why they are aggressive and so on that remain to be addressed. Then, the person with mental health problems might enter the court system. Again, staff throughout the court system need to be trained to recognise and deal with people with mental health issues, whether they are in the dock, are a witness or are just accompanying somebody. That is another issue. We have already heard from Mary Fee about prisons. She is quite right—an overwhelming number of people in prisons have mental health problems, which are sometimes drug and alcohol-related: they may have been caused by drugs and alcohol; the mental health problem may have come first; or sometimes it is a bit of both. The improvement that has taken place with the NHS taking over the delivery of health in the prisons is important. A recent visit to Polmont told me that. There were a few teething problems—with people changing from being employed by the Scottish Prison Service to being employed by the NHS—but I think that it was a good move. We must also bear in mind the fact—somebody alluded to this—that the majority of prisoners in Scotland are from poor socioeconomic backgrounds, where again there is a higher prevalence of mental health problems and drug and alcohol misuse, so the issue is very complex. I will deal briefly with Cornton Vale and women’s prisons, which have already been mentioned. Real progress is being made, and I do not use the word “progress” lightly. There is real commitment from the prison governor, from the Government, from the chief inspector of prisons and from the prison officers themselves to change what has happened in Cornton Vale. Of course, we have now had the announcement that the new prison at Inverclyde will be adapted and allocated to be the new prison for women in Scotland—dealing specifically with women, many of whom are victims themselves and who are just coming back into the system because there has not been the proper throughcare. We know about the throughcare issue—we have known about it for 12 years in this Parliament—and it is utterly depressing. It is getting a bit better, but what happens is that people in prison have a structure: their mental health problems are perhaps dealt with, as are their medical problems and things to do with their families—you name it, prison officers do their very best to deal with such issues. The minute that people come out of prison, that help stops. We could not deal with that, so how can they deal with it? Take a simple thing such as releasing people on a Saturday, when the benefits office is not open—if they are going to get any benefits—and the housing office is not open, so they are left cast out. When members visited 218 in Glasgow, the provision for women trying to be rehabilitated from Cornton Vale, we were told a very simple thing: they have somebody at the prison gate to meet a woman on release, take her somewhere and ensure that she has her benefits and that she has not lost her tenancy because she has been in prison for six months. The woman has somewhere to go and someone to help her—that is very basic. We cannot do that for every prisoner.

I will come to that. I will say that with 15,000 prisoners being released every year, we cannot have someone meeting all of them at the gates. However, we found out a simple thing on a visit to Polmont, and I am sure that Richard Simpson and others will recognise this: many people leaving prison simply do not have a GP, so their medical records and information on their mental health, their physical well-being and all the good work that has been done in prison is lost to the winds. They come out and there is nothing to meet them. We cannot impose GPs on people, but surely to goodness we can find a system where prisoners on release have somewhere to go and somebody to help them to go there to ensure that their medical treatment—physical and mental—continues once they are released.

I, too, welcome the agreement and the practical progress on establishing a specialised national crime unit and local policing plans. However, is the cabinet secretary aware that, at its meeting tomorrow, the Justice Committee will discuss the on-going scrutiny of the SPA and the chief constable and their interaction, perhaps through an ad hoc committee or a sub-committee? Does he welcome that?

I note what the minister says, but does he not think that some community groups will feel disenfranchised by the removal of the requirement to consult them again on a proposal that they may have objected to in the first place? That will mean that when an application is amended, they will not have a chance to come into the game, as it were. By the way, I am glad that I came, as I now know what a charrette is.

I must say that I come here as a partial conscript and that I am well out of my comfort zone among all these ex-councillors who know all about planning. I did not even know what a charrette was—I have probably been at one and never known it. Many of us have individual and community constituency cases in which planning is a huge and stressful issue. I will basically come at this debate from the community point of view. I will be reprising things that others have said—after all, I am about the hundredth speaker in this debate. Too often, communities are unaware of a proposed development until the 11th hour. Sometimes developers do not even bother with neighbourhood notification; they do not care and they just get on with it—and get away with it. I am looking very carefully at what is said in the Scottish Government’s response to the “Planning Reform—Next Steps” consultation—I have already taken the minister up on this in an intervention earlier. The document states: “The views varied about the desirability of a more efficient system, with some concerned that more streamlined procedures may be at the expense of quality of output and community participation.” I have come back to that because the minister has said: “We have laid legislation in Parliament to amend the Planning Act. In particular, removing the requirement to carry out pre-application consultation when amending a condition associated with a major development.” There are two weasel words there. The first is amending—what does amending mean? It could mean taking out a preposition, which might be a very important preposition, or changing a conjunction from an “and” to a “but”. Additionally, what does “a condition” mean? What would that condition be? There are a range of conditions and there are all kinds of substantive and little amendments that take place. My concern takes us back to third party community right of appeal, which Helen Eadie raised. Many years ago I happened to be on the Communities Committee, which argued for a community right of appeal in very limited circumstances—and this is one of them. That proposal was rejected by the then Labour-Liberal Administration and, actually, not many in our party agreed with it, but we are back to the issue. The whole idea of pre-consultation was to ditch the idea of third party community right of appeal, because it would mean that everybody would get a fair shot. The proposals seem to be taking that away from people. I may be wrong and I look forward to seeing what will come, but, for me, there are difficulties with the words “amending” and “condition”. I have a lot of time for Planning Aid for Scotland, but it is a mystery to me why many communities do not know about it. Helen Eadie said that she has often used it, and I have, too, but I have had to tell active groups, with very professional people who have worked for a long time, about it as they have never heard of it. I am not blaming Planning Aid for Scotland, but I do not know how we get the message through that there are professional planners who can help communities. Therefore, although I welcome the money that is going to Planning Aid for Scotland, I believe that we must somehow make the people who face developers and local authorities much more aware of it. Margaret Mitchell spoke about enforcement, which I have a lot of time for. A lot of people do not believe that it will happen. If they are told that a developer has to screen a site to stop dust and everything that is going past, and if it does not happen and they have to complain, they think, “Well, that was going to happen anyway”. If developers promise to put in a row of trees that is 10 feet high—forget the high hedges, these are the important ones—to screen some hideous things and that does not happen, people have to go through hoops to enforce the promise. Margaret Mitchell is absolutely right—I have great sympathy with the view that enforcement during development and post-development should mean what it says. I now have some wee bits and pieces. I do not know much about how we force or persuade local authorities to develop on brownfield sites, but I would like to see more of that happening rather than greenfield land being encroached on. I would also like to know what happens—it seems to me that this does happen—when a local development plan in which people get involved is put in place, only for councillors to walk away from it and do things that are not in the plan. In such a case, what was the point in people getting involved in the first place? Another important point was in the news this morning, but we all knew that that would happen. It is about the impact on town centres of out-of-town retail developments, which Willie Coffey mentioned. Even in Galashiels, although there is not an out-of-town development, we have a major Asda and a huge Tesco, and the wee shops in the main streets are withering on the vine. Everybody is hypocritical about supermarkets—they shop in them and then complain that they have lost their fishmonger or their greengrocer—but we must take account of their impact. If that is to be the path for town centres, what are planners thinking about in the wider spectrum when they are doing one of those charrettes? I am going to google that word to see how often it is used. To pick up on John Finnie’s important point about planning gain, I agree that planning is not all good news, but it is good news, for instance, in the Borders, where there is planning gain on the land and development for the Borders railway. Land and houses will be more valuable and will sell because of the railway. Planning is sometimes extremely appropriate in that regard. I think that it was Willie Coffey who referred to design. I hate the Legoland houses: bright, ubiquitous brick wherever we go, which has nothing to do with what a place was like to start with. With houses of semi-dressed stone in Edinburgh and granite in Aberdeen, for example, the design is sympathetic to the place. There is a lot to commend the Victorians and Edwardians for in that respect. What have we got? We have Cala Homes, Persimmon and so on just plonking down the same design and exterior wherever they go, and they are horrible. I do not want to insult my constituents—the houses are probably really nice inside—but the exteriors do not even weather or grow moss. Finally, a point was made about prohibiting councillors from taking an active part in planning applications in their wards. The wards are much bigger now, and we must look at that situation again because people do not understand why their democratically elected members cannot open their mouths on those applications.

6. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on the legalisation of drugs given the potential impact on its justice and health policies. (S4F-01056)

I welcome the fall in addiction, but it remains a substantial source of social problems. In relation to enforcement, does the First Minister see merit, as I do, in the idea of commissioning research into the potential impact of decriminalising drug usage? I stress that I am talking about decriminalising, not legalising.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am not often called in rural affairs questions, so I do not know whether the situation is usual. I am certainly not challenging or criticising you, Presiding Officer, but we have reached only question 6. It appears that the questions have been very technical, and there have been long and technical answers. Would it be possible to consider putting fewer rural affairs questions in the Business Bulletin, as we have reached only question 6 and four members have not had a chance to ask a question?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I make this point of order with reference to rule 1.6 of standing orders, on the “Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament”. At First Minister’s question time, Johann Lamont made comments to the First Minister in respect of the case of a Mr Morrison, his inability to access cancer drugs under the current Scottish Medicines Consortium regime and the fact that he has been charged an administrative cost for the drugs he has purchased privately. I immediately recognised that the person referred to is my constituent and that this is a live case that I am dealing with, having met Mr Morrison and his wife. I am in correspondence with NHS Borders and the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing on behalf of Mr Morrison, and indeed I raised the issue of VAT and administrative charges at topical question time a week or so ago. Section 8.1.2 of the code of conduct states: “A constituent can approach any of the MSPs (whether a constituency MSP or one of the seven regional MSPs as the case may be) elected to represent them as all MSPs have equal formal and legal status.” [Interruption.]

Section 8.1.3 says: “In the event that a member is made aware that a constituent’s case is already being pursued by a constituency MSP or regional MSP, it is recommended that the member notifies that MSP. Whilst this is not a requirement of the Code of Conduct, adopting such an approach should avoid any duplication of case work or MSPs working at cross purposes thereby damaging a constituent’s case. Notification between members should only take place with the explicit consent of the constituent.” [Interruption.]

Section 8.1.4 says: “An MSP must not deal with a matter relating to a constituency case or constituency issue outwith the member’s constituency or region (as the case may be) unless by prior agreement.” Presiding Officer, I seek your guidance. Ms Lamont is not a member for South Scotland; she did not seek my “prior agreement”; and neither she nor any of the regional Labour MSPs for South Scotland who might or might not have drawn her attention to this case have made any contact with me regarding this matter. Is it appropriate that she appears to be pursuing the case of Mr Morrison, who, I should add, is blameless in this matter? Indeed, whose “prior agreement” has to be sought?

This is not breaking news, but the committee has agreed that those opinions would be treated as private. There is a letter to that effect to Vic Emery and the chief constable on our website. I think that there was a misunderstanding at the time, disappointing though that is. We thought that we would be given them to publish, but we have accepted that there was a misunderstanding. We are not happy about that, but we have agreed together as a committee to go forward and keep the matter private.

I will deal briefly with three issues: first, the job losses or backfilling; secondly, the relationship between Emery and House—they could be a good double act in time; and, thirdly, parliamentary scrutiny. On backfilling, Chief Constable Smith said: “I do not think that anyone in the service or from any of the staff associations or professional bodies would advocate backfilling.” Chief Constable House said: “there is no plan or strategy for reform that I am in charge of that is predicated on backfilling.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 23 October 2012; c 1832, 1851.] In relation to non-operational matters, the cabinet secretary has given an undertaking to Unison that there will be no compulsory redundancies.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. This is a short debate. The fact is that the single police force in Scotland is envied in England and Wales—members should listen to Radio 4 occasionally. Instead of cuts to the front line, we are cutting our cloth by removing duplication of chiefs, not Indians, if you will forgive my metaphor. Indeed, Labour has stated that it would have made cuts of 12 per cent in England and Wales. As for the Tory-Liberal coalition, there is the possibility of 16,000 police in England and Wales losing their jobs. I invite members to compare that with a 7.5 per cent increase in the police in Scotland. I turn to the so-called jostling between the SPA chief and the chief constable. I am confident that the issue will be resolved. Indeed, they indicated to the committee that, by 5 December—I think that that is today, but I am not sure—resolution should be well on its way, and we hope to have that meeting of minds. Perhaps it has done them no harm to spend so much time together. The committee was told: “We are also focused on working together; in fact, we spend a lot of time together and between October and Christmas we will have achieved the appointment of all the deputy and assistant chief constables and have agreed a voluntary redundancy scheme.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 27 November 2012; c 2109.] Two very powerful men have got to know each other and I am sure that their relationship will work in time. It has a lot to do with personalities. I am not going to the wedding, but it might get close. As back benchers who were concerned about the SPA and the single police force, Alison McInnes, Graeme Pearson and I put to the Parliamentary Bureau and then the Presiding Officer the idea of a cross-party scrutiny panel comprising back benchers from all parties—without a built-in Government majority—and chaired by the convener of the Justice Committee in an independent capacity to look at the arrangements for the implementation and management of the police service of Scotland; the relationships and structures in place to deliver the responsibilities and functions attached to the SPA, the chief constable and the justice directorate; and the operation of arrangements for policing in Scotland. It is quite a detailed plan. The panel would have quarterly meetings and would report on its considerations. Other parliamentary committees would be involved, such as the Local Government and Regeneration Committee and the Finance Committee, and the members of the panel would be there in a representative capacity. I compare what is happening here to what is happening in England, where there was an election for police and crime commissioners with a 15 per cent turnout at a cost of £75 million. They are going in completely the wrong direction. In Scotland, by having a single police force and introducing parliamentary scrutiny we are cutting our cloth, not cutting the service.

Is the cabinet secretary as surprised as I am that there is nobody on the Labour or Conservative front benches in this debate?

Ah, an unsuccessful successful European challenge.

It is interesting that Lord Leveson reflects on the commercial pressures on the press that drove some papers to a race to the bottom. Let us consider the drop in circulation of some of our titles. The Daily Mirror is down 8 per cent to 21,000; The Scotsman is down 14.8 per cent to 32,000; and Scotland on Sunday is down 17.7 per cent to 38,000. There are no figures for The Herald and The Sunday Herald because that publication has been designated by its American owners as a regional newspaper. I am not indicting those particular titles, but against that kind of pressure we can see why some papers took the law into their own hands and developed it. It is important to note what the Leveson report does and does not say. In paragraph 12 of the executive summary, Lord Leveson says: “Not a single witness has proposed that the Government or Parliament should themselves be involved in the regulation of the press. I have not contemplated and do not make any such proposal.” It is important to bear that in mind. Leveson also says that the vast majority of the press do not fall below ethical standards that the public would expect of them and which, indeed, they expect of themselves. However, he also says that a subculture of people within certain publications ignored and, indeed, flouted those standards. The regional press can, in the main, be wholly exempted from criticism. Leveson reminds us that many of the aberrations of certain aspects of the press were and remain criminal offences. There have been some 90 arrests to date, and although the application of the criminal law, of itself, would not resolve the problems in the culture and practice or indeed address the fact that certain journalists and publications felt that they were their own lawmakers, it still has its course to run. Even before the current situation, the PCC was ineffective, to put it mildly. Even if we had not had the exposure of the horrendous phone-hacking activities, it would have needed to be reformed. Paragraph 42 of the executive summary says: “The fundamental problem is that the PCC, despite having held itself out as a regulator, and thereby raising expectations, is not actually a regulator at all. In reality it is a complaints handling body.” The PCC is very much dependent on the press itself. The system needs reform. I think that we all accept that. However, how that is to be achieved while ensuring that the fourth estate remains robust, independent and, indeed, thrawn enough to act in the public interest is the challenge. That brings us back to that awkward word, “regulation.”

I will let the member in later, if I have time. Any profession that I have been in—teacher, lawyer, politician—has had professional regulation, and so should the press. However, that regulation must be independent of any interests and be perceived to be so. I therefore support the possibility of an independent press regulatory body and believe that its composition should provide a better balance between the profession and the public interest, and that it should be wholly devoid of politicians. Throughout this debate, it has been made clear that the independent press regulatory body and the code of conduct and code of practice can be UK-wide. That is a matter for the press, in discussion with third parties. There is a distinction to be drawn in relation to what jurisdiction would recognise that independent regulatory body. If it were UK-wide, embedded in Scots law would be a recognition of that independent regulatory body. It would have no regulatory function itself. Leveson makes that plain in the part of the executive summary that deals with recognition, which says: “In order to meet the public concern that the organisation by the press of its regulation is by a body which is independent of the press, independent of Parliament and independent of the Government, that fulfils the legitimate requirements of such a body and can provide, by way of benefit to its subscribers, recognition of involvement in the maintenance of high standards of journalism, the law must identify those legitimate requirements and provide a mechanism to recognise and certify that a new body meets them.” The law must recognise and certify that a new body—Scotland-wide or UK-wide—meets those standards. Leveson continues: “The responsibility for recognition and certification of a regulator shall rest with a recognition body. In its capacity as the recognition body, it will not be involved in regulation of any subscriber.” Therefore, I think that we are unnecessarily getting ourselves in a little bit of a muddle.

I will take the member’s question in a minute. Leveson has recognised that there are demands and requirements under Scots law. He referred to civil remedies and talked about civil regulations changing. We cannot do that.

I apologise to Mr Findlay, but I will be unable to let him in. We still have corroboration and criminal affairs to deal with, so it would be a mess if we did not have Scots input. Whatever is decided, we must take our time. There is no emergency. Essential freedom of the press to expose and challenge must not be constrained unnecessarily. However, there is a huge difference between a free press and a free-for-all of the press.

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank all who signed the motion for what is a timeous debate, given that the findings of Leveson are due this afternoon—I thank him for his timing. I will refer, if I have time, to the First Minister’s comments on the issue at First Minister’s question time. The stimulus for my debate was a report to the Welsh Assembly Government on the future outlook of the media in Wales. Two main issues faced Wales in terms of radio and television coverage: first, that Wales was underprovided for by media coverage, which was not beneficial to the reporting and accountability of its civil structures; and, secondly, that media control took place largely outside Wales or was reserved. For Wales, we can substitute Scotland. In relation to public broadcasting, I pray in aid of my case the BBC’s “News at Ten”, in which Scottish news is reduced to five minutes, and Newsnicht, which is often pruned—and not always neatly—to fit in with London-centric priorities. The success of the recently launched “Scotland Tonight” in the more sociable 10.30 pm slot demonstrates that there is an appetite for longer coverage of topical Scottish issues. However, timing is not all. Content is frequently skewed to the south-east of England, and a snowfall of a few inches on the London streets can displace international headlines.

Other offenders in the dock are the 24-hour BBC News Channel, which also churns out news items of a domestic nature with ne’er a regard for the devolved Parliaments, and Radio 4, which I enjoy but which seems deeply rooted in the politics and culture of the south-east of England. It is as if we all had the Archers for our neighbours.

I will give way to the member in a moment. As for accountability to Scotland through its Parliament, I note the refusal of BBC executives to attend the Education and Culture Committee to answer union charges that cuts and plummeting staff morale could threaten coverage of the historic independence referendum in 2014. Former Radio Scotland producer Peter Murray branded the BBC “irresponsible” over cutbacks in Scotland and said that they have led to a fall in the “breadth and depth” of programmes. He also warned that they could take their toll on coverage of the 2014 vote. If devolution had just arrived, there might be an excuse for those failings, but 13 years on, I think not.

I think that I touched on that in what I said about the cutbacks, but others might deal with that point, too. Following the publication of the report in Wales, a broadcasting advisory panel was set up in September. It reports directly to the First Minister of Wales and it gives advice on how to maximise the impact of broadcasting there. For the avoidance of doubt, I include radio, community radio and local television in my proposal. However, I also suggest that a media panel should include the print media. The sales figures for some of our titles tell their own story. Here are some examples of plummeting circulation in Scotland. Between October 2011 and October 2012, the Daily Mirror’s circulation dropped by 8.2 per cent to 21,000; the Daily Record had an 8.7 per cent drop to 243,000; The Scotsman had a 14.8 per cent drop to 32,500; Scotland on Sunday had a 17.7 per cent drop to 38,000; and the Sunday Post, that stalwart of the decades, had an 18.7 per cent drop to 181,000. Even if we take account of online readership, those figures make for dismal reading and they present democrats such as us with a real challenge. If we add to the mix the troubles of local papers, a huge and growing democratic deficit is exposed at the very time when, with Scotland’s future up for grabs, no matter which team we play for, we need a full and informed debate across all our media. Heaven forfend that we rely on Facebook and Twitter. The last thing that print media companies need, be they large or small, is heavy-handed statutory regulation. Here, I make the necessary distinction between statutory regulation and a statutory body such as the ombudsman in Ireland, which the First Minister mentioned. He has stated that he finds that system attractive; later, I will mention the other things that he said in his response today. Certainly, given the misgivings of some editors and proprietors, the Press Complaints Commission is well past its sell-by date, but the wrongs, which in some cases undoubtedly amount to criminal activity, must not blight the print media at large, which reports with integrity. I unashamedly quote from one of my local papers, The Southern Reporter, which got in touch with me about this debate. It states: “Our readers trust us and look to us not only to report on the great things happening in our region, but also to challenge those things that are wrong or where standards fall below what we should expect. No reporter from The Southern Reporter has ever hacked a mobile phone, nor have we paid the police—or anyone else—for a story.” That is true of the vast majority of our print media. Whatever the remedy, we must defend—most of all, the political establishment must defend—robust reporting, because we all need media that are strong, combative, professional and testing of our politicians. The fourth estate, national and regional, did not earn its soubriquet without merit. I note what the First Minister said about a meeting of politicians to discuss a way forward following Leveson and what he said about an independent implementation group. I respectfully commend to the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs, and, indeed, the First Minister, the establishment of a Scottish media panel, which would comprise respected, experienced journalistic professionals to advise—I stress “advise”—on all matters pertaining to the media, both electronic and print. The print media is devolved, so the Leveson report could be the first issue on the agenda of that advisory panel, because the last thing that we need is an off-someone-else’s-shelf, knee-jerk solution. The panel would balance that meeting of politicians and show that those seeking a solution are not just politicians, but the journalists and media themselves. There has to be that coming together.

My point about Twitter and Facebook is that they are totally unregulated; indeed, I think that they are almost impossible to regulate. Whatever happens to the press, if we are going to start regulating, we must have balance. As a result, we cannot get our news from totally unregulated sources.

I do not think that we should just pick up everything—we do not want something off the shelf. However, I think that it is somewhat urgent that we have an independent media panel of experts to advise Government, particularly in the current climate. It would counterbalance the politicians meeting to discuss the response to Leveson, as was suggested in the chamber earlier.

The idea, I think, is that the Scottish media panel would not necessarily be static. People could be co-opted on to the panel for specific items, such as the entertainment industry, digital and so on. That is why I would like the cabinet secretary to take away and consider the proposal, particularly in the light of what the First Minister has said. I agree that there should be consensus in the Parliament and that the Opposition leaders should consider Leveson, but it bothers me a little that the politicians’ fingerprints might be seen to be all over the response.

What impact will the operation of the Borders railway have on reducing traffic usage on the A7?

Will the member give way?

Am I the tour de force? No. Of those successful bids, were any from other than urban areas? My concern is that rural areas such as the Scottish Borders are losing out on the conference bid fund.

We have had ponies breakdancing and Chic Brodie claiming that he is training one—you can tell that we are all desperately trying to zizz up the debate. We have had MICE—at least that is an acronym to toy with. It stands for meetings, incentives, conferences, exhibitions and events—we learn something every day, whether we want to or not. Then we had Dennis “Am I from the north-east?” Robertson. Yes, I too am impressed with returns from the bank of Fergus. Crumbs, I am bored with my speech already. Members’ speeches were littered with a lot of local press releases, so it is not all bad. In anticipating the debate, I did a rough survey of hotels across my constituency—I can be as parochial as other members—against the background of the concerns of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee about the winning years project, which seeks to maximise opportunities from all that happens from now until 2014 as regards major events in Scotland. The committee’s report noted—and we have all seen this—that the winning years project appears to be “focused more on urban areas” and that “rural areas might not benefit equally” from it. A few of us have now got into a fight about that. I will give members a prime example. The Commonwealth games are to be held in Glasgow. Where are the rugby sevens being held? They are not being held in Melrose, home of the rugby sevens—so much for rural places getting their fair share.

Please. I am glad that the member is still awake—that is a compliment.

No, that would not happen—it is not likely. I welcome the £2 million for the conference bid fund but we know that none of the rural places is getting it. Rural areas are not applying—frankly, they did not know about it. As regards business tourism, we are really looking at the major cities, which are in the central belt and the north-east. I did my survey as part of my usual business surgeries. I went round several areas in the Borders to hotels that are quite useful as conference venues. The MacDonald Cardrona hotel near Peebles recently hosted the Prison Officers Association of Scotland conference—it can hold conferences. Peebles Hydro frequently has the Scottish Police Federation conferences. Use of Traquair house extends to book festivals and smaller conferences. The Tweed Horizons centre has a wide range of facilities. I use the Tontine hotel, which is in Peebles, for meetings. Some of the ladies present, and perhaps some of the gentlemen, will recognise Stobo Castle for its spa facilities, but it also holds business conferences. There is also Abbotsford house, which is being brought back to its prime. As I understand it, it was the home of the founder of tourism, Sir Walter Scott. It has a wonderful visitor centre that is just open and it is available for conferences. However, there are problems. Transport links, particularly to the Peebles and Traquair side of the Borders, are a huge issue that many people have raised, and the lack of national exposure of the Borders by VisitScotland has been brought to my attention. VisitScotland tends to focus on the Highlands and Islands, and possibly the north-east. There is a link to the high cost of business advertising—

I did not think that the Highlands and Islands would be on the south of Scotland walking map, but maybe my geography is wrong. Aside from his training of horses, Chic Brodie is right about connectivity. Broadband speed and mobile reception are big issues for people who are holding a business conference. I have not finished my negatives. I have already mentioned the other negative, which is that many people are unaware of the conference bid fund. We need to do more than have this debate about that fund; information about it has to be taken out proactively to small to medium-sized businesses. On the plus side, many who have met the minister and heard him speak thought that he was a decent chap, and they liked the cut of his jib—that is it.

I am doing that. Members are looking at a Borders business tourism ambassador in the making. The jury was out on VisitScotland, which talks a good talk, but people were not convinced that it walks the walk. There are issues to do with the dispersal of business tourism to areas such as the Scottish Borders. I know that the rail link will help the central Borders, but it will not do very much for the west. Therefore, I ask the minister to liaise—I am sure that he does so regularly—with the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities, as infrastructure is more than incidental to dispersing business tourism.

Oh, no.

The bid fund is worth £2 million over three years. How will that be allocated? Would it all go in one year if enough people applied, or will you stagger the fund over the three years?

1. No question on flooding can be quite as attractive as that was. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on its flood prevention programme. (S4T-00122)

I refer the minister to Derek Mackay’s answer to question S4W-06436 on 19 April, which referred to an application by Scottish Borders Council for around £3.5 million for flood prevention schemes in Galashiels, at Plumtree, Wilderhaugh and Netherdale. Was the application successful?

That is fine for the local authority. However, an individual who runs a successful business at Flotterstone in Midlothian finds that his inn is flooded too regularly and that it is almost impossible to find the proprietors round about who are liable. What can he do, other than approach his MSP to try to get help? How can he access flood prevention schemes?

Question, question.

6. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on reports of a so-called turf war between the chief executive of the Scottish Police Authority and the chief constable for Scotland. (S4F-00971)

As it is not seemly—to put it mildly—for the issue to be trailed in the media, with alleged quarrels over who is to be in charge of backroom staffing and information technology, will the First Minister confirm that issues of the framework and demarcating the functions of the SPA and the chief constable will be resolved soon, and that we can be confident that operational policing is solely the responsibility and remit of the chief constable?

The cabinet secretary will have received a letter from me about a constituent of mine who is paying privately for cetuximab. My constituent and his wife fully appreciate the SMC’s role, although I am glad to hear that a review will take place. In the meantime, there is the issue of administrative charges plus VAT on the invoice that my constituent has received for his private treatment. Is there any way to deal with those charges?

What facts?

The cabinet secretary mentioned Henry McLeish, and I will mention Jack McConnell. Both tried and failed to get the attendance allowance, which was saved to the Department for Work and Pensions by the introduction of free personal care, returned by Westminster. The last that I knew, the figure was £40 million per annum. Does the cabinet secretary not think that it is disgraceful that that money is retained by the DWP?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention on the demographics?

On a side point to that, does the member agree that subsidised bus travel—whether it is for pensioners, the disabled or others—keeps the buses running, and that if those subsidies were not provided, some of the bus services simply would not be there, whether or not people use them for travel to work?

I want to pick up on something that Johann Lamont said about us being on a fixed budget: of course we are and we know that much of the budget of various portfolios is also fixed. Some 80 per cent is allocated to salaries, transport, buildings and so on, leaving us with 20 per cent to reallocate. In my parliamentary committee, as no doubt in others, there are calls for additional spending across the various portfolios. I do not want a list just now, but I ask Johann Lamont in free debate to add all the commitments together, give us the total bill and tell us where it is coming from, when we see what is being done in the budget debate. I do not want to be in a Parliament that pitches college students against university students. For goodness’ sake, having no tuition fees benefits such students who are, like me, from a working-class background—and they are often the same people.

I am going to develop the argument, because we are also being asked somehow to pitch free personal care for the elderly against nursery accessibility—all very laudable, but again not the arguments that I want or think that we have to make. I want to pick up later on Drew Smith’s reference to resources. Let me remind members of what I said in my earlier intervention in the cabinet secretary’s speech: our introduction all those years ago of free personal care has saved Westminster and the Treasury £300 million to date. If Westminster had offered justice to this Parliament in that regard, that £300 million could have been reapplied to attending to the elderly in their homes. I acknowledge the issue that members from the other side of the chamber have raised about the limited time that is spent with the elderly, but it has gone on for longer than the past four or five years. Some members touched on the council tax freeze. Some funding for local authority spending is based on property, but to get rid of the freeze without putting something else in place based on income and other resources would be a huge disadvantage to many pensioners and would penalise them—they may live in large houses, but they are their homes. The council tax freeze is a broad brush stroke, but it is fair at least to that group. On concessionary travel for the over-60s, I do not know how Robert Black worked out that the cost for those in work is £34 million. I did not know that if I swished my card through, which I do rarely, it would show who I am, so I must investigate that. I do not know where the £34 million figure came from or whether it is just a guesstimate. However, it is blinkered just to regard concessionary travel as a travel item, because it has a huge health and mental health benefit to the elderly. It takes them out of their isolated existence and cold homes—and my goodness, they are going to get colder; how useless is Ofgem in the winter? Concessionary travel gives the elderly a reason to get dressed up a bit, go out, speak to their friends on the bus or even to strangers on the bus, get somewhere at the other end, have a cup of tea and a scone, and then come back, having done something with their day. It has a huge health and mental health benefit.

Who shall I pick? Richard Simpson.

For a start, the member does not have to use a bus pass; he could choose not to use it or he could put the money saved through using it in a charity box. However, to means test people means two things: it is costly in administration and it makes some people fall out of using the resource. Concessionary travel is a huge benefit. In the run-up to the most recent election, the Labour Party accused the SNP of planning to get rid of concessionary travel, so it is a bit of a cheek to come up with its policy now. I listened to all the evidence on prescription charges when I was the convener of the Health and Sport Committee. There is no way in which we can make a complete list of exemptions that is fair—we cannot do it. We heard evidence that people picked which of their prescriptions to take. Prescription charges were a false economy and extremely unjust. Introducing free prescriptions is one of the best things that this Parliament has done. We know that means testing, as posited by Labour, immediately creates injustices. It has never worked for those who fall just out of a category and it tends to take them out of every other category. The thing to do is to tax at the top. Why are all parties across the chamber not united in attacking the benefits cuts from Westminster? Those benefits cuts will cause misery to many Scots and no doubt lead to increased demands on our health service and other services, where disabled people are being challenged to prove that they are not fraudulent. Let us consider the drop in the value of the state pension. Members perhaps do not realise that the graduated pension, which pensioners paid for over many years, and the state earnings-related pensions have been frozen. People who put in money in early years to boost the state pension are now seeing that pension reduced. Their employee pension schemes are not paying out in the way that they thought they would. Their savings—for this is not the credit card generation—are being eroded, with 0 per cent interest. Those are the major issues that we should be looking at, but of course we do not control anything to do with them. It is an irony that, although Scotland is resource rich, we cannot command those resources and so we cannot deliver social justice. That is really what independence is all about. It is not pie in the sky and it is not a magic wand, but it would give us the means to deliver social justice. If we had independence, we good people would not be standing in this chamber making choices that pitch the needy against the needier, which is a disgraceful thing for any Parliament to have to discuss.

Will Jackie Baillie take an intervention?

Great concern has been expressed in my constituency about the proliferation of wind farms. Is there any guidance for local communities on buy-in schemes to allow communities to profit directly from local energy productivity?

The member mentioned the amount that pharmacists get in the Borders and the amount that they get elsewhere. However, I do not know what her point was. I may have been drifting—although I try not to drift during the member’s speeches. Can she explain her point?

I welcome the general tone of today’s debate, but that tone should not stop constructive criticism or recommendations. We all know that this is a hard nut to crack. The solution is multidimensional and requires collaboration and co-operation among agencies. Those are clichés, and we know all that. We know also—I agree with Willie Rennie on this—that drug addiction is closely, but not wholly, related to poverty, community circumstances, family and friends and the environment in which a person is brought up. I have yet to meet an addict who does not want to be freed from the personal prison that is addiction. We even have children who are born addicted because their addiction began in utero. I welcome front-line treatment and the establishment of the alcohol and drugs partnerships—the key word being “partnerships”. I also note the record funding in my constituency. Key, too, is the drop in waiting times: addicts need help from the moment they seek it, so any cut in delays is precious. In my constituency, the target of 90 per cent starting first treatment within three weeks of referral has been exceeded, so I commend the Government for that. Others have spoken about methadone and other replacements, but I want to focus on the strategy’s possible impact on reducing crime and reoffending. I note from the “2010/11 Scottish Crime and Justice Survey” that illicit drug use among adults decreased to 6.6 per cent in the period 2010-11. However, as others have said, there are many people who are now in their 40s and beyond who have been addicted for decades. In Audit Scotland’s report, “Reducing reoffending in Scotland”, paragraph 22 states: “An analysis of data provided by SPS”— the Scottish Prison Service— “shows that in March 2012, 40 per cent of all prisoners came from the most deprived areas in Scotland, compared to 15 per cent of the total Scottish population. Almost half (44 per cent) of prisoners also reported being under the influence of drugs at the time of their offence. This profile is similar to reoffender populations in other countries.” When that is put in context, the relevance of drug addiction, the drug trade and the impact on crime and reoffending is substantial. To buy drugs, a person must steal, rob and peddle them. The majority of reoffenders are male, but many women offenders are drug and alcohol addicts, too. Cornton Vale has—but will have more so—a whole person and individual approach to help to break addiction. I think that the Justice Committee was, in general, welcoming of the reappointment of Kate Donegan as governor of the prison, and of the new head of the SPS and the drive to have Inverclyde as a custom-built prison for women prisoners and their rehabilitation. I, too, commend the 218 project in Glasgow, which I visited with colleagues last year. The committee is keeping a note of how important such alternatives are. The motion rightly speaks of “relevant national and local agencies” working together “to drive this ... strategy”. Frankly, there is no greater requirement or, indeed, opportunity, for co-operative working than between our courts and prisons, health, and housing services and local authorities, than when the addict is in prison and—most certainly—when he or she is released from prison, because the dealer might be waiting at the gates to provide a freebie and, in a stroke, to undo any good work that has been achieved in the prison. When I tell members that the average annual cost for each prisoner place in 2010-11 was more than £32,146, they will see the waste of money. The latest figures on the SPS website also indicate that there were recently about 8,500 people in Scottish prisons. Of those, some 30 per cent reoffend and are reconvicted within one year. If members accept the earlier figure that 44 per cent are under the influence of drink or drugs at the time of the offence—there are others who were not under the influence, but offend because of their addiction—and that we can reduce the reoffending rate by 10 per cent through a focused strategy, members can do the maths and calculate the savings to the public purse—let alone the savings to health and social services, for example—and the benefits to the chaotic life of an addict offender, and to their families and wider communities. We must therefore ensure that money that is invested in the strategy is spent appropriately and effectively. One way to evidence that would be a reduction in offending rates and, indeed, reoffending rates due to drugs abuse, drugs purchase or drug-related crime. That would provide rock-solid evidence.

I have finished.

The member has defended things that Jenny Marra has said in the press, if not in the chamber. Is he saying that there are pharmacists out there who are making money unnecessarily out of dispensing methadone in the way that they do?

It is a pity that Mr Hume was not here for topical questions this week. Is the minister aware that many people in my constituency believe, like me, that even if it takes a little longer and a little extra money, to build in three years—as Nicola Sturgeon said—what the Liberal Democrats failed to deliver over decades will be a remarkable achievement for the Scottish Government?

I, too, congratulate Kenny Gibson on securing the debate and share his huge regret—as we all do—at the avoidable deaths reflected in the individual stories that we have heard today. I am on the donor register, but I have substantial reservations about the proposal of presumed consent. I will argue caution on presumed consent on two fronts: the principle and the practical. The principle of consent is that it must be informed and clearly expressed, and the person consenting must have capacity. The proposition is that consent will be presumed in the absence of registration on an opt-out register. I note in passing that the fact that 90 per cent of the public support organ donation does not mean that 90 per cent of the public want to donate their organs—they may support it for other people. At the moment, almost 40 per cent of the Scottish people are on the donor register, but we know that that does not mean that the rest do not want to donate. Many of them simply will not get around to it in their ordinary, busy lives. As Mark Griffin said, we also do not like to think of our own deaths, especially when we are very young. If we accept that, why should someone’s failing to opt out not also be because, like most people, they simply do not get around to it? We could make opt-out compulsory, but I cannot see—as Jackson Carlaw rightly said—how the entire population could be captured in that way.

I am just coming to that. However, if publicity campaigns for an opt-in system secured only 40 per cent, I cannot see how publicity campaigns for an opt-out system would make the system watertight. How can we say that someone’s wishes are clearly expressed? Further, if we presume consent, we presume capacity and capacity reaches far further—as Liam McArthur rightly said—than simply age. That would be a serious erosion of a basic tenet of consent that consent can be given only if someone has capacity. Turning to the practicalities, in the short time available I want to quote from a now retired consultant anaesthetist in the accident and emergency department at the Western in Edinburgh who has 30 years’ experience of organ donation. He says: “I think I would find it difficult to re-assure grieving relatives that their loved one who had just died really did want to give his organs based on the fact that he had not registered an opt-out.” So what is being argued for would be counterproductive. He continues: “at present ... The possibility of organ donation may come up spontaneously from the family, but most often we broach the subject usually after the first set of brain stem death tests. We ask whether the deceased expressed any wishes about donation and what were their views on the matter. It is amazing how hard information about the deceased’s wishes as expressed on the donor register removes any doubt, and relatives are immediately able to agree to a donation. I have personally never had a family refuse a retrieval where the deceased held a donor card or was on the register”. That is from a consultant who was involved in the first multi-organ donation in Dundee. As consultant in charge of the general and neuro intensive care unit at the Western from 1998 to 2002, he fostered a positive attitude to donation. He has seen how families have come to terms with their grief at the sudden loss of a loved one and how the gift of the loved one’s organs has helped with that. He says: “Please do not put this goodwill at risk for an unproven benefit in terms of numbers of available organs. If goodwill is lost, the potential losses of available organs could be much greater.” Of course I support the ends, but we must be very careful that the means are not counterproductive.

2. To ask the Scottish Government when the Borders railway will be operational. (S4T-00093)

The tone of the minister’s answer is very different from the negativity of the Conservatives and in particular Mr Lamont, who is forever going on about the Borders railway. I suppose that he would have a different tune if the line went through his constituency. In any event, that is not our fault—it was the Liberals and the Labour Party who decided the route. However, I will raise a positive note, as I am a positive person. Would the minister be willing to consider—even if it affected prices and time—cross-party and local campaigners’ views on accommodating charter trains, given their potential additional economic benefit to the Borders? Will he also give me a further update on journey times?

Would charter trains make any difference to the regular running of trains? Would they operate at weekends? Would they have an impact on commuting?

I thank the Presiding Officer for that. When I rise to speak, I am usually told that speeches are being kept short. I welcome the opportunity to open the debate on behalf of the Justice Committee. I will try not to duplicate matters—I have used the word “matters”; I should say “issues”—that have been raised by the cabinet secretary, Kenny MacAskill. I thank everyone who has given evidence on the bill—in shorthand, I refer members to the full list in annexes C and D of our report. I also thank yet again the members of the committee—the little darlings—for their diligence and good humour. In particular, I thank the inimitable David McLetchie, with his wicked wit. In quizzing the Lord President on his discretionary power to appoint six members of the council, he asked with an impish grin whether Lord Gill would comment on his “six-pack”. We should give Lord Gill his due: there was the merest flicker of a raised judicial eyebrow before he answered. Like previous justice legislation, the bill has two main parts—as members know, such bills are quite my favourite. As the cabinet secretary said, part 1 will establish the Scottish civil justice council and part 2 will introduce contributions to criminal legal aid. I will cover each part in turn. Part 1 received less media attention than part 2, but it nonetheless deals with a crucial issue. As the cabinet secretary said, it stems from the 2009 review of the civil courts by Lord Gill, who is now Lord President. That review proposed a package of structural and functional reforms. The proposed creation of the council has received widespread support. Many believe that it is an important step in ensuring the effective operation and oversight of the Scottish civil justice system. However, the committee heard a number of concerns relating to the provisions, which included concerns about the council’s status. Some witnesses believed that it should be a non-departmental public body. There were concerns about whether the council’s functions and powers are appropriate—for example, should it prioritise updating rules versus advising on policy—and about the balance therein. There were also concerns about who would chair the council and how sub-committees might best be utilised. The committee is satisfied by the explanations and assurances that it received from the Lord President and the cabinet secretary on all those issues. Perhaps the main concern that witnesses highlighted related to the composition of the council and the Lord President’s appointment process—the “six-pack” process. In particular, evidence centred on the balance of legal versus lay representatives. My colleague Jenny Marra raised that issue. To reflect specialist areas of law, some legal bodies suggested that there should be more solicitors on the council; I vote for that—okay, I do not really. Others, including consumer groups, believed that there should be a more even split between legal and lay members so that the views of users of the civil courts rather than those of just the practitioners would be taken into account. The committee shares concerns that the perspective of end users may not be fully represented on the council, but we expect that, once a new set of court rules is drafted, the balance of membership will shift over time. The committee notes that the Scottish Government will have powers to adjust the council’s mandatory membership if required. Rules may seem to be dry as dust, but they are important in the processing of justice. They ensure that deadlines are met so that we do not have a Dickensian pace in our civil justice system. They require fair notice of the case pled and defended, for example. By their nature, they often require to be technical and specialised, but so is a mechanic’s toolbox. For me, they are simply the toolbox of the civil justice system. However, rules must keep pace with modern requirements and with technology. They must make allowances for the party litigant, accelerated court process, abuse of process, tardiness and so on. I speak from weary experience, having had to know court rules. The committee welcomes the Lord President’s assurance that he will draft a statement of appointment practice based on the principles set out by the office of the Public Appointments Commissioner for Scotland. In any event, we have asked the Scottish Government to consider whether that might be put in the bill. I turn to part 2, which is on criminal legal assistance.

Unfortunately for me, I am not allowed to agree or disagree in this debate because I am speaking as convener. I have to represent all and sundry—I am sundry at the moment. I will be free on another occasion to take a view. The principle of making contributions is already established in some forms of legal assistance such as civil legal aid. However, with regard to criminal legal aid, the vast majority of accused persons—as the cabinet secretary quite rightly said—do not pay anything for their legal representation and associated costs. Now we are introducing contributions to criminal legal aid for the first time. The Justice Committee found seven distinct areas of concern about that part of the bill. One concern was whether it was right in principle to require contributions for criminal legal aid. It could be argued that there is a clear distinction between the civil litigant—at least the pursuer, who has the option of whether to raise proceedings—and a defender in a criminal trial who has no option. On balance, the committee was not opposed in principle to recipients of criminal legal aid making a contribution towards its cost; there is more to say about that later. However, any contributions must be proportionate to the means of the accused and must be sufficiently flexible to take into account particular personal circumstances. That raised the issue—I think that Jenny Marra raised this as well—of whether the financial circumstances of the spouse or partner should be taken into account. Frankly, I do not have an easy answer. Perhaps that should be decided on a case-by-case basis—I am sure that we will examine that later. Another concern was whether fairness required that there should be provision to enable refunds of legal aid contributions to be made in certain circumstances on acquittal. The committee had some sympathy with the argument that acquitted persons should be refunded their costs, so it asked the Scottish Government to consider further the issue of recovery of contributions—perhaps restricting that to a narrow range of cases, perhaps under judicial direction where the bench indicates that the case should never have been brought by the Crown in the first place. However, we would then have to consider an award of expenses against the Crown. Again, complications would arise if the defence is privately funded and there is a big Queen’s counsel bill to be met, but the complications are not insurmountable and the issue is worth debating. We wondered whether the level of contributions that is being proposed is appropriate. A number of witnesses had concerns that the threshold had been set too low and that very poor and vulnerable people might be asked to make contributions. The cabinet secretary has indicated that he will bring draft regulations to the committee before we move to stage 2; that is useful. However, we were disappointed—rap over the knuckles here—that the equality impact assessment was not forthcoming during our deliberations. It was forthcoming later, but we did not have it at the time. It is not good enough that the committee is left to deal with things when all the evidence, such as the assessment, is not available. We were concerned about whether it was right that solicitors rather than SLAB would collect summary criminal legal aid contributions. Representatives of the solicitors’ profession of course strongly objected to what they saw as an additional burden of collection being forced upon them and the committee asked the Government to reflect upon those concerns. There was also the argument, which has some traction, that the relationship between agent and client might be compromised. Would it even lead to a change in plea? Would an accused who was unwilling to pay contributions simply plead? If the case was lost, how would the agent ever recover contributions? Who would pay him or her if they lost the case? Who would stump up if the accused was in prison? Why will SLAB not collect the contributions as it does for civil legal aid—is it so that solicitors will carry the loss? That is a fair point to make. If that was the case, would that mean that agents simply would not take cases because they would not want to carry losses? The committee wants to know whether the proposed changes would affect the smooth running of the criminal justice system. For example, if someone has their legal aid suspended in the middle of a trial, what happens to the trial? What happens if there is a co-accused, and they are left hanging out to dry, waiting for someone to come in to represent them—[Interruption.] I beg your pardon, Presiding Officer—I have just knocked over my glass after too much flamboyance. There are issues around the suspension of legal aid that do not arise in civil cases where someone’s liberty is not at risk. [Interruption.] What has happened? Have I given somebody an early bath?

In order to do that he would have to leave the chamber entirely, as I see that he is doing. The committee considers that it is crucial that any savings that are made are not in effect cancelled out as a result of the changes having unintended consequences. That is a mantra in law: watch out for those unintended consequences coming down the track. The committee has therefore called for the changes to be effectively monitored and for ministers to report to Parliament three years after the proposals come into effect. Human rights is a huge issue, and the committee sought evidence on whether the Government’s proposals would comply with the European convention on human rights. Our concerns centred on whether an accused would be left without legal representation during a trial—as members have highlighted—and whether financial contributions were appropriate and equitable. Indeed, it was clear that, even if the office of the public defender stepped in, it would still be required to get those contributions, so that issue has not been solved. I will conclude before I scatter any more fluid around the chamber. The committee supports the general principles of the bill, but we urge the Scottish Government to consider carefully our recommendations, particularly on part 2. In that regard, I note the Scottish Government’s response to our report and the cabinet secretary’s comments this afternoon. The bill is the committee’s fourth, and I think that we have become a well-honed team in comprehending and scrutinising complex legislation. [Interruption.] I welcome Mr Eadie back to his seat—I promise that he will have a dry few minutes. I hope that the committee’s stage 1 report provides some assistance to members, and I look forward to hearing other contributions to the debate. I am very glad to sit down.

You are welcome back, darling.

The Lord President.

I dread to comment, having not practised for such a long time, but I think that someone can sue, say, the police only if there has been a malicious prosecution. It would have to be something pretty heavy duty.

I certainly hope that I do not use 13 minutes, Presiding Officer. I am pleased to open this debate on the role of the media in criminal trials on behalf of the Justice Committee, which is to have a very busy week—we are back again on Thursday. I ask members to cast their minds back to the images—albeit that this is something that happened in England—of the landlord Chris Jefferies and the murdered tenant, Jo Yeates. In fact, if one Googles “landlord” and “murder”, up come strings of references to those events. Images of Chris Jefferies as a rather strange-looking individual ran on the front pages. Even people of whom I would have thought better said that he had done it. Of course, he had not done it. Trial by media; conviction by media. Had the case proceeded to court, could Chris Jefferies have been given a fair trial? In the meantime, the real murderer had time to cover his tracks. That was in England, and we have different restrictions on reporting; nevertheless, we have seen many developments such as the televising of the sentencing of a person convicted of a high-profile crime, and Twitter and internet blogs being used to report court proceedings, notably in the case of Tommy Sheridan. We have also observed the ease with which members of juries can now access, on the internet, material relevant to the case in which they are involved. What impact might that have in prejudicing a trial? Our work to date on those issues has involved the commissioning of a briefing by the Scottish Parliament information centre and the holding earlier this month of an introductory evidence session with leading legal, media and criminal justice experts. With personalities such as Donald Findlay QC, Alistair Bonnington, Magnus Linklater and Aamer Anwar around one table, one can imagine how lively and challenging the session was. Even I could not get a word in edgeways, and that takes some doing. The session certainly provided much food for thought and demonstrated to us that there are no easy answers on some of the issues. That is one of the reasons why we were keen to hold the debate. We wanted to throw the discussion open to more members, and we wanted members to put their heads together to try to come up with ideas about where the committee should go next with the issue. We have yet to decide whether to undertake a full-blown inquiry into the role of the media in criminal trials, if, indeed, we have the time to do so in our heavy legislative timetable—the minister and the cabinet secretary should take note, please—or whether we should focus on one or two particular issues of interest. To set the scene for the debate, I intend to highlight some of the key issues that were raised during the evidence session and in the written evidence that we received. I want to focus on three issues in particular: contempt of court legislation; the televising of court proceedings, jury deliberations and the use of the internet and social media; and filming witnesses arriving at and leaving court. I am sure that my colleagues on the committee will deal in more detail with some of the other topics that were raised. The Contempt of Court Act 1981 is the main piece of legislation that relates to contempt of court in Scotland. We heard from some witnesses that it works fairly well in relation to the print and broadcast media, but it is completely unsuitable for controlling material that is published through social media and the internet. As a demonstration of the frailties of the legislation, witnesses cited the example of the print and broadcast media not being able to disclose the identity of a famous footballer who had been granted a super-injunction, although his identity was well known on social media and internet sites. The internet is no respecter of national and therefore legal boundaries, of course. However, it came through strongly that it would be foolish to pass legislation in an attempt to police the internet, given the amount of information that is published and republished across many jurisdictions, and the difficulties—and, indeed, the costs—of tracing the authors of information or disinformation. Witnesses agreed that that particular genie is already out of the bottle. The televising of court proceedings generated the most debate and dispute among the witnesses. Some were vehemently opposed to the television broadcasting of criminal trials on the basis that that could lead to proceedings being broadcast on prime-time TV and to what some called the Hollywoodisation of criminal trials. “Judge Judy” springs to mind, of course. I actually quite enjoy “Judge Judy”, but the programme is more entertainment than something that I consider to be serious. Other witnesses disagreed and felt that the scrutiny that would be provided through placing cameras in court would contribute to the administration of justice and increase the understanding of court procedures among the wider public. However, it was widely accepted that if televising court proceedings was to extend beyond the experiments that have taken place so far—for example, if it was to extend to the live broadcasting of High Court trials—a set of guidelines and safeguards would certainly be needed. Some witnesses said that, in general, TV exposure would give a more rounded portrait of participants than a newspaper article would, but others expressed concern that TV coverage and the ability to replay proceedings on the internet and, indeed, to edit them could lead to additional risks to the accused, and even the acquitted, from those who might want to seek revenge. There was understandable concern from the police and victims groups in particular that victims and witnesses would be even less likely to come forward to give evidence if they knew that they might have to appear on TV. Given the difficult issues that were raised around the televising of criminal trials, I was pleased to hear that the Lord President announced last week that judicial office-holders would conduct a fundamental review of the current policy on the use of television cameras in court and that, until that review is completed, no further applications to film in court would be considered. Although little detail of the review’s timescale and remit is currently available, it is expected that the applications submitted to date, the experience of handling such applications and the applicability of the current practice note will be considered in it. For clarity, I will give my understanding of practice as it was and is. On 6 August 1992, Lord President Hope issued a notice that stated that filming by television companies “may be done only with the consent of all parties involved in the proceedings”. In January this year, Lord President Hamilton made an alteration to that notice to state: “The Lord President has today directed that, for a trial period, filming may be done without the consent of all parties but only where the production company and broadcaster have provided the presiding Judge with an undertaking that the final broadcast will not identify those who have not consented to the filming. In addition, no member of a jury may be filmed.” Ultimately, of course, it is for the presiding judge to decide whether the filming of court proceedings or even a part thereof should take place. With regard to jury deliberations and the use of social media and the internet, the witnesses agreed that it was almost inevitable that jury members would research or inadvertently come across material relevant to the trial in which they were involved. Some thought that although that is unavoidable in the current climate, jury members are far more likely to be influenced by what they heard during the day’s proceedings in court than by reading material online or in newspapers, or hearing about the case on the TV. However, others thought that it was essential that judges’ directions to juries were in “severe and unequivocal language” so that jurors understood that if they prejudiced a trial by deliberately researching relevant material they could be punished and even sentenced to prison, which is the nuclear option. Some witnesses felt that jurors should be issued with written guidelines on their role and responsibilities. If I may step outside my role as convener, that seems to me to be a reasonably good and uncontentious idea. A number of witnesses highlighted that it is illegal under the Contempt of Court Act 1981 to inquire of juries how they carried out their functions and suggested that now is the time to get rid of the ban. They believe that the time is right to conduct research into issues such as whether a jury member understood the judge’s directions or whether they had any prior knowledge of a case from the internet or television. I have some sympathy for the view that such research should be conducted. One witness concluded that “if, at some future point, there is evidence-based serious concern about this, then juries should be abolished.” That is a step too far for me, but it is an interesting argument. I move on to the filming of witnesses arriving at and leaving court. Although there can be protections in court with proceedings being held in camera, there is nothing to prevent witnesses from being filmed when they arrive at and leave court. The witnesses were agreed that there was no reason why an adult witness should not be filmed participating in what was seen as a public event. However, they felt that it was unacceptable for the media to follow witnesses beyond the steps of the court. Of course, there could be repercussions for witnesses. For example, some might be perceived to have grassed on neighbours—on fellow men and women. It was clear that on occasion things get a little out of hand—to put it lightly—especially when a witness or the accused is in the public eye. For example, Aamer Anwar spoke of media scrums when witnesses, the accused and solicitors were chased down the street to their cars. It was highlighted that such unacceptable behaviour might be covered by the common law and by the Protection from Harassment Act 1997, but I have my doubts that that would be a robust deterrent, given that it does not seem to be being used now. Having raised some of the issues that we have tentatively identified following our round-table discussion, I look forward to hearing the views of other members on the role of the media in criminal trials, which has evolved so much in recent years, and their ideas on where the committee might focus any future work. I move, That the Parliament notes that the Justice Committee is examining the role of the media in criminal trials and that, in order to inform any future work in this area, the Committee would welcome members’ views on the issues arising in both SPICe Briefing 12-50, Role of the Media in Criminal Trials, and in the summary of evidence gathered to date.

A point of interest is that the sentencing that has been televised was not in real time. My understanding is that the judge ultimately decides what will be broadcast. For example, any sounds from the gallery can be edited out, so the footage is a rather more dignified than it perhaps would have been had the trial been broadcast in real time.

Given the recent storms that battered Scotland and, in particular, caused flooding in Peebles and power cuts in Gorebridge—both of which are in my constituency—what processes are in place to provide the necessary links from the Government’s resilience team to local authorities, such as Scottish Borders Council and Midlothian Council?

I remind the cabinet secretary that Peebles sheriff court, which is on the current hit list, was targeted for closure several years ago by the Labour-Liberal Administration and got a reprieve by relocating to Rosetta Road and co-locating with the police headquarters. I would like that to be taken into consideration. Further, of the 12 cases in Peebles sheriff court tomorrow—the one day of the week when it sits for civil business—five are in the small claims court. Those are party litigants. In considering removing sheriff courts, one should consider the interests of party litigants.

Does the cabinet secretary concede that when we compare systems we are not always comparing like with like? For example, other systems might not have majority or not proven verdicts.

I will have a little moan first and ask the Parliamentary Bureau to reflect on the fact that this is essentially a justice debate and that the Justice Committee sat until 12.45 today, with a substantial agenda—indeed, I had to guillotine business to allow members a breathing space and a little ham roll before they came to the chamber. Is it not possible for the bureau to ensure that when there are what are virtually subject debates in the afternoon, they do not take place on a day on which the subject committee is meeting in the morning? I feel better for having said that. The consultation is still on-going, so the timing of the debate is a bit of a mystery to me. However, members can all take this as my contribution to the consultation. The Government motion “highlights the importance of delivering these measures in a coherent way”. The issue for me is coherence. The terms of reference for Lord Carloway’s inquiry indicate that he was not asked to consider the not proven verdict or the majority verdict. The inquiry was held in a very specific context. Paragraph 1.2 of Lord Carloway’s report states the terms of reference. I do not have time to read them out, but members can see them. That takes me to the concerns that I have aired previously in the chamber about the proposed abolition of the necessity for corroboration in criminal cases. The concern is not new and it is not just mine. I refer the cabinet secretary to the letter sent to him by the Justice Committee on 26 January. I think that I am quoting the sentences fairly. The letter states: “the Committee noted an underlying consensus; that the corroboration rule should not be seen as sacrosanct, and that it was legitimate to re-investigate from first principles whether it continues to serve a useful purpose in 21st century Scots criminal law.” That is fair enough. We went on to say that it was important to ensure “that any future work on corroboration should avoid considering that single issue in isolation. Instead, it should also take into account the complex web of factors that, taken together, set the current balance between the state’s ability to secure a conviction and the individual’s right to a fair trial, and to be acquitted where there is a reasonable doubt.” That is terribly important. Let us take the oft-quoted example of how no longer needing corroboration would lead to an increase in successful prosecutions in cases of alleged rape. I say to Margo MacDonald that we cannot say that we do not need corroboration for one crime and that we will park the others. In some respects, a serious sexual assault can be far worse than rape for the victim. Would we say that we needed corroboration for that assault but not for something else? No—I do not think so. I will debate that afterwards. Sandy Brindley from Rape Crisis Scotland thinks that it would be a great idea to abolish corroboration in rape cases, but my view is much more cautious. If a case simply comes down to the credibility of the accused and the credibility of the witness—the alleged victim—it is perfectly open to the defence advocate to conduct on behalf of his client a rather brutal cross-examination of the alleged victim that addresses previous sexual behaviour, behaviour on the evening in question and so on. Why not? Some people will look and behave like victims and some will not. Some people will look like rapists and some will not. In addition, as I said, we retain majority verdicts. We must remember that the Crown must prove its case beyond reasonable doubt. The accused is innocent until proven guilty beyond reasonable doubt. If a member of the jury says—rightly—“This is about credibility and I’ve a wee bit of a doubt,” there might be many more acquittals, not guilty verdicts, not proven verdicts, appeals and referrals to the SCCRC, and double jeopardy might even be used more, to bring in evidence that it is alleged was not available at the first instance. As far as I can see, there is no evidence that removing the necessity for corroboration in England and Wales has led to an increase in successful prosecutions for rape. Given the time pressures, I have been unable to ascertain the number of hung juries and retrials south of the border—where a verdict must be unanimous—but that would be good evidence to have. I am sympathetic to the thrust of the Opposition amendments on that issue, although I do not agree with everything that is in them. Another issue is the removal of the High Court’s gatekeeping role, which the 2010 emergency Cadder legislation introduced, when the SCCRC makes a referral. The High Court should not be allowed to reject a referral from the SCCRC in the interests of finality and certainty; that makes it judge and jury in its own case. The removal is fine, but it does not go far enough. Even if the High Court hears an appeal that is referred to it and agrees that a miscarriage of justice has occurred, it is still allowed to consider whether allowing the appeal is in the interests of justice. I am a simple soul. I thought that, if a miscarriage of justice was proven, it was a miscarriage of justice—full stop—and the appeal should be allowed.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

I am spinning out John Finnie’s time. Is there not a procedure in court whereby evidence can be agreed so that there is no need for two police officers to agree a label if it is not contentious?

It can be agreed.

I just want clarification that corroboration is not two witnesses; it is two independent pieces of evidence. Corroboration does not have to be two people.

That is very interesting. How many not proven verdicts have there been over a period of time? I do not know, but Michael McMahon may know from his consultation. Does he have figures for that?

Thank you.

To clarify, I did not say that John Finnie’s point was redundant. I said that evidence could be agreed. If it is contentious, corroboration is needed, but items that are not contentious can be agreed and it is encouraged that they be agreed in evidence.

As Stewart Maxwell knows, I probably disagree with him. The point about two people giving evidence on the DNA trail concerns traceability. It shows firmly and securely that the DNA sample that is produced in court is the sample that was found at the scene and taken to the lab. That is terribly important.

I remind Stewart Maxwell that the terms of reference for Lord Carloway’s inquiry did not include a reference to the not proven verdict or to the current majority verdict. It was not part of his job to consider corroboration within that ambit.

I may accept that such cases might have got as far as the court door, but I do not see how it can be said that the prospect of success was reasonable when that has never been tested. We are back to juries or sheriffs looking at credibility, which we cannot prejudge. We would have to have run the cases to find out the outcome.

That bodes ill for me.

Regrettably, I do not have a copy of what was said with me, but I know that the committee challenged Lord Carloway on that very point. That leaves it open to the High Court, when there has been a miscarriage of justice—notwithstanding everything else—to come out with the line that it is not in the interests of justice to allow an appeal. That cannot be right in principle.

Szanowna Pani Przewodniczaca, z wielka przyjemnoscia przemawiam na temat Wielkiej Mapy Szkocji. Presiding Officer, it is a great pleasure to speak on the subject of the great Polish map of Scotland. It is also a great pleasure that the debate is being simultaneously translated into Polish—a first for a language other than Scots or Gaelic. I said those few faltering words in Polish with thanks to our many Polish colleagues in Parliament—I thank Maria, Waldi, David and Monika—for pronunciation lessons. I apologise for unintended errors, despite their best endeavours. I welcome the people in the public gallery, including the Polish consul, and I remind all that there is a reception afterwards in TG.20 with the Polish consul, Mapa Scotland and representatives from the Barony hotel. I thank all the members who signed the motion but, most of all, I thank Mapa Scotland—which is now a charity—which comprises a band of enthusiastic volunteers who have secured funding of £20,000 from the Heritage Lottery Fund, and listed status for the map from Historic Scotland. Added to that is an agreement from the new owners of the Barony hotel in Eddleston in my constituency, where the map is located, on match funding of £20,000 together with an access route to the map. When we think that some £60,000 will secure materials, with free labour from volunteers, Mapa has come a long way. But—to the beginning. Constructed in 1975, the great Polish map of Scotland is reputedly a globally unique example of topographic landscape modelling of a complete country. It is a very large—50m by 40m—three-dimensional outdoor scale model of the Scottish landscape, with mountains, rivers, estuaries, coasts and seas. It is located in a walled oval excavation that is 1.5m deep. I know that it is large because, before health and safety officials stepped in, I jumped down and stood on the Scottish Borders. Well, I would, wouldn’t I? The map’s design and layout involved pioneering survey and construction techniques and it incorporates a unique dynamic representation of major river basins that uses a gravity-driven water supply. The map may commemorate a defence strategy map that was used in the 1940s when Barony castle housed a Polish military staff training college. It was designed by young Polish geographers from the Jagiellonian University in Krakow in 1975, at the request of war veteran Jan Tomasik, who owned the hotel at the time and who financed the project, provided the ground, procured materials and recruited local labour for its construction. One of the labourers was Kazimierz Trafas and the current Polish consul general is Dr Tomasz Trafas. Yes—he is a close relative. The map is a reminder of the vital role of Polish forces in the defence of Scotland in the second world war, and of the hospitality and friendship that was given to the Poles by the Scots, not only during the war years but in the decades that followed and up to the present day. Many Poles were unable to return to their homes because of political persecution and border changes in Europe, so they remained in Scotland. One such person was the great General Stanislaw Maczek, who settled in Edinburgh after the war and became a close family friend of the Tomasiks and a regular guest at Barony castle. Maczek was known as the most accomplished Polish tank commander of world war 2. After the fall of France, he and many of his men made their way to London and formed the nucleus of a Polish armed force that was based in Scotland and which defended our shoreline between Montrose and Dundee. Maczek had long years of exile and was deprived of his Polish citizenship by the post-war Stalinist regime. His life and Scottish connection are worth commemorating. He lived to be 102 and died in Edinburgh. The focus of work on the great map is the full restoration of the structure to its original appearance, including, eventually, surrounding sea, flowing rivers and lochs. The historic themes are the second world war on the British home front and the relationship that developed between Polish citizens and communities in Tweeddale and Midlothian. The map was neglected and almost forgotten, as were the ties from wartime to today. It is time to change that. As is the Italian chapel on Orkney, the map is a symbol of our past—in this instance, it is the shared history of Poland and Scotland. It deserves our attention and deserves to be restored. There are at least 60,000 Polish people in Scotland. The map represents our Polish and Scottish ties. W Szkocji mieszka przynajmniej 60,000 Polaków. Ta mapa reprezentuje polskie i szkockie wiezy. Now, wi ma heid birlin with my Polish endeavours, I look forward to the rest of the speeches—and, indeed, to the Polish translation of “wi ma heid birlin”.

I am delighted to see Mr Macintosh back. To call the programme “legislation lite” is not doing justice to justice. The members of the Justice Committee will know that because they have three bills coming before them, and I will address those if I have time. First—as referred to by Jamie Hepburn—is the victims and witnesses bill. The bill is important because it will enable support for witnesses from the point of the police investigation. That support should run not only through to the discharge of the prisoner—if proved guilty—but for a period thereafter. However, I have a caveat—it must always be remembered that the victim is the alleged victim and will be the prime witness until the case is proved beyond reasonable doubt by the Crown with a presumption of innocence. Sometimes we are sloppy in the use of language and we must always be wary of that. However, there is no doubt that when people take the trouble to report to the police and end up in the court process, they become bewildered. They have no idea what plea bargaining is. Whispering goes on at the desk in front of the sheriff and somehow the case is discharged. They do not know what has happened and they do not know what the disposal is. That is still happening, despite years of trying to change it. Sometimes, the alleged victim has no idea at the end of the court process what the disposal is. The sheriff says something and, when they come out, they do not know what has happened. Sometimes, the case does not proceed on the day that they expected. That is all very unsettling for a witness and an alleged victim. It is important to deal with the issue, so that people feel free to come forward to report to the police in the first instance and to continue through the court process. They should also know thereafter that it is not an end for them and, if somebody is put in prison, they should know when that person is being released and what will happen in the community. Indeed, the committee will have a debate on the role of the media in dealing with court proceedings in criminal matters, because there are concerns about people being seen on television going into a court to give evidence, which might create difficulties for them in their communities. The bill also contains the very important suggestion of a victim surcharge, which means that the accused has to pay for the distress or loss to the victim. In practice, that might be quite difficult to deal with, but it is important that we test the proposal out and possibly deal with it in legislation. I think that the criminal justice (Scotland) bill will be quite controversial—it certainly is for me. My first comment about the Carloway recommendations is that they were the recommendations of Lord Carloway himself. Before the Justice Committee, he made it plain that they were not his committee’s collective recommendations. I have concerns about the abolition of corroboration. Sandy Brindley from Rape Crisis Scotland thinks that it will make prosecutions for rape much more successful, but I take a divergent view. If it is simply about the credibility of the accused and the credibility of the witness—the alleged victim—it is perfectly open to the defence advocate to conduct a rather brutal cross-examination of the alleged victim on behalf of his client. Some people will look like victims and some will not. Some people will look like rapists and some will not. In addition, we retain majority verdicts. Remember that the Crown must prove its case beyond reasonable doubt. If a member of the jury says—rightly, it is about credibility in such a serious case—“I have a wee bit of a doubt,” there may be many more acquittals or not proven verdicts. The issue for me is that we cannot take away corroboration without looking at majority verdicts and the not proven verdict. I am not prepared, as a back bencher—I make this plain as the convener of the Justice Committee—to roll over on the matter. For me, if members forgive me for saying this, the jury is out on abolishing corroboration in serious cases. We need to look at what has happened elsewhere, where there is no corroboration in serious cases. In such jurisdictions, there are unanimous rather than majority verdicts and there is no place for the not proven verdict. We must compare apples and apples, not apples and pears. It is time to have a really good look at the recommendation, bearing in mind that it was Lord Carloway’s view alone, rather than the view of his entire committee. I do not know what its view was, but the recommendation was his view alone. It would be unfair not to mention tribunals, which are very important in relation to mental welfare and private rented housing. I am glad that we will deal with the issue and make the tribunals more user friendly, because a lot of people feel out of their depth and unable to deal with day-to-day issues. Having said all that, surely what we are discussing belies the argument that for the next year this Parliament will not be dealing with serious issues that matter to ordinary people. We certainly shall.

Will the member take an intervention?

I congratulate George Adam on bringing the motion to the chamber. I turn to the witches of Galloway. I once went to a part of the River Cree where I lived and was told that three witches had been tied to stakes in the middle of the river, which is tidal. When the tide came in, if they drowned that proved that they were not witches and if they survived, they were witches. There you are: heads you lose, tails you lose. That was the story for witches. Had I been living in the 17th century, I have no doubt that I would have qualified for the title “witch”. I live alone. I have a black cat, which has fangs, evil eyes and answers with a variety of yowls when I speak to it . He weaves in and out between my feet as I try to walk, squawking as he goes and responding to my comments. In the 17th century, I would have been wearing a long skirt, and the yowling cat seen weaving in and out between my legs under my long skirt would have been deemed to be the devil in feline form. Sometimes, appearances were all that it took to be condemned as a witch. However, I would probably also have been just as outspoken, which would not have helped. I make a serious point, which was reflected towards the conclusion of George Adam’s speech, when he talked about children going from seeing the re-enactment as a pantomime to realising that it had involved the demise of real people. Persecution, injustice and superstition are the dark and sombre side of parts of our history. Unfortunately, in some parts of the world, they persist—although the title “witch” is perhaps not given to the people who suffer a similar fate. I am sorry to end on such a serious note, because some people think that I still have witch-like qualities.

In my view, from the back benches, we had an interesting and somewhat lively debate on some of the amendments, particularly those on local accountability, gender balance and the proposal for a Scottish policing commission. I have commented on those topics before in committee and in the chamber and will not reprise my remarks, except to say about the Scottish policing commission idea that I hope that the Parliament will move some way towards having a committee of some nature that is dedicated to holding the chief constable of Scotland to account. That issue is still to be looked into. We must look at why we are here. We are here simply because we had regional reorganisation in 1975 that led us to have eight chief constables, eight constabularies and everything that goes with that. Since then, we have reorganised again and we now have 32 local authorities. They do not all have their own set-ups, but nevertheless the current position is an accident of history. As the cabinet secretary said, in these straitened times, one must make a virtue out of necessity, so it is quite a good time to look at reorganising the police in Scotland. The purpose of the bill is modernisation, including a recognition that the fire and rescue service has to meet very different demands from those in the last century. Indeed, that is also true of the police. If we think back 50 or 60 years, I cannot think that we would be talking about things such as drug trafficking, people trafficking, serious organised crime, money laundering through environmental agencies and residential homes for the elderly, or international crimes such as internet crime and terrorism. We live in a changed world, and the police, the fire service, the ambulance service, hospitals and the national health service all have to work closely together, so it seems a good time for these national issues to be considered at a national level. It makes sense to tighten up the administration, the strategy and the operational matters through a single, dynamic, accountable leadership in a chief constable for Scotland who is answerable to the SPA and to the Parliament both at large and, as I said, perhaps through a specific committee. Balanced against that, quite rightly, is the delivery of local policing, local priorities and local accountability. The public in Scotland rightly ask for and deserve both. Concerns were raised that portrayed the restructuring of police and fire services under a single chief constable and a single chief fire officer as centralisation, which is a pretty dirty word, and raised the spectre of political interference. I do not think that either of those concerns is worthy at this time. I am satisfied that, with the checks and balances through the SPA and the SFRS board, through the Parliament and indeed through the fourth estate, or the press, the chief constable will be watched, will act at arm’s length from Government at all times in the interests of his remit and will be held to account for delivery at a national level. At the local level, I am also satisfied. Sections 45 and 46 require local commanders to involve local authorities in setting priorities and objectives for the carrying out of police functions in each local authority area. Localism is paramount because, as we all know, the needs of the cities and of rural areas such as mine are very different. I am short of time, so—

We are 5 million-plus people. The bill seems to me to be a sensible and practical solution, and as for scrutiny, it is time that the Justice Committee was made to earn its keep.

Will the member take an intervention?

The member is concerned about gender balance and interventions. However, does she agree that the Justice Committee took the view that it is quality on the board, be it a man or a woman, that counts, and not a gender balance?

I agreed with much of what John Park said, but Kezia Dugdale and Jenny Marra have quality—they are here not because they are women, but because they are good politicians. That is not patronising; it is an observation from an old hand.

Yes.

I am afraid that that does not help the member, so he should not dig any further. Just last week, I attended a Penicuik high school ceremony in which 5th and 6th year pupils received awards for academic excellence. The balance on the platform was tipped in favour of the girls. That was before I started to think about what I would say in this debate, but I wondered how many of those girls would continue to outperform the boys who were receiving awards on the same day. I am pretty clear that they will not continue to do so. For many of the reasons that Annabel Goldie and, to some extent, John Park outlined, some of them will not even reach, let alone attempt to break that glass ceiling. The fact is that certain practicalities lie in the way of women’s progress—indeed, I myself came across those very practicalities many years ago. In my time, I have been a teacher, a lawyer and a politician, but at the time I had my children I had to leave work for six years. That made a huge difference to my career progression as a teacher—although I should add that that is not why I left the profession. The same practicalities remain; indeed, men who parent children now face some of them. I do not mean this in a bad way, but the fact is that children and even elderly parents get in the way and prohibit progression. As Jenny Marra will know, because she raised the issue at the Justice Committee, I very much sympathise with her ideas but cannot support the notion of quotas. Instead, I support the provision of support to all kinds of people who cannot progress because of certain practicalities in their lives. Let me examine the logic of the argument that Jenny Marra advanced at the Justice Committee. She argued that women should comprise 40 per cent of the membership of the Scottish police authority because they make up 50 per cent of the population and understand and deal better with “women’s issues” with regard to, for example, domestic violence, sexual assault and so on. Notwithstanding the fact that domestic violence can happen across generations, between women, between men and, indeed, in all kinds of situations, Ms Marra took the view that women as members of the Scottish police authority would be better at dealing with resource and policy issues in relation to these matters. I simply do not accept the logic of that argument. I think that there are men who can be extremely sensitive to what one might call women’s issues and women who can be extremely sensitive to what one might call men’s issues—and both can be sensitive to children’s issues. I look at the quality of the individual. At this point—and with regret to Annabel Goldie—I am going to have to say two bad words: “Margaret Thatcher”. She became Prime Minister, but I can think of no one who was less sensitive to what one might call women’s issues. I also highlighted certain practicalities at the Justice Committee. For a start, if 40 per cent of the women coming forward were not of the same quality as 40 per cent of the men—and vice versa—we would not be picking the best people. Jenny Marra rose— I am sorry—I have only 20 seconds left of my four minutes. I am concerned that we would not be picking people on the basis of quality. As I said before, Jenny Marra and Kezia Dugdale are sitting on the front bench because they have been chosen on their merits, not because they are women.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I advise Malcolm Chisholm that it was an all-woman panel that considered the applications for the Scottish Information Commissioner, it was a woman who was appointed, and it was all done on merit.

No, certainly not. I agree with everything that Kezia Dugdale says about critical mass. She heard what I said about the pupils at Penicuik high school. My personal approach would be not to have quotas, as that would be counterproductive. However, women certainly need more support in getting through, creating that critical mass and reaching—if not breaking through—the glass ceiling. There are practical things that we can do, but which are not quotas.

As the Sheriffhall roundabout impinges on my constituency, will the minister confirm that I have taken a correct note of his words—is it intervention 22 in the STPR? Is that what will help me?

Presiding Officer, I apologise to the member. I thought that I had switched it off, but I am obviously incompetent with this thing.

It is commendable that Annabel Goldie has agreed that the cabinet secretary has taken steps in that direction, but does she agree that we need more prisoner places before we can end automatic early release and that, to that end, the Government has had a building programme to address prisoner places?

I commend Mary Fee for campaigning for the children of prisoners and for the specific examples that she gave. I was particularly interested to hear what she said about child impact assessments. However, I thought that Mary Fee was a little ungenerous in her earlier remarks, when she criticised the Government for not having done very much for victims and witnesses to date. Legislation is not the be-all and end-all, nor is it always the cure. Although I welcome the proposed legislation for further consolidation of the recognition of the particular requirements of witnesses and victims, a lot has been done during my time in the Scottish Parliament—not by me, but by the Parliament—with regard to such things. As has already been mentioned, we have the victim notification scheme and victim impact statements, and there is recognition of the great work that is done by Victim Support Scotland. I was told today that its office in my constituency in the Borders has dealt with 1,000 cases this year. Some of them involved antisocial behaviour, which we do not always include in the category. I want to make some initial comments and give some initial thoughts on the consultation and the proposed legislation. The first question that I ask myself is, “Who is a victim?” The division of people into the categories of witnesses and victims can be artificial, because on many occasions the prime witness will be the alleged victim. I use the word “alleged” because, at that stage of court proceedings, the person is not actually regarded as the victim. It is a difficult definition to accept, but that is a fact. In such circumstances, we must insert the word “alleged” because we must be careful not to pre-empt or predetermine the outcome of a prosecution. Not all prime witnesses are the nicest of people. The old lady who has been battered over the head is obviously a victim to the world, but some may be pretty well thuggish themselves. They might well be a victim, but they might not be. We must be careful with language because we must never pre-empt the outcome. The onus is on the Crown to prove guilt beyond reasonable doubt. However, legislation must define the terms “victims” and “witnesses”. A victim cannot have been directly involved in the alleged or proven crime, even in some minor way. Criminal activity can affect not only the individual but their family, their neighbours and the behaviour of an entire community; they, too, are victims of a form of collateral damage. That brings me to the victim surcharge which is, as my old history teacher used to say, a good idea. However, the devil is always in the detail. The fact is that every individual deals with stress and trauma in a different way and the question is whether the surcharge follows the eggshell skull principle that is set out in civil law on delicts, in which the issue is the damage done, not what an individual did to cause that damage. For example, someone who has been the victim of a burglary might have had their life destroyed; they might not have seen the burglar, but the burglary itself has put them in a state of fear and alarm and caused enormous psychological damage. On the other hand, someone who has been physically attacked might be able to deal with the situation. How do we assess compensation in that respect? Who will assess it? How long will the process take? I do not know the answers to those questions. Moreover, who will collect once the assessment has been made? What will happen if that money is not paid out? Those are fair questions. After all, the law is a tool; it must be practical. How will the financial contribution of the convicted person be assessed? Do they have family commitments? Are they stable, or do they have an erratic lifestyle? How often are they assessed? Having been a civil legal aid lawyer, I know how difficult some cases can be, with people having to be kept constantly informed of changes in financial circumstances. Those are all practical questions. They do not mean that I disapprove of the principle itself, but it needs to be made to work. Will controversy arise if a victim receives less or more than another victim of the same type of crime because of the effect on them or, indeed, because of the financial circumstances of the accused who has now been convicted? What will be the basis for assessing those circumstances? Someone might read in the newspaper that a woman who had her handbag snatched got such and such compensation, see that someone else who had their handbag stolen got more and ask “Why?” We have to consider all the details.

That is the very point that I am making. People will be asking what the difference is. Moreover, over what period of time will that damage be assessed? Someone who looks very bad at one point might be fine a year later, while someone else might be damaged for years. The surcharge is just a one-off payment. Furthermore, how will it interact with Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority awards? I do not know. Much has been made of the experience of witnesses in trials, but I think that there are other problems with process, particularly at pleading diets. For example, the prime witness—the alleged victim—might at one point see the procurator fiscal and the defence counsel with their heads together in the well of the court and talking away to each other and, the next thing they know, the accused person is pleading to a different charge. The procurator fiscal might look at the charge sheet, decide—properly—that the evidence will not support the original complaint and say to the accused, “If you agree to plead to this or that, we will convict you of it.” The alleged victim sits there, not understanding what has happened and thinking that there has been jiggery-pokery.

I did not mean to introduce Miss Goldie after talking about jiggery-pokery.

Indeed. The point is that the prime witness, who has been leaning forward to try to follow the intricacies of the discussion in the well of the chamber, never receives an explanation of what has happened. They come to court expecting a trial, but none takes place. Begging the Presiding Officer’s indulgence, I want, finally, to highlight an issue that concerned the Justice Committee: the amount of not only press coverage but tweeting and use of other social media sites such as Facebook pre-trial, during a trial and post-trial. As has already been pointed out, some prime witnesses get a pretty tough time when they return to their communities because they will be seen as grassing up the community. We need to examine that as well. Presiding Officer, I thank you for indulging me.

Although the business of looking at the courts that we have at present is out for a long discussion elsewhere, does the member accept that some of them disadvantage victims? Some courts are in ancient buildings and victims are put beside witnesses for the prosecution, with defence witnesses in the same room. That cannot be good.

Further to his answer to Nigel Don, will the First Minister ensure the involvement in the plans and publicity for the year of homecoming of the various common ridings that are held annually between June and August in communities in the Borders and Midlothian?

In my teaching days, a pupil asked me whether hens laid eggs hard and with a little stamp on them. I will ask the minister a question to which I do not know the answer: does the hen lay eggs that are soft and then harden? I am thinking of the hen.

I, too, congratulate Jenny Marra on securing the debate. I want to focus on Hearing Dogs for Deaf People, which was first brought to my attention by Lesley Stewart, a borderer, and her lovely hearing dog, Molly. I recall that some 10 years ago in the first session Lesley and her colleagues brought their dogs to Parliament—which was then at the Assembly Hall of the Church of Scotland—and many parliamentarians found the meeting to be extremely useful and eye-opening. Hearing dogs not only do significant things for their owners, but provide immeasurable companionship that removes the isolation to which members have already referred. I hope in the coming months to organise a presentation similar to that in the first session with owners bringing their dogs to Parliament and showing what they can do. What do hearing dogs do? They are trained to alert owners to doorbells, telephones, text messages, alarm clocks, fire alarms and many other things that we take for granted. As I have already said, they also become a channel of conversation between their owners and other people. As soon as people pat the dog, see its jacket saying that it is a working dog for Hearing Dogs for Deaf People and start chatting, the deaf person is immediately drawn in and no longer isolated. Puppies are socialised for 12 months and receive basic obedience training; they also undergo quite stringent health tests. After that, they go into intensive training. There are currently 750 hearing dogs and since the charity’s launch—this is its 30th anniversary year—it has placed more than 1,600 dogs with owners in the United Kingdom. I want to quote from the experience of a young hearing dog owner, Sam, who says: “Ember does lots of different sound work with me ... If mum were to say to her ‘Sam’ she’d run to wherever I was, nudge me, I’d ask her what it was and she’d lead me back to mum.” His dog also pulls the covers off him to get him out of bed—I could have done with one of those dogs for my own sons, but there we are. Ember has also helped the family. Sam’s mother says: “One of the best things for me is that Sam sleeps now. We had nine years of” not getting much “sleep. When he takes his hearing aids out he can’t hear anything so he used to get up” to see “where we were several times a night”. The family got burgled and because Sam could not hear he was always anxious that they would be burgled again and he would not know about it. Of course, he has the dog now and his mother says: “He’s more settled and more confident and I worry less about his safety. People will come ... and speak to him and it makes Sam interact where he wouldn’t necessarily have done before.” That is one of the huge benefits of hearing dogs for the deaf. I must conclude by mentioning the borderer, Lesley Stewart, who introduced me to all this, and her wonderful dog, a tiny black wonder known as Molly. I attended a sign language presentation with various deaf and hard-of-hearing people—it turned out to be a bit of a test to find out whether we could lip-read—and I had the privilege of Molly resting her head on my foot for 30 minutes. She was such a charmer. She went to sleep but, unfortunately, so did my foot.

For the sake of balance, I point out that, in evidence, Chief Constable Kevin Smith said: “There is a notion that for every member of support staff that goes out, we put a cop in, but we have not done that. In the past two or three years, we have reduced our support staff by about 1,000 people, and that has not been followed by cops simply migrating in.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 28 February 2012; c 983.]

Obviously, we have to say that these are not times of plenty. Let us begin at the beginning. I repeat the cabinet secretary’s words: “we are making a virtue out of necessity.” Repeating certain facts can be wearisome, but they have to be drummed into not only members, but the public at large. Some £1,300 million was cut from the Scottish budget last year. It is, of course, a fixed budget, because we have no borrowing powers. Under the plans that the United Kingdom Government has announced, by 2014-15, the Scottish Government’s budget will have been cut by 9.2 per cent and capital will have been cut by 36.7 per cent. On 25 April this year, the UK went back into recession—into a double-dip recession. The UK economy contracted by 0.2 per cent, and goodness knows what will happen to it with the current activities in Greece, Italy and, indeed, France on the euro. We are in very difficult times. Most significant of all is that the construction industry is in very difficult times. If we could advance construction projects, we would help the UK and Scottish economies at least to stand still, if not to go forward. They would not go backwards. I think that members of other parties—although not the Conservatives and Liberals—share our views on that. Why is that relevant? First, I return to making a virtue out of necessity. Policing and its structure in Scotland needed to be reviewed. I think that it is generally accepted that that is long overdue. It has simply been put to the top of the agenda. Secondly, the Government has pledged that, where budgets are within its control, there will be no compulsory redundancies. That is important to give security to those who are in work and might not even be under consideration for redundancy, but are concerned that they might be. Unison has accepted that position. Of course, some jobs will be redundant; replacing eight constabularies with one means that some jobs will not exist any more. The cabinet secretary referred to support staff jobs—clerical, human resources, equal opportunities and procurement jobs across eight constabularies—that will not exist. That is partly a good idea for its own sake and partly a necessity because of where we are now financially.

I am sorry, but I have only four minutes, and I have things that I want to say. Thirdly, it is of course appropriate for two reasons that Opposition parties and back benchers highlight concerns that civilian jobs will, or may be, undertaken by police officers. Obviously, those officers would not then be available for front-line duty, and civilian jobs involve a different skills set. David McLetchie referred to that and made the considered point that whether something is front line or back room is not black and white or obvious. I note that the chief constable together with the divisional commanders will determine the new staffing requirements. The chief constable will not just be accountable to the Scottish police authority, and the divisional commander will not just be accountable to local boards. Ultimately, there will be accountability for the quality of policing across civilian provision and the front line to the Parliament, whether under the scrutiny of the Justice Committee or—if Graeme Pearson has his way and convinces us—a commission that will watch the delivery of policing and the activities of the chief constable.

I say to Alison McInnes that crime figures and the fear of crime are falling notwithstanding civilian jobs going. In England, Theresa May was told by the Police Federation of England and Wales that she is “on the precipice of destroying” the police service. Paul McKeever said of the Scottish Government: “they have no Winsor, they have no professional body and no loss in police officers—”

It is a privilege and quite strange to find myself, a Grahame and a member of the Scottish Parliament since 1999, addressing members about an ancestor—the e in my name was a later addition—who was a member of a somewhat different but ancient Scottish Parliament, which nevertheless appears to have exercised some influence and control of the then Government, which was the monarchy. I lodged the motion to remind the Parliament of its ancient roots. The first Scottish Parliament was a unicameral Parliament that was first mentioned on record in the 13th century, when a meeting took place in Kirkliston in 1235. The Parliament met until prorogued sine die at the time of the Act of Union 1707, and until Winnie Ewing said on 12 May 1999: “I want to begin with the words that I have always wanted either to say or to hear someone else say: the Scottish Parliament, which adjourned on 25 March 1707, is hereby reconvened.”—[Official Report, 12 May 1999; c 5.] Some of us were there and a tingle went up our spines. I want to remind members of the man born 400 years ago, whose execution on 21 May 1650 at the Mercat Cross just up the Royal Mile will be commemorated in St Giles cathedral on Monday. His head was fixed on a spike in the Tolbooth and his limbs were fixed to the gates of Stirling, Glasgow, Perth and Aberdeen. In those long gone days, people did not just lose power or position; they lost their heads. Today, politicians or soldiers can be consigned to the back benches or elevated to the Lords—they could even become a columnist—but in those times, they lost their lives in the most callous and cruel fashion. I move to the beginning, and the birth of a renaissance man who was a politician, a leader, a military commander and a poet. He achieved all that between 1612 and 1650 in what we would consider a short life of 38 years. His beginning was as the only son of John Graham, the 4th Earl of Montrose. His mother died when he was only six. At the age of 12 he was sent to Glasgow to prepare for college. His father died when he was 14 and he became clan chief but, being a minor, he was placed under the tutelage of others. He went to the University of St Andrews, that ancient university that was founded in 1413. He appears to have been a generous man, as he donated funds for a new library at the University of Glasgow. He was already writing poetry when he went to France and Italy to complete his education, including spending time at a French military academy. In 1638, at the ripe age of 26, he returned from France and signed the national covenant, which, in short, was to confirm opposition to the Stuart kings interfering in the Presbyterian Church of Scotland. By way of background, members may recall that, from the Tudors through to the Stuarts, kings of England believed in the divine right of kings, which meant that they were not only ruler of the land but head of the church. That thread of history runs from Henry VIII and his dispute with the Pope over the annulment of his marriage to Catherine of Aragon. That was unpalatable to the Scots and, even to this day, any monarch of Scotland is not head of the Church of Scotland, although they remain head of the Church of England. Therefore, when Charles I thrust upon the Scots the book of common prayer and declared that opposition would be treason, it was like a red rag to a Scottish bull. It was all about battles for power and the balance of power. Then, monarchs, nobles and the churches were involved, with the covenanters taking on the monarchy. Today, multinationals, Parliaments—international and national—the media and so on all struggle with the balance of power. However, from leading the covenanters—Montrose led the first regiment of covenanters across the Tweed when the Scots invaded England in the second bishops war—he came to oppose them. Such were the machinations of the time that intercepted correspondence from Montrose to King Charles, in which he criticised Argyll, resulted in Montrose’s arrest on charges of conspiracy against the ruling Committee of Estates. In 1641, he was imprisoned in Edinburgh castle and demanded an open trial. Instead, he was—for political reasons, one could say—released on bail. Think of today’s equivalent: intercepted e-mails, hacked voicemails, police charges, political resignations, public humiliation, people being trailed through the tabloid press, careers in tatters. Plus ça change. Two years later—and this is a potted version—he opposed the solemn league and covenant, because he suspected that it went beyond its original remit to being a vehicle to undermine the king’s ultimate authority, and he pursued the royalist cause thereafter. In 1644, his career was on the up. He was appointed lord lieutenant of Scotland and a string of military victories followed, until he suffered a bloody and devastating defeat to the covenanters at Philiphaugh in the Borders in 1645. Just as happens in all wars, compromise was eventually found and, in due course, Charles did a deal with the covenanters and disavowed Montrose, who was displayed as he was taken to his public execution. The rest, as they say, is history, which is where I came in. Politics and patronage, principles and pragmatism—there is nothing new in that. The politics of that time shifted as the sand. Principles—I believe that Montrose was a man of principle—fell under the sword of pragmatism. Where can we see that today? This extraordinary man, whom his chaplain the Rev George Wishart described as “a most resolute and undaunted spirit”, has left his own threads of the past to today. He was a man who lived by his own words: “He either fears his fate too much Or his deserts are small, That puts it not unto the touch To win or lose it all.” I humbly think that there may be a wee bit of his DNA in me; and, yes, above my fireplace there is the Grahame family crest with the words, “Ne oublie”—never forget—and, yes, I wear a Grahame sash on special occasions. History—national and personal—matters, so we should not forget the Montroses of our history, the covenanters and all that came before and after, even though our views of them may differ. It is a cliché, but I repeat it nevertheless: you have to know your past to understand your present and, possibly, to determine your future.

I think that the member is endorsing the part of my speech in which I said that we each have our own view of that part of history.

There may be a way for local authorities to have the ability to contribute, thereby showing that these are local services. Does the Labour Party have any suggestions to assist with that?

Even if I were to accept the argument that there is not a solution as we have suggested, could the member say what the Labour Party’s solutions would be if it was in government? Has it investigated and explored other ways of ensuring that the VAT exemption remains?

I am sorry that Jenny Marra is not here because I was going to commend her for deputising for me. I had not anticipated that I would be here today, due to circumstances—as they say—beyond my control. It is the first time that Jenny Marra has deputised for me and I hope that it is the last as I guard my convenership like a mother hen guards her chicks. If anyone dares to cluck at the next committee meeting, they will not get a supplementary. They have been warned. That said, I turn to the bill. I want to touch on issues raised by the committee and questions that people would ask, such as about why we are reforming. Is it just to save money? That is no bad thing in itself. Does a single service mean that local needs and requirements will be sidelined? Will the central belt—the great conurbations of Glasgow and Edinburgh—dominate? Will the Highlands and Islands, with very able advocates such as Dave Thompson opposite, get more than the Borders gets? Will the appointment of a single chief constable for Scotland risk politicising the police? Who will hold him to account? Those issues were raised by my colleague Graeme Pearson. Will people, in particular civilian staff, lose their jobs? Will there be cost savings? At the end of the day, will we have better policing? The day after the establishment of a single service, will my constituents see any difference in day-to-day policing? Those are reasonable questions. On the issue of why we are reforming, I accept that reform has, to a degree, been driven by the cuts from Westminster. They are not so-called cuts; they are real. However, as the cabinet secretary said, we have made a virtue out of a necessity. Having eight constabularies has been a historical accident. Some, such as Strathclyde, are huge. In Lothian and Borders—my patch—we have had the chief constable for Lothian and divisional commanders in parts of my constituency in the Borders and Midlothian, and it works swimmingly. We do not notice any joining of the seams. With a population of 5 million, it is not ridiculous—in fact it is quite practical—to suggest that we have a single police force and a single fire and rescue service. However, reasonable concerns were raised about how local issues will be addressed, and the committee raised them in its report. We must consider those issues, even if just to allay unnecessary anxieties. We did not want to put something formally into the bill about disputes—it would be like a red rag to a bull, as it would encourage dispute—but we need to ensure, certainly in the early stages of a police force, that local communities feel that they still have a say in what is happening in their area. David McLetchie raised an important point about the additional police that local authorities have been provided with. I note what the cabinet secretary had to say and I accept it. I move on to the politicisation of the police. The committee raised issues about the Scottish police authority. It was clear from the evidence of some witnesses—I shall not name them because it would be embarrassing for them—that if we had local authority representation, there would just be a scrap about resources and so on. The view that was generally accepted was that the authority would hold the chief constable to account and have a strategic overview. I am beginning to speak like a convener—I must get out of that habit. I am concerned about civilian staff. The Government has said that there will be no compulsory redundancies. I hope that there are opportunities to retrain civilian staff if voluntary redundancy is not available to all or if they do not want to take it. Less has been said about fire and rescue. So much has changed in the delivery of fire services—I am thinking of my grandfather, long dead of course, who, way back at the beginning of the last century, drove a fire cart with horses. What they dealt with then was fires. That is why they were called the fire brigade. They put out house fires and factory fires. What fire and rescue does now is far more diverse; in fact, fires are probably the least of the things that they deal with. I recently went into one of the big fire trucks and it had computers, inflatable canoes, gadgets for climbing and descending mountains and all sorts of other material. Regrettably there were cutters, which are needed for one of the biggest issues in rural areas: vehicle accidents. It is a whole different world. The committee’s report says that, although we do not want to see it in the bill, we want some codifying and examples to show how the service has changed. Also, because of recent tragic events, we would like to see not demarcation lines but some firm guidance to the fire and rescue service on what it can and cannot do and what it is expected to do. I want to touch briefly on human rights, because I am very cross about something in the press today, saying that the Justice Committee never deals with human rights. The remarks were made using the example of four oral evidence sessions that took place in November. I do not know how the rest of the committee members feel but I am hopping mad—I had to be contained. The press release that has been released is very calm compared with what I said because I had a bit of therapy before releasing it. The Justice Committee’s report deals with human rights at paragraphs 336 to 340. The convener of the cross-party group on human rights ensures that the committee deals with the issue. So—this time, on behalf of the committee—I say that we do treat the issue of human rights seriously.

I will finish my point. If the authors think that that is academic research, then I can tell them that it is gey poor and that they should consider looking at the rest of the work that the committee does. I apologise to Ms Marra but I must conclude on that point. On the point about parliamentary scrutiny, I say to Mr Pearson that my mind remains open to a commission but he will need to flesh the idea out; we need much more detail and I do not know whether we have the time to do it because we would have to take a serious amount of evidence.

I do not mind that at all, and I welcome it, but—my goodness!—to look at four oral evidence sessions and to quote what the cabinet secretary said as if the committee said it is not academic research. I would be happy to meet the people who said those things, but my hands would have to be tied together.

Does the member accept that the committee did not want the wider definition or guidance to be put in primary legislation as that would have been too constricting?

Will the member take an intervention?

Given the recent disappointing statistics on childhood obesity at primary 1—in the Borders, the level remains static at around 10 per cent while, worryingly, in Midlothian, the figure for obesity has gone up to 12.6 per cent and for severe obesity has gone up to 7.8 per cent—will the cabinet secretary tell us whether she is aware from her discussions with NHS boards that the issue is raised at antenatal and neonatal clinics? As the previous Health and Sport Committee reported to Parliament, that is the stage at which a child’s palate for sugary and heavily salted foods—the basis, of course, of junk food—can develop.

I am delighted to take part in this debate and congratulate Kenny Gibson on securing a debate on the topic. Among my limited talents, I am quite green fingered. I am part of the green-fingered brigade, but I have a very small garden and have run out of space. I love allotments, and am one of the many on a waiting list for one. In fact, we find that we are waiting to fill dead men’s or dead women’s shoes. The waiting lists run to some 10 years. I have looked far and wide for an allotment. I have looked in my constituency and have noticed that, in Peebles, there are four sites for allotments, 42 allotments and a 10-year waiting list. In Midlothian—the other part of my constituency—only Penicuik has allotments. There are 23 there, and again there is a 10-year waiting list. The Presiding Officer looks very sad about that—so am I. It will take me ages to get my spade intae the grun, as they say. Recently in Walkerburn, new allotments were opened up on a south-facing slope, and what a difference that has made to the community. Apart from the fact that people can be seen out working, there is a communal shed. No one is allowed to have their own shed, so I am afraid that the days when someone could take a stereo, have a seat and smoke a pipe outside are gone. The whole area has improved because of the allotments. There is nothing better—I am going to wax lyrical—than someone digging up their own new tatties, taking them home and cooking them in a wee bit of butter and a wee bit of mint. That is wonderful, as are peas—if the crows can be beaten—straight from the pod and strawberries straight from the ground. Many children do not do such things or know about them because many of the modern housing developments have rather small, twee gardens. Once someone has the twirler, the space for the barbecue and the timber decking to sit on, there is no space left to plant in. I hasten to add that that is not like my garden, where there is no room for another plant. As the number of allotments is limited, I suggest an alternative, which I know is done in Edinburgh—the garden share scheme. The scheme takes place under the auspices of care and repair, which, as members may remember, is where small tasks are done for free for elderly, vulnerable and perhaps disabled people. Under the garden share scheme—which is a proper, monitored scheme—somebody who has a great big garden, who wants to stay in the house but who is not capable of digging and maintaining the garden is partnered with someone who is keen on gardening. That person will do the tatties and vegetables, trim the hedge and keep the front garden looking tidy. It costs the homeowner nothing, they have a blether, a cup of tea and some of the produce, and it is sociable, just as proper allotments—if we can call them that—are. The garden share scheme is to be commended. I tried to do something similar in the Borders about a year or so ago, but, given the current local government hiatus, there is not much point in talking to anybody about anything because they are all too busy fighting for their seats. However, once the election is over, I will go back to Midlothian Council and Scottish Borders Council and ask whether we can have more space for allotments. The idea that in the country there is a lot of ground to grow on is not true: fields are industrial and contain animals and grain, so they cannot be used. It is therefore important to have allotments in the country. I will also raise with the councils the garden share scheme. Let me give some breaking news. I understand that the Government is introducing a community empowerment and renewal bill—I know that that is on the tip of all members’ tongues. The bill may give members the opportunity to raise issues to do with allotments, such as the protected status of existing allotments. Unfortunately, until fairly recently a lot of housing developments took swathes of allotments out and left people with nowhere to grow things. I am pleased to take part in the debate, and I will certainly make a press announcement on the day on which I get my own allotment. The spade is ready; it is in the shed with the rake—I have all the tools. Christine is willing: she just needs her allotment.

Can I put my name down on that list? It might take me less than 10 years to get an allotment.

For what purpose did the member ask for that if Labour is not considering changing the present situation?

Will the member take another intervention?

I cannot see it—it is too small.

I welcome the debate, which gives me an opportunity to speak on behalf of my constituents in Penicuik, Gorebridge, Newtongrange and Fountainhall, for example, for whom the issue is concerning, particularly with the announcements by First. The minister is aware of those concerns and has addressed some of my constituents directly about them. However, we simply cannot walk away from the fact that we are in this position because banking regulation failed under the Westminster Government. We have a ruinous deficit that is costing the UK hundreds of billions per annum in borrowing and we are not even cutting the deficit. Gordon Brown’s fingers were all over that. The situation is costing our domestic budget £1.3 billion. Against that fact, we are asked to ignore it all and instead look at Labour’s manifesto for the local government elections. I have no problem with creating new jobs and training opportunities, spending more on schools, greater support for childcare, proper support for carers or further subsidy for bus services, but there are no price tags on any of those things. I would vote for all of them, but I would want to know, first, the cost, and secondly where the money will come from under a fixed budget.

I will let the member in in a moment. Am I right in presuming that Labour still supports the council tax freeze, or is that a presumption too far? Am I right in supposing that it still supports the concessionary fares scheme, which we have extended to veterans and dial-a-bus, and that the member’s question about the savings that could be made, with reference to the Auditor General, was just a question and the answer does not matter? If Labour would not touch those things, it has to tell us where the money would come from. It did not do that during the budget debate; there was not a single amendment at stages 2 or 3 of the budget process that dealt with the buses.

We could certainly afford better bus services. I will tell the member something, to get right to the nitty-gritty of the matter. The real issue for the bus companies is the price of fuel. The irony is that the Labour motion hardly addresses that. I quote: “The irony is that the main driver of increased costs for public transport lies in fuel costs compounded by fewer passengers on account of job losses and therefore loss of commuter passengers due to this UK recession.” Those are not my words but the words of the transport correspondent at The Herald. The success story in Scotland is Lothian Buses, which made a profit of £13 million in 2010 and increased its passenger numbers by 1.9 per cent to 109 million. How did it do that? The answer is careful cost control and a favourable fuel hedge position. The problem is that, as Lothian Buses says, higher fuel prices will “significantly impact on this year’s trading results”. That is the nitty-gritty of the issue, but Labour will not face up to it, because it is a UK issue. The Government has put forward money that we could use. We have called for a fuel duty regulator to stabilise fuel costs for all forms of transport and we have called for the scrapping of plans to increase fuel duty in August. That would be a start, but those proposals fall on the deaf ears of those in the Conservative and Liberal Democrat parties who have just learned that the rich avoid paying tax. What do they talk about at their cocktail parties—pasties? We can add to that the costs of Trident, which run into billions, and an illegal war in Afghanistan, which is and always was unwinnable. Money that would support Scotland’s communities and services, including interlinking public transport, is being squandered. There is no oil fund here. We have false promises, no costings from the Labour Party, and no budget proposals. Labour’s position is pie in the sky. Is it the saviour of our bus services? I do not think so. I am realistic. I look forward to realistic and practical discussions with the minister on behalf of my constituents who travel to work, hospital or the social work centre in Dalkeith, and on behalf of the people who work on the buses, so that we can resolve the issue. However, I will not tell them porkies just to get through the local government elections.

Will the member take an intervention?

I ask Mr Hume not to use the word “free” when referring to the bus pass. The scheme is concessionary and the people who use the bus pass, among others, have paid taxes.

I welcome the opportunity to open the debate on behalf of the Justice Committee—at least, that is what it says here. I thank all those who gave evidence to the committee on what, is in football parlance—as I understand it—a bill of two halves. There could continue to be issues about conjoining distinctly separate pieces of legislation in one bill. The practice has an established history in that other legislature and we seem to have adopted it over the past 13 years, but it is perhaps not the best practice. As a result, the evidence-taking sessions were in two distinct categories: the Petch and Foye group and the Megrahi group—I am using shorthand. I will therefore deal with the bill in those two distinct parts. I thank all the witnesses for their time and contributions First, I will comment on part 1. I take a deep breath, because this is tricky stuff. I commend the committee members and indeed myself for struggling week in, week out to understand the solution to the Petch and Foye problem—I stress the solution, not the problem. First, what is the problem? I know that my learned friend Rod Campbell will do a far better job than me of describing it, although he might kill me for saying that. I will repeat to some extent what the cabinet secretary said. In 2011, the appeal court by a majority ruled that convicted sex offenders Messrs Petch and Foye, because of an anomaly in the law, could become eligible for parole earlier than someone who was serving a mandatory life sentence. By way of explanation, class, there is the mandatory life sentence for murder, and the determinate sentence and the discretionary sentence for other serious offences short of murder. The problem lies with the discretionary sentence, which comprises a punishment element and an element for protection of the public. Eligibility for parole relates only to the punishment part, and it kicks in after 50 per cent of the punishment part has been served. If a large chunk of the discretionary sentence is for protection of the public, we could have, as in Petch and Foye, serious sex offenders applying for parole earlier than someone on a determinate sentence. The problem is the solution on offer to the committee, which we found overly complex and which is one big headache, not just for me and members of the public but, I have to say, for some practitioners, including a Queen’s counsel who gave evidence. Am I embarrassed to admit a degree of defeat? Not in the least. Although I am mindful that I speak for the committee, I think that it is fair to say that we all struggled with the bill. To be frank, some committee meetings had the flavour of a final-year law tutorial. Even the question-and-answer page on the bill on the Government’s website states: “This is a very complex area of law.” The Petch and Foye ruling was by a five to two majority and the appeal court was not able to agree the terms of the judgment, so I am in good company. I will take another deep breath. Sit up straight, class. Here are some working examples. For ease of consumption, I have colour coded them. Members will be tested later. The first example concerns the mandatory life sentence. John Black is convicted of murder following a fight outside a bar and, as required by law, he is given a mandatory life sentence. After taking into account the seriousness of the offence, any previous convictions and whether there has been an early guilty plea, the court says that John Black must serve at least 20 years in prison before he is eligible for parole. We know the score—it is 20 years. Now I move to the determinate life sentence. John Brown is convicted of serious assault following a fight outside a bar. He escapes a murder charge simply because of the speed of the ambulance and the skills of the surgeon. He is therefore not charged with murder and is convicted of a serious assault to the danger of life, which does not attract a mandatory life sentence. He is given a determinate sentence of 20 years to reflect the gravity of the crime, but he will be eligible to apply for parole after 10 years, and he must be released after serving two thirds of his sentence. That is how determinate sentencing works, by the way: a 20-year sentence does not mean 20 years in prison; it means 16-ish years. I hope that members are still with me as I move on to the non-mandatory life sentence. John Red is convicted of a similar crime of serious assault following a fight outside a bar. However, the court considers that the pattern of behaviour that he has demonstrated means that there is a likelihood that, if he is at liberty, he will be a danger to the public. He is therefore given a non-mandatory life sentence, which effectively means that, even when he is eligible to apply for parole halfway through his sentence, he will be released only if the Parole Board considers that he is no longer a risk to the public. He cannot be released automatically after he has served two thirds of his sentence. It is when calculating the punishment part of John Green’s sentence that things get tricky. Let us say that Mr Green gets 20 years, but five of those are for public protection. We do not need a calculator—perhaps we do by this stage—to calculate that eligibility to apply for parole is at half of 15 years, not half of 20 years. Mr Green would be eligible for release after seven and a half years, not 10. That is the anomaly. I think that I am understanding this. Members should remember John Black, John Brown and John Red—I will give members a test when they are leaving the chamber. For further working examples on the problem, I direct members to the Government’s website because I have run out of codeine. I do not, however, fault the Government, because the appeal court’s decision compelled legislative intervention. To cut to the chase, why make a complex area more complex? I give the suggestion of the Law Society of Scotland and the Faculty of Advocates, on which the committee remarks in our conclusion at paragraph 94 of our report. We were attracted to the simplicity of a less prescriptive approach of enshrining in the proposed legislation a principle that a discretionary life prisoner, such as our Mr John Red, should never be able to apply for parole earlier than a non-mandatory lifer such as Mr Brown. I say gently to the cabinet secretary that if there had been a formal consultation on part 1—although I hear what he is saying about what has happened subsequently—simpler solutions would have been on offer such as those that were presented to us. It is undeniable that, although part 2 was drafted in general terms, it was proposed to enable publication of the SCCRC’s statement of reasons in the case of Abdelbaset al-Megrahi. At this point, Presiding Officer, I declare an interest as a member of the Justice for Megrahi campaign. Having exposed the difficulties of part 1, I now have to repeat the difficulties that arise with part 2 in particular because of the marriage of disparate pieces of legislation. This is not the first time that I have had to raise such issues. Notwithstanding the fact that all the evidence that we took was directed at the al-Megrahi case and the fact that, on 25 March, the Sunday Herald published most of the statement of reasons, part 2 cannot now be detached from part 1, even if someone wanted to do so. Indeed, I give notice as convener of the Justice Committee that if an attempt was made to lodge an amendment to delete part 2, I would reject it as a wrecking amendment and therefore incompetent. Of course, such an amendment could be re-presented at stage 3, but that would be a matter for the Presiding Officer. To some extent, it is a fiction to say that part 2 will have general application, but there is an issue around whether it is robust enough to do its job in general circumstances and not just in relation to such a high-profile case. There was a fair bit of to-ing and fro-ing, which might have looked like “Blankety Blank”, between the Scottish Government and the UK Government’s Information Commissioner’s Office with regard to the restrictions that the Data Protection Act 1998 might impose on publication of the statement of reasons. That turned out to be a bit of a red herring because, at the end of the day, the UK institutions appeared to be pretty relaxed about publication. I suggest that that progress was made because of the pressure that the committee put on the Government. That approach might prove to be useful should such intergovernmental co-operation be required again, although this might have been a special case. That was my executive summary. The bill has two parts: I can sum up by saying that part 1 is overcomplex and part 2 is perhaps redundant. That is not the cabinet secretary’s fault but, as has been said before and will no doubt be said again, we are where we are. Now, as the tumbleweed gathers round my ankles, I leave the floor to the other committee members. I have run out of codeine, but I have spare supplies of aspirin. Before I forget, I point out that, in spite of all the aforesaid, the committee supports the general principles of the bill. As a caveat, I remind the cabinet secretary that I speak as convener of the committee, not as a Scottish National Party back bencher—I am not looking to build a case for a by-election in my constituency.

I have to say that I confused myself. John Green is an intruder.

Thank you, Presiding Officer—I apologise to you for having to listen to me twice today. I thank not only those members who have stayed to take part in the debate, but those who signed the motion and, indeed, the many MSPs who attended the recent presentation and reception by community radio stations from across Scotland. I also want to thank the Scottish Parliament information centre for providing a thorough briefing on community radio. I have come late to knowing about community radio, but that is not entirely my fault—it has been hiding its wee light under a bit of a bushel. However, now that I know of it—in particular, in my constituency, Black Diamond in Newtongrange and the embryonic TD1 in Galashiels—I am quite sold on it. I inform those not yet in the know that community radio stations typically cover a small geographic area, with a coverage of in or around 5km, and are run on a not-for-profit basis. TD1 and Black Diamond cover urban geographic areas, but community radio can cater for areas of specific interest. For example, Awaz FM serves the Asian and African community in Glasgow. Community radio can also serve age groups and groups such as the armed forces, as 98.5 Garrison FM does. In a recent research study on public attitudes to broadcasting that was done on behalf of the Government, 49 per cent of respondents indicated that “it was either fairly or very important to have a community radio station in their area”. Interestingly, the report also stated that community radio “provides over 12,500 volunteering opportunities and 15,000 hours of original radio per week across the UK”. Despite my earlier ignorance, community radio is not a new phenomenon, and a campaign for community radio goes back to the early 1960s, although it was not until 1989 that the United Kingdom broadcasting regulator—which at the time was the Independent Broadcasting Authority—took steps to introduce full-time community radio services. The station has to have a licence, which can be issued by the Office of Communications only to a company or other organisation, not an individual, so MSPs need not bother to put in their own bids. Currently, there are 18 Ofcom-licensed community stations in Scotland—they have a voluntary secretariat in the Scottish Community Broadcasting Network—and there are 18 applications for licences in the current round. SCBN stations are also collaborating this year to provide live coverage of the Edinburgh book festival and, indeed, for their sins, already carry “The Week in Holyrood”. Most community radio stations can carry advertising and sponsorship, although at least half their income must come from other areas. A few stations may not carry advertising as they overlap with existing commercial radio services. That is currently the position that TD1 in Galashiels finds itself in because of the coverage of Radio Borders. As always, funding is the nitty-gritty, and the overview of community radio that the Government commissioned—to which I have already referred—which was intended to assist policy development in support of these services, homes in on the issue of the lack of finance. One of its findings on funding says: “Both station managers and volunteers drew attention to how lack of finance affects their ability to service and purchase equipment, pay licence fee charges, recruit paid staff, pay volunteer expenses” and so on. The findings also highlighted difficulties with accessing arts funding and securing advertising revenue, a lack of awareness about funding opportunities and a need for assistance with accessing wider funding pools. That brings me to the community radio fund, under the Ofcom umbrella, which has £500,000 a year to allocate. Applications for funding must be in by 12 May. The fund provides support for equipment, management, training and so on. Community radio is good for the communities it serves. Is it good for Parliamentarians? Think hustings. For example, during the last election, Black Diamond recorded one hustings that I took part in and, continuing the voluntary work that is done by community radio, Sunny Govan Radio is holding a local elections hustings programme next week—council candidates should pin their ears back and get on the air. Dedicated broadcasters are doing the same thing across Scotland, playing a vital role in extending democracy and delivering social gain. Really, what is the ultimate ego trip for a politician? Is it getting our picture in the paper—for the best of reasons? Is it making the lead story on the 6 o’clock news, the 9 o’clock news and all the other news slots—again, for the best of reasons? Is it being a regular pundit on “Newsnicht”? No. It must be having the air waves to ourselves for an hour or so in order to talk about ourselves and our politics, to dally with being indiscreet and to have an uninhibited choice of our own desert island discs—which is probably where some of our constituents would like us to go. Members know that I am the shy type, but I thank both Black Diamond and TD1 for letting me loose with “Blue Suede Shoes” and other old rocker stuff. Indeed, I have just received a message—although not during my time in the chamber—with a return invitation to Black Diamond, so I am being spoiled for my record choice. I say to Mr Kidd, who is beside me, that if that is not a bribe for members to become involved with their community radio, I do not know what is. For the avoidance of doubt and for community radio listeners who are listening on AM/FM or online, I am indeed wearing blue suede shoes but, as they are pointy toed with kitten heels and are size four and a half, they are, unfortunately, but an homage to Elvis.

I hope so.

I am impressed with Jim Hume’s command of the technical information. He has hidden that light under another bushel.

What was all that about?

Presiding Officer, my heart sank when you said that we have extra time. We always get extra time when we do not have a lot to say. I commend David McLetchie who, despite his protestations, spoke for eight and a half minutes, taking us from Roman tribunes to Labour tribunes and from the ancient to the recent history of the development of the word “tribunal”. That was masterly padding, and this is a little bit of padding of my own. David McLetchie was followed by Graeme Pearson, who referred to the possibility of Mr McLetchie possessing the attribute of glamour. I remind Mr Pearson that it is recorded in the Official Report that, this week, he referred to the Cabinet Secretary for Justice as “gifted”. We definitely need recess in the Justice Committee. Let us move to the business in hand—tribunals. I had no idea that there were more than 40 tribunals, and I did not know that they dealt with 80,000 cases a year. Some people might have expected the debate to be like watching paint dry or that it would be preferable to watch paint dry but, as others have said, tribunals deal with the most sensitive, fundamental and personal issues for many ordinary people day in, day out. Four of the tribunals that have already been referred to are the Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland, the Additional Support Needs Tribunals for Scotland, the Lands Tribunal for Scotland and the Private Rented Housing Panel. To be honest, I had no idea that the Private Rented Housing Panel existed. Mind you, I did not know that there was an Inspectorate of Prosecution in Scotland until last week, and nobody else appears to have known about him either. It is possible to learn something here even after being here for 13 years. The tribunals, panels and committees are all different. Some, such as the Lands Tribunal for Scotland, appear to be very judicial and are like a court; others are not like that. In relation to additional support needs tribunals, I have issues about what happens further down the chain. By the time that people get to the tribunal, they will already have been in front of councillors, trying to get support for placing the children in a certain school. My issue—it is not totally relevant to the debate, but it is connected because it touches, to an extent, on the issue of mediation that John Finnie raised—is that, if we dealt with things earlier on and had proper representation at that stage, we would not need to have people going into the tribunal system. Do we need to restructure the system radically? I think that we must. I welcome the tiered system, but I look forward to some tribunals and panels providing education and training for tribunal members. I do not wish to slight existing panel members, but I understand that there is not always consistency in the way in which cases are dealt with. Jenny Marra said that tribunals are inquisitorial rather than adversarial, but that is not always the case, as John Finnie said. Sometimes, what one might call a layperson or a party litigant turns up and there is a Queen’s counsel fully decked out in the wig and the bow tie—the whole lot—with a pile of books in front of them. Whether the books are referred to is another matter, but it is scary and that is an issue. Although some tribunals allow people to have legal aid, legal aid will not always pay for them to have a QC at their side. We must address that. As has been said, some tribunals are very important. A mental health tribunal is, on balance, the most sensitive, as it can result in someone being compulsorily treated and even put into mental health treatment completely against their will, which is a fundamental removal of the individual’s rights. I understand that the tribunal can make a determination on the day but can also defer determination for up to 28 days and, in that period, make an interim compulsory treatment order. That is pretty serious stuff, so we should be thinking about what our tribunals are moving into. The matters that they are dealing with now—“matters” is a word that Mr MacAskill likes—are becoming more complex. In a decade, things have moved on so that, when a tribunal is dealing with someone with mental health problems, their whole background is considered, which might not have been taken into account 10 years ago. Additional support needs tribunals deal broadly with children who require support because they are being bullied or have emotional, behavioural or learning difficulties. They might even be gifted children—at the other end of the spectrum, one might say—or bereaved. Those are difficult issues. Panels and tribunals involve a legally qualified convener and two expert members, but I return to my point that I have always found the difficulty to be that, by the time they reach a tribunal, parents and carers are worn out, because they have been in front of councillors, who have an interest in proceedings when someone is trying to get their child placed somewhere or to get additional support at a school. The additional support needs tribunal can consider appeals against decisions by education authorities. I like the idea of having a more stable appellate system. I note that, as of 18 March, the tribunal has been able to deal with appeals by parents—or by the person involved, when they have the capacity to make a claim—against a body because it has discriminated on the basis of a disability. That is an incremental change—the minister referred to that. My goodness—I have been speaking for only six minutes. In the summary of the proposals, I am keenest on the proposal “To ensure impartial decision-making”, which must be seen to be impartial. That relates to how some of the tribunals have evolved. I feel that parents have been disadvantaged in additional support needs tribunals. They have not really had a fair hearing and fair representation under article 6 of the European convention on human rights. Councils can sit there with legal teams, whereas the parents are standing on their own, perhaps with somebody who is from the voluntary sector. That person will be informed, able and doing their stuff, but there will nevertheless be an imbalance in representation. Common judicial leadership is terribly important to education. When the Lord President is put at the top of something, it begins to matter and to mean something. I notice the “potential for future developments of the wider system”. Will the minister comment on a bit of the consultation document that I do not understand? I could have read the simplified version but, unfortunately, I found out about it too late. The consultation document says: “it does not introduce barriers to future consideration of the option of merging courts and tribunals, in Scotland”. I do not know what that means. Does it mean just that the same buildings would be used or that tribunals would be linked in? I saw that and thought that I would ask about it.

I am trying to help the member out. Does he agree that the websites of some of the tribunals are quite helpful? Does he also agree that we should applaud the Government for publishing a simplified version of the consultation—I saw it late in the day—which is about the level that I need?

I, too, very much welcome the debate and the consensus across the chamber about reoffending. I will not reprise the figures and percentages, which have been cited. The costs of a prisoner are in the tens of thousands per annum, yet most of that is wasted funding. The prison population has been rising and, if it goes on as it has done, it is predicted to rise to 9,500 by 2019-20. The population has been rising over my entire 12 years—almost 13—in the Parliament. We must look to reduce the waste of public funding and human potential yet retain the element of punishment and, most certainly, public protection. There remains the conundrum of how to deliver those elements along with effective rehabilitation, effective early interventions, diversions from prosecution and alternatives to custody. We have trod this path before. I take members back to February 2003, when the Justice 1 Committee—I think that Richard Simpson was there, I was a member of the committee and Jim Wallace was the Minister for Justice—held an inquiry into alternatives to custody. It is regrettable that everything that we said then is still valid now. I even recall a proposal that local alternatives to custody should be available at the touch of the sheriff clerk’s fingertips on a computer, so that the sheriff would have up-to-date information at his or her disposal should he or she be considering options other than custody. I do not know whether that is now the case. I hope to be enlightened later in the debate. We have talked about the social impact bond that is being piloted in Peterborough. I note that the cabinet secretary is not setting social impact bonds to the side and is prepared to consider them. I think that the Liberal Democrats should therefore be able to accept his amendment. Programmes are, of course, already funded by a mix of central Government, local government, charitable and corporate funding. For instance, Turning Point is funded by Lloyds TSB, the Robertson Trust, the KPMG Foundation, the Tudor Trust and the lottery. That brings me to a Turning Point programme that I believe is exceptional: the 218 service in Glasgow. Some members of the Health and Sport Committee visited the service earlier this year as part of a preliminary fact-finding task on women in prison. Others went to Cornton Vale and HMP Saughton, where some of the women are held. Many of the women are, like many prisoners, damaged. I think that it was a senior procurator fiscal who said many years ago—I paraphrase—that in prison there are the bad, the mad and the sad. Indeed, a high proportion of those who are incarcerated have mental health issues. Many have been victims themselves, which may be part of the genesis of their criminality. However, to take that on board does not mean that we are going soft on crime: we are looking to break the cycle. The 218 service has 12 beds. The women must have a commitment to turn around their lives. Some had been in before, had failed and had come back. We had time to speak to the residents and the discussions were very enlightening. Many of the residents had been in care and, sadly, because of their offending, their children are now in care. That is another cycle that requires to be broken. I observe that that might be one of the factors that contributed—I am not saying that it is, but it might have been—to their criminality. Another contributing factor that surprised me was not drugs but alcohol. Many of the women were in there as a result of excessive abuse of alcohol. That issue was touched on in yesterday’s debate; as I said, that debate could well have been a justice debate rather than a health debate. Across the chamber, the task is to reassure the public that diversions from prosecution, alternatives to custody and putting money into rehabilitation are not soft options. Those options must be tough and we know that if they are tough, they work. That does not always require public funding and it does not always take funding from the justice portfolio; it must take funding from education, health, housing and employment, which all have a part to play in breaking the cycle.

There have been allegations in the recent Megrahi biography and in the press regarding the Crown’s actions throughout the prosecution appeal process. Is it possible, through the Inquiries Act 2005, to instruct an independent examination of those allegations, and might that fall within the remit of the Inspectorate of Prosecution in Scotland?

I remind Dr Simpson that Labour’s attempt to introduce a measure on caffeinated drinks came very late in the day—I know because I was there. The Health and Sport Committee at the time had been given no evidence on that and therefore could not deal with the matter, which was made plain at the time.

I do not want to take on the committee’s convener, but I am going to. From the tone of his speech, I am not quite sure whether he is speaking for the committee, the majority of which I understood to be fully in favour of the bill, or with a tinge of Labour policy on the matter.

Those are all superb and worthy examples, but it would certainly be possible to have minimum unit pricing alongside the measures that the member very reasonably puts forward.

I am wearing two hats today—my old hat represents my role as a convener of the previous session’s Health and Sport Committee, which heard all the evidence on minimum unit pricing, and my new hat represents my current role as convener of the Justice Committee. The evidence was, and remains, overwhelming. I say to Kezia Dugdale, who is a lady who has merit, that she should not just look at the streets of Edinburgh, but read the evidence from all the professions, including the academic evidence on the impact of minimum unit pricing. It is not the be all and end all, but it is one part of a whole programme to reduce binge drinking and the alcohol-fuelled society in Scotland. I am pleased that the Conservatives and the Liberals support minimum pricing. Their suggestion that a sunset clause be included is right and sensible, as are their monitoring proposals. The great difficulty with the Labour amendment is that it refers to “the windfall to the large retailers”. From my recollection, apart from Tesco—there might be another one now—the large retailers are opposed to minimum unit pricing. If they were going to make a lot of profit from minimum unit pricing, they would be in favour of it. Therefore, if they oppose it, they are opposing an increase in their profits. Labour is exercising a strange logic. Dr Richard Simpson mentioned that Labour will address caffeinated drinks in its bill, but when that issue was raised at the Health and Sport Committee, Dr Alasdair Forsyth told us: “There is no research that suggests that mixing caffeine and alcohol is related to moods in any way—that it makes people either more or less aggressive.” Moreover, Chief Superintendent Bob Hamilton said that “we have no evidence that that type of caffeinated product is a cause of violence or increases violence.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 15 September 2010; c 3308.] Dr Richard Simpson is shaking his head, but that is evidence; it is not hearsay or something that I have just heard.

I am saying that the evidence that was presented to the committee by the police and academics was that caffeinated alcohol does not lead to aggression. When Helen Eadie asked about the matter, she was told that the issue is not really what people drink, but why they drink it, and that it is not so much the steady heavy drinker that we are concerned about in relation to violence in society, but the binge drinker who drinks anything that they can lay their hands on and, most important, the cheapest thing. The impact of that is that people stay at home to drink. They front-load before they go out, because they say that they cannot afford the prices in restaurants and pubs. Therefore, they buy the cheap stuff to get themselves going. The only reason why people do that is to bevvy themselves out of their minds. Duncan McNeil clearly set out the results of that. I am sorry that he is not in the chamber now—I was a bit hard on him, but he deserved it.

He certainly deserved it, given the tone of his speech, which he was making as convener of the Health and Sport Committee. Perhaps he will learn. This is important, because he has a fine record on the issue. The committee report states: “The Committee draws particular attention to the issue of protecting children who may be growing up in a household where alcohol is being abused and the detrimental effect that this can have on their care, development and wellbeing.” I commend Duncan McNeil, as he has chased for 12 years the issues of the effects of alcohol and drugs on children in households. We are considering the impact on the next generation. To speak with my Justice Committee convener’s hat on, there is evidence that domestic violence is fuelled by alcohol. Even the loss of a football game can mean that some woman is sitting at home wondering what the consequences will be for her because somebody is fuelled by alcohol. Graeme Pearson said a lot of grand things and set out good ideas, which is why I say to him that minimum unit pricing is only one of a range of measures. I say to the Labour back benchers, as one back bencher who breaks the party’s whip, that they can break the whip and survive if they believe in the principles. I know that Malcolm Chisholm has occasionally done that. The cost to Scotland is not just on health issues. This could be a justice debate or one on homelessness—Kezia Dugdale mentioned homelessness among people who drink too much alcohol. Alcohol causes a range of problems in society. I say to Kezia Dugdale, who is new to the Parliament, that she should think hard on the evidence that two committees of the Parliament have heard. Everything rams home the fact that minimum unit pricing will, as part of a programme, have a serious and important impact on Scotland’s alcohol problems through the generations.

Will the member take an intervention?

On the issue of cross-border selling, is the member aware that Scottish Borders Council voted unanimously for minimum unit pricing some years ago? I think that the motion was introduced by a Tory councillor.

Heaven forfend.

6. To ask the First Minister whether, in light of comments in the recently published biography of Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi, the Scottish Government considers that an inquiry into all aspects of the Lockerbie bombing is now urgent. (S4F-00502)

Can the First Minister clarify who might have a locus to pursue any posthumous appeal on behalf of Abdelbaset al-Megrahi?

Walker!

Will the member give way?

First, I declare that I am a member of the Justice for Megrahi campaign. I turn to the exact words of Abdelbaset al-Megrahi, on page 352 of the book to which the cabinet secretary referred in his statement. With regard to the prisoner transfer agreement, Mr al-Megrahi says: “For my family’s sake I decided I must choose the latter” —that is, the prisoner transfer— “and on 23 March 2009 I signed a provisional undertaking to abandon the appeal.” That considerably predates any memos, and anything that has been said in hearsay. Those are the direct words of Abdelbaset al-Megrahi. It seems that, instead of going on this wild goose chase now, we should be looking at having a full inquiry—

Is it not the case that we should have a full inquiry into all aspects of the Lockerbie atrocity, for the sake not only of Abdelbaset al-Megrahi and his family, but—more importantly—for the people of Lockerbie and the victims’ families, who still need answers? I would like to ask the cabinet secretary a supplementary—

Has he had any indication of an inquiry from Westminster?

I congratulate Iain Gray on securing the debate and on his robust defence of the case for keeping Haddington sheriff court open. I did the same when the Liberal-Labour coalition was going to close the sheriff courts at Peebles and Jedburgh, so we have been here before. I return to Roderick Campbell’s intervention, just to give Iain Gray the facts on the Lord President’s evidence to the Justice Committee last year. He said: “40 per cent of the Scottish Court Service’s expenditure is on court buildings, another 40 per cent is on the wages of staff, and there is a balance of 20 per cent. ... As some of those buildings are rather old, the maintenance costs are high.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 1 November 2011; c 390.] The committee challenged the Lord President on the lengthy timescale for the SCS proposals. Committee members John Lamont, John Finnie and I—all with rural constituencies—also challenged him to give huge consideration to travel costs not just for witnesses and victims but for the police and the sheriffs, and to all the paraphernalia, as it were, that is required to deliver justice not just in criminal matters, as Iain Gray quite rightly said, but in civil matters. In the majority of cases, Scottish people are involved in the civil court because of cases involving, for example, matrimonial disputes, contact with children, small claims actions in which someone is suing a local tradesman, and so on. The Lord President also said that the judicial members of the SCS board, which includes the Lord Justice Clerk, will “consider what principles we ought to apply in the provision of court services in future.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 1 November 2011; c 390.] They will take on board all the reasonable concerns that Iain Gray has expressed. However, we must consider whether there is wastage in the justice budget. There is wastage in some processes and money can be saved by addressing that. For example, there are too many court hearings and too many postponed hearings. Those issues will be considered as part of the review. We must also consider the state of the sheriff courts. Iain Gray referred to Dickens in his speech, and some of the SCS buildings are Dickensian. I have been in Haddington and Selkirk sheriff courts—I hasten to add that I appeared as a solicitor and was not in front of the bench for any other purpose—and I believe that they do not have proper facilities. When I started in legal practice several years ago, I was shocked to find that witnesses for opposing sides in both criminal and civil cases would be in the same room, and sometimes the air could have been cut with a knife. For example, people who were involved in a bitter dispute over their children would sit facing each other, which is not suitable. In other courts, I do not know how anybody who was disabled got access. Moreover, there would not be proper facilities for parking at the court. The issue is huge and long term. We want to get rid of some of the costs in the process for what is not needed, so that the money can be put back into, for example, extending legal aid to allow more people to have representation in court. Iain Gray made some good points, but he must consider the whole package. For example, videoconferencing could be used in some cases so that the police would not have to be brought to the sheriff court and, by agreement with both parties, individuals would not need to come, which would save costs. I sympathise with Iain Gray’s defence of Haddington sheriff court. If the SCS tried to close Peebles sheriff court, I would say “Over my dead body.” Peebles is very much like Haddington, in that it has its own personality; it is a community that is fighting against the same kind of things as Haddington, such as supermarket developments, and is competing with other places—Edinburgh, in the case of Peebles. All that is true, but it is also true of places such as Peebles that if the sheriff court closed, access to justice would be extremely difficult for many people, particularly those who do not have their own transport. I agree with all the points that Iain Gray made in that regard, but I ask him to consider, too, that in the 21st century our sheriff courts should be built so that they serve all the people properly. They should separate out witnesses, have proper facilities and give people access to justice and they should not cost an arm and a leg to heat and maintain. When the buildings were first put up, they were really threatening because they were big, terrifying baronial places that said to people, “Here’s the court.” However, we have got past those days. In fact, most of the people who are going into the courts do not want them to be threatening, baronial places. They want to be in civil courts, for example, in which they feel comfortable and justice is done. I ask Iain Gray to look again at the issue and take some comfort from the fact that the Justice Committee will be robust in dealing with the issue when it comes before it.

I am not familiar with the courts that the member is talking about. Do they have proper facilities for witnesses on either side of a case?

For the record, I ask the member to keep saying that she is talking about the previous Justice Committee and not the present one.

I am not for a moment suggesting that it is sufficient reason, but we must look at the balance between providing local justice and having proper facilities. I am sure that John Lamont does not want money to go into heating ancient buildings instead of providing people with legal aid.

If the minister will take an intervention, I think that I can assist. The Justice Committee took evidence from the Lord President on 1 November, and he announced that he would start a consultation process in January 2012. We knew all about it. We could not get it on to the front page of the newspaper, but it certainly was not a big secret. There are members of Mr Gray’s party on the committee.

The First Minister might be aware that Peri-dent, a company that manufactures oral care products, which is located at Tweedbank, in my constituency, closed its doors to manufacturing on Friday, transferring production to Malaysia—as usual because of cheaper production costs. There was a loss of 130 jobs. The intention to relocate was made public in June last year. What has been done since then in preparation for the redundancies that I regret to say have now become a fact?

I, too, commend Dennis Robertson on delivering a speech that was tough to listen to and must have been extremely tough to deliver. I will give an example from my experience in practice as a solicitor. A couple who had a 21-year-old daughter with anorexia turned up at my office. They felt helpless and desperate because their daughter was full of hostility and resentment that they should try to interfere and make her take treatment. They were driven to the point of seeking to section her under mental health legislation so that she could be compulsorily treated. However, on inquiring, I found that it had been deemed that she had capacity—that she knew perfectly well what she was doing—and that, although she was starving herself to death, there was nothing her parents could do. In researching the matter for the debate, I found that some jurisdictions are considering anorexia bills that would provide for compulsory psychiatric or medical treatment and compulsory feeding of sufferers. I have, however, concerns about that, to which I will return if I have time. Dennis Robertson rightly talked about tackling the problems early. It could be schools, employers or the medical profession who see that something is wrong. I will go right back and start with the image that we give young people: models who are rake thin and boyish in their shape. Clothes drape beautifully on them, but they are not like real people. That image is set before all our young people—our young women in particular—in the glossy magazines. We now even have children who are not yet at primary school who have concerns about their body shape and whether they are thin enough. It is no wonder that the generations-old anxieties that happen at puberty or in adolescence are exacerbated by those glossy images, which are often airbrushed to perfection. I am not saying that that is why people become anorexic, but it is part of the backcloth of how we see ourselves that thin people are successful and that fat people are deemed to be failures in some way. I return to compulsory treatment, which I find to be a difficult issue. We are talking about the point at which we decide whether a person who is starving themselves to death for a variety of psychological reasons has capacity. To say that someone does not have capacity is a very big step to take. Before anyone suggests legislation—I am not saying that anyone has done so yet—we would need to make a deep inquiry into why we would be intervening at that stage instead of tackling the issues early on, even when there is an intervention.

That was an interesting intervention, but Dennis Robertson has explained how difficult it is to determine when a person has slipped from having capacity to not having capacity. In his speech, he indicated that, at times, his daughter was well aware of the difficulties—she had self-awareness and wanted to stop. At other times, she went into a state of denial. It is an extremely sensitive issue. I would much prefer there to be early access to, and no long waiting lists for, psychological help, therapy and so on. I know that that has to be provided sensitively, as there will be resistance from the sufferer, but I would like more effort to be put into that first, before we embark on what could be quite a rough-edged way of dealing with the condition, which would be to take away a person’s ability to make decisions about their life by having them sectioned.

When the previous session’s Health and Sport Committee carried out its inquiry into the mental wellbeing of children and young people, it was concerned about the transition from adolescent to adult services and recommended that such a transition be tailored to individuals. I ask that when the minister considers tailoring services to individual need he looks at that particular issue.

The minister will be aware that, although Gorebridge residents in my constituency fully support the development of the Waverley line, they are not being given advance notice of structural works. Will the minister undertake to get in touch with the relevant agencies to ensure that they explain to people what is happening along that line with regard to tree felling and so on?

I, too, welcome the debate, and I welcome the amendment. Many have been concerned about what seemed—I stress the word “seemed”—to be a fait accompli on the question of the continuation of prison visiting committees. I ask Annabel Goldie to look again at the amendment, which does not use the word “abolish”, I am delighted to say. It leaves the door open by stating: “the Scottish Government is considering how to build on the role performed presently by visiting committees”. As we all know, the cabinet secretary is—how can I put it?—a robust reformer. That is no bad thing in itself, but he is a man in a bit of a hurry. Some of us end up saying, “Hold on a wee minute. What’s happening here? What is proposed?” He is not in reverse at the moment, but I am glad that he has put the brakes on things for the time being. We heard a reference to the statutory process from the Labour benches. I am delighted that we are taking that route, but I should say to members that the Justice Committee has been concerned about prison visiting committees and considered the evidence that should be put before us, and it might look into the matter, perhaps in tandem with the statutory process or before it. It is up to the committee to decide on that in considering its work programme. I stress that I am not speaking as convener of that committee today, but as a back bencher. The Parliament, and back benchers of the Government party in particular, have a duty to ensure good governance, but it is also appropriate that that duty is embodied in the committee structure. We must all remember that, regardless of whether a majority Government comes from a single party or, as we had in the first eight years of the Scottish Parliament, a coalition—that was also a majority Government. The Parliament should now be mature enough to debate matters that deliver the better governance of Scotland. As for the substance of the issue, the process has been delineated in a letter from the deputy director of community justice to the Association of Visiting Committees. A draft order will be laid by 30 April and there will be a 60-day sitting and public consultation process. Thereafter, there can be further consultation. We at least have that as a backstop. As I said, the Justice Committee might do other things. I want to look at the continuing role of prison visiting committees. I quote from a letter from Neil Powrie about the committees: “Of 60 responses to the consultation, 59 wanted to retain VCs and only one, the SPS - the very body which VCs are set up to monitor - was in favour of abolition.” The independence of the prison visiting committees is terribly important. The issue of independent advocacy is also extremely important. The cabinet secretary is right to say that times have changed and prisoners have complex problems. Those of us who have been here for 12 years are well aware of the great difficulties: mental health problems; drug and alcohol problems; literacy problems, and so on. The move towards independent advocacy is much to be welcomed because it will give us the link to throughcare. Those of us who have been on the relevant committees in the Parliament know that, when prisoners walk out of prison, that is sometimes the end of the care.

I am terribly sorry. I have exactly one minute to say the rest of what I want to say. For me, the jury is out. I tend towards the position of supporting prison visiting committees. I see, for instance, that they have made 246 visits to Cornton Vale, and I know that Alison McInnes has drawn the Justice Committee’s attention to the real issues there. Her Majesty’s chief inspector of prisons could not have made those 246 visits, and that point is terribly important. Perhaps the figure is not as good for other prisons, but the visits to Cornton Vale are important. However, we also require to consider independent advocacy. I look forward to the debate opening up. I am pleased that the motion was lodged, as I know that prison visiting committees have been an issue for members across the political parties, and I am glad to see that the amendment does not use the word “abolish”. It leaves the door open to debate. I would like members to consider the terms of the amendment before they vote tonight.

He has not been sacked yet, then.

Some of us already are.

I really feel like the proverbial fish out of water. I say to Willie Coffey that I speak, in part, for some of the over-55s. In addition, I am a technophobe. I can change a light bulb and I am so-so with fuses, but white space, ducts, ISPs and 4G are a complete mystery to me. I do not tweet—my brother forbids it, because he seems to think that I am a bit indiscreet. I do not Skype, but I intend to do so, as my eight-month-old granddaughter is regularly on Skype to her Canadian granny. There is a generational divide. Unsurprisingly, I am a master at shopping online. However, there is an age divide. When I talk about tablet, I am talking about the teeth-rotting variety, but I am aware that when other people talk about tablet, they are talking about another kind of tablet that is now very fashionable. There are many learned technical people, but for those—like me—who require explanations to be simple, l liken the impact of digital technology, broadband speed and mobile phone reception to the impact of the Roman roads, the Victorian railways and those stalwart Telford bridges that took people over water on those roads and railways. Just as before roads and rail Scotland’s waterways provided essential commercial routes, so today, in addition to that built infrastructure, we need digital technology. I hope that I am getting there somehow. I hope that that explanation helps those technophobes like me whose eyes glaze over when 4G is mentioned—I still do not know what it means. I understand “freezing screen”, “crashing”, being “unable to log on” and about too many people logging on—although I think that those last two are the same thing. However, I congratulate everyone in the south of Scotland who has worked hard on it, the cabinet secretary and, indeed, all members who see how important broadband infrastructure is. Nigel Don was right to liken it to the delivery of other utilities, such as water and electricity. If we think along those lines, we will realise how important it is to get the funding in. I note that the cabinet secretary—God bless him—is concentrating on essential services in places where the market will not go, such as in Midlothian South, Tweeddale and Lauderdale. However, I congratulate the people of Innerleithen, who managed to get funding all by themselves. Communities can move forward, but they need help. Why do we need broadband? Everybody has said—they are right—that we need it for economic development and regeneration. We also need it for democratic reasons. More debate about any subject—whether it is the referendum or anything else political or non-political, including international affairs—is taking place on the internet, so there are people who are being denied access to democratic debate. We also need broadband for practical things such as e-government and e-health. Mary Scanlon has banged on about telehealth. The Health and Sport Committee did a terrific report on it in the previous session of Parliament, but we are still not using it. It saves people from making long and stressful journeys. We could be doing that. Dave Thompson mentioned e-learning. Roads and rail are necessary, but people can access e-learning opportunities without having to leave their own homes. That is particularly important for people who have disabilities or frailties. Broadband infrastructure is a cost-saving facility and is bang in line with the mantra of “spend to save”. Perhaps the cabinet secretary could get more money from other Cabinet ministers to help us to spend to save more. We need better mobile coverage for reasons that Claudia Beamish mentioned—for example so that people with hearing disabilities can text the national health service to make appointments. We need broadband for local television, which is the coming thing. I am afraid that newspapers are withering on the vine, but people will be getting on to those tablet thingies and watching television on their mobile phones. Many of us get letters from our constituents on the matter, and I will quote from one of mine, who raised with me the problems for business in the Borders. He lives in Galashiels and said: “As an individual consumer I have always thought that the provision of a modern communications infrastructure is beneficial to a sparsely populated area like ours. Since starting my own business over two years ago I have come to realise that a high capacity broadband service is not only desirable but of crucial importance to the survival and competitiveness of businesses based in regions like the Borders … Ironically, access to the national and international travel infrastructure is actually quite good: I can reach London within four hours on the now much improved East Coast service; and I can reach major international aviation hubs like Schiphol and Heathrow through Edinburgh and Newcastle airports. However, access to the internet is so poor as to represent a growing cost to my company. My broadband connection through the Blainslie exchange is slow and greatly affected by contention rates”— I do not know what contention rates are, but I take it that the term means other people on the internet. “As you know, 3G network coverage for working on the move in this area is extremely limited.” That is the hindrance to Scotland’s economy. It is also a hindrance to people accessing services. If Willie Coffey starts up a beginners class in the terminology of broadband, digital and the internet, I will sign up first.

And on the benches behind him.

On that point, I announce to members that Willie Coffey has set up a sub-group for members to learn the basics of internet technology, for which I have already signed up.

I congratulate Linda Fabiani on securing the debate, on an issue of which I was not previously aware. I also congratulate Jamie McGrigor on his speech. Two constituents of mine—Alison and Betty Brown, who are sisters in their 80s—are puppy walkers. They started 40 years ago, when Betty read an article about the urgent need for volunteers to instil basic obedience in would-be guide dogs at a tender age. The aim is the same now as it was then: to produce a puppy that is socially well behaved, friendly and which will be responsive to its future handler. Alison and Betty Brown’s first puppies were called Cambus and Lang and were sponsored by the women’s guild of—not surprisingly—Cambuslang. As other puppy walkers do, the sisters keep their charges for an average of a year. They are quoted as having said: “It’s our job to prepare the dog for the working life that lies ahead”— I emphasise that— “so we take them on buses, across busy roads and into shops both in Melrose and Galashiels ... We even take them to church on Sundays.” The puppies even pray, seemingly. After their year with puppy walkers, who get expenses to cover food and vet bills—we now know that VAT is paid on their food—the animals go to one of the Guide Dogs charity’s four specialist training centres. In Scotland, they head for Forfar, where they can spend up to six months under expert mobility instruction and temperament assessment before being matched with their guide-dog owner. If that is not training a working dog, I do not know what is. The two wonderful ladies whom I named have voluntarily walked more than 90 puppies between them since they began with Guide Dogs. They are prolific fundraisers for the charity—so much so that they even have a Guide Dogs shop in their house. In 2008, they entered the record books when their 86th pup—Uri—was entrusted to their care. That makes those ladies the most prolific as well as the longest-serving puppy walkers in the long history of a charity that provides dogs for more than 4,500 blind and visually impaired people in the United Kingdom and Ireland. It is thought that the sisters have raised in excess of £1 million at fundraising events in the Borders, mainly by selling their charity’s merchandise at local shows. I am sure that, when they were raising that £1 million, they did not know that the VAT man was going to collect VAT on it, and neither did the people who contributed. It is disgraceful that that continues. I note the UK Government’s argument that it is constrained under European Union law and that, at best, it could reduce the VAT to 5 per cent. However, it cannot possibly be beyond the wit of man to redefine “working dog”. I might be wrong; it might be the food that needs to be redefined. Surely the definition of a working dog must include hearing dogs for the deaf, guide dogs for the blind and, indeed, canine partners, as well as possibly others that we are unaware of at the moment. I look forward to hearing what the minister has to say. Perhaps there is a way of getting the VAT down to 0 per cent.

The motion that I will move is in my name, on behalf of the selection panel that was established under our standing orders. It invites members to nominate Rosemary Agnew to Her Majesty as the new Scottish Information Commissioner. The selection panel was chaired by the Presiding Officer. The other members of the Scottish Parliament on the panel were Margaret Burgess, Helen Eadie, Alison McInnes, Mary Scanlon and Maureen Watt—all women, who incidentally selected a woman, but members should read no more into it than that. The Parliament is not subject to the code of practice on ministerial appointments to public bodies, but we follow the guidelines to ensure that best practice is observed and that the process is fair. On behalf of the panel, I thank Louise Rose, the independent assessor, who oversaw the process and has provided the Parliament with a validation certificate confirming that the process complied with good practice and that the nomination of the commissioner is made on merit after a fair, open and transparent process. Our nominee, Rosemary Agnew, was the panel’s choice from a strong field of candidates. We received 33 applications and shortlisted six candidates for interview. Rosemary Agnew is currently the chief executive of the Scottish Legal Complaints Commission. Previously, she held posts as an assistant local government ombudsman and as the head of the economics and business faculty at the Northern Consortium of universities in England. The commissioner’s role is important. The commissioner is responsible for enforcing and promoting Scotland’s freedom of information laws, which give people anywhere in the world access to information that is held by more than 10,000 public authorities in Scotland. Rosemary Agnew will bring to the post a range of skills and experience, including an understanding of the challenges that freedom of information presents to those seeking and providing information. I believe that Rosemary Agnew will prove to be an effective and fair commissioner who will bring to the role enthusiasm and a determination to continue to ensure that the freedom of information regime in Scotland remains highly regarded throughout the world. I am sure that the Parliament will want to wish her every success for the future in her new role. I think that the Parliament will wish to record its thanks to Kevin Dunion, the first Scottish Information Commissioner—incidentally, I nominated him on behalf of the panel the first time round—who was appointed in 2003 and has successfully helped to establish a strong and internationally respected freedom of information regime in Scotland, and to wish him well for the future. I move, That the Parliament nominates Rosemary Agnew to Her Majesty The Queen, for appointment as the Scottish Information Commissioner.

4. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions’ statement that the United Kingdom Government’s proposed benefit reforms will not lead to an increase in child poverty in Scotland. (S4F-00420)

I thank the First Minister for a very full response. Of course, the Scotland Office minister David Mundell was unable to answer the question when asked on several occasions in an interview earlier this week, even though it is his Government that is imposing the cuts. Does the First Minister agree that, if a UK Government cannot even answer such questions, the power to make decisions on such an important issue should rest with this Scottish Parliament? In particular, does he agree that child benefit, with an uptake of 96 per cent, should remain a universal benefit?

Name names!

I have to agree with David McLetchie that power devolved is, indeed, power retained. We are talking about obtaining independence. As a divorce lawyer—as I was—he knows that when one party sees the end of the marriage, the marriage is at an end. The detail is then negotiated according to law and practice. The same would happen in the separation of two parts of the United Kingdom. It is sometimes important to work back to why certain assertions are made—for example, in the claim of right, the assertion that the Scottish people are sovereign. Much slips into our everyday parlance that has a deep-rooted and substantive cultural constitutional genesis. For example, we hear Scots being reprimanded for saying “I seen it” or “I done it”. That is, in fact, grammatical language. Those phrases have survived through centuries of spoken Scots. They are not lazy or ignorant slang, but an echo from the past. That takes me to the claim of right from 1989 and the words: “We, gathered as the Scottish Constitutional Convention, do hereby acknowledge the sovereign right of the Scottish people to determine the form of Government best suited to their needs”. That Constitutional Convention was proposed in a private members bill way back in 1980 by the SNP leader, Gordon Wilson. Where did that sovereign right come from? There is no written UK constitution, but there are fragments of an incomplete constitutional jigsaw, some of which predate the treaty of union. We have to go as far back as the declaration of Arbroath—a declaration of Scottish independence and of conditional monarchy. Talking of Robert the Bruce, it says: “Yet if he should give up what he has begun, and agree to make us or our kingdom subject to the King of England or the English, we should exert ourselves at once to drive him out as our enemy and a subverter of his own rights and ours, and make some other man who was well able to defend us our King; for, as long as but a hundred of us remain alive, never will we on any conditions be brought under English rule.” That shows that he was a king who was in office by leave of those who, at the time, represented the people. They were a narrow bunch—some 51 magnates and nobles—but, nevertheless, he was on parole. The significance of those words, resonating through the centuries, is that the monarch’s power to rule was conditional on the will of the people of Scotland. That is reflected in the fact that Queen Elizabeth is Queen of Scots and not of Scotland. Therefore, sovereignty—now exercised in this democracy by various institutions—is exercised through the expressed will of the Scottish people. That takes me to why Queen Elizabeth is designed Queen of England. If my recollection is accurate, Henry VIII of the Tudor dynasty, installing himself as the head of the church, embedded the divine right of kings to rule. Sovereignty—the embodiment of which was the monarch—was absolute. However, as power was removed from the Crown and transferred to the English Parliament through the centuries, so was sovereignty. Therefore, the English Parliament was, indeed, sovereign, but that does not overrule or supersede the conflicting principle of the sovereignty of the Scottish people. Article III of the Union with Scotland Act 1706 says: “That the United Kingdom ... be represented by one and the same Parliament to be stiled The Parliament of Great Britain.” The significance of that is that that Parliament was not a continuation of the English Parliament or of the Scottish Parliament. Therefore, for Scotland, sovereignty remains as it always was—with the people. I pray in aid the case of MacCormick v the Lord Advocate, from the 1953 session cases. At that time, postboxes with “E II R” on them had been blown up, because Elizabeth was the first Elizabeth of Scotland. In that case, the following remarks were made obiter: “Considering that the Union legislation extinguished the Parliaments of Scotland and England and replaced them by a new Parliament, I have difficulty in seeing why it should have been supposed that the new Parliament of Great Britain must inherit all the peculiar characteristics of the English Parliament ... as if all that happened in 1707 was that Scottish representatives were admitted to the Parliament of England. That is not what was done ... The principle of the unlimited sovereignty of Parliament is a distinctively English principle which has no counterpart in Scottish constitutional law.” So, why the potted constitutional history lesson? It is because it is significant to the legitimacy of the referendum, which will of course not be consultative, but will have legal and constitutional authority, as well as political authority. In 1979 and 1997, there was no Scottish institution to provide a mechanism for asking the Scottish people a question on the constitution. In 1979, the UK Government took it upon itself to draw up a referendum. Of course, it produced the question and chose the date—1 March 1979, which was right in the middle of the winter of discontent, when snow was falling over Scotland. That was an omen, but the 40 per cent rule, which in effect counted the dead and those who did not exercise their franchise as having voted no, was the real treachery. That was compounded by Sir Alec Douglas-Home broadcasting on the eve of the poll that we should vote no for a better deal. Plus ça change, plus c’est la même chose. Now we have our own mechanism in the Scottish Parliament, but we do not need to have a Parliament. Even if the Parliament did not exist, if the Scottish people streamed out on to the streets of our towns, cities and villages to say with a clear voice on megaphones, on marches and online that they wanted an independent Scotland again, that would be a declaration of independence. No challenge from the Palace of Westminster, the corridors of the United Nations, this place or any courts could gainsay that. The Scottish people would say that they done it, and they done it their way.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I thank the member for developing the historical trail, but what he says does not impact on the constitutional position, which is that the people of Scotland remained sovereign through their Parliament, and that the English Parliament was sovereign as it came through England’s historical roots. That does not change because of what the member said.

I thought that I gave a fairly objective analysis of the constitutional position in Scotland in relation to the sovereignty of the people as opposed to the sovereignty of Westminster, how that came about historically and how it is still extant. There was no ranting and nothing that was not objective analysis. Does Hugh Henry accept the point in the motion that we are dealing with the sovereignty of the people, with which Westminster cannot interfere?

I speak as someone who was born in England of an English mother. Given the proximity of my constituency to the English border, can the First Minister confirm that the current harmonious sharing of services—English patients go to Borders general hospital and Scottish elderly people go to care homes in Berwick—will continue with independence?

In her statement, the cabinet secretary said that the investment will support the further development of critical care paramedics and paramedics with enhanced skills. Can she expand on that, with particular reference to rural areas?

Will Elaine Murray give way?

I congratulate Elaine Murray on securing the debate. In her speech, she mentioned expats who have UK passports who had been resident “at some point” in the past 15 years. For how long in the past 15 years? Where? Where is the evidence?

So, “at some point” could mean that they been on the electoral register for just a period of months. Someone could put themselves on the register for that year but not re-register. That is the point that Elaine Murray is making. Elaine Murray has introduced complexities—quite apart from a principle—that I cannot quite follow. The democratic principle, as I understand it, is that someone is on the electoral register to vote in various elections in which they are affected by those policies. That is why we are on the electoral register for UK elections, and why people must be on a Scottish electoral register for Scottish Parliament elections. A person has to live in a ward to vote in council elections. There is a direct connection between people’s right to vote and what happens as a consequence of their vote. I cannot follow the argument that people—goodness knows how to define them—who say that they are Scottish but will perhaps never return to Scotland, or have no intention of doing so, should have a vote on the future of this nation and whether or not it is free and independent. That cannot be democratically right in principle alone, if one follows the logic of the argument. Putting that argument to one side, it seems that Elaine Murray wants to extend the franchise, but I cannot for the life of me understand—others have said the same—why she opposes 16 and 17-year-olds having the vote in the country to which they are committed. Neither can I understand why Mr McLetchie has unfortunately introduced the idea of immigrants who take the trouble to put themselves on the electoral roll. That does not just happen—people have to make sure that they sign the form every year to ensure that they have their vote. I would say to Mr Wallace, with whom I have every sympathy, that he has two years to come back to Scotland, put himself on the electoral roll and vote for independence. That would be the cure for him.

I have finished.

When I gave evidence to the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee about how we might change our procedures in the Parliament, I posited cross-committee subject debates without a motion to allow interaction between committee members on evidence that they had received. The debate comes pretty close to that and I welcome it. I will focus on evidence that my colleague Joan McAlpine referred to about looked-after children finding themselves disproportionately in the criminal justice system. I will exclude from that the issue of children’s panels. Parliament has heard that 28 per cent of the prison population indicated that they had been in care during their upbringing. Of those, a fifth had been in care at the age of 16. Further statistics show that three quarters of children who are in residential care by their 16th birthday will have a criminal conviction by the age of 22. Further, 45 per cent—almost half—of all young people who are in young offenders institutions have been in residential care at some point in their lives. It is not rocket science to see that we are not sorting the situation out to any degree. That was brought home to me when the Justice Committee split into three groups to look into the way in which we deal with women offenders. Two colleagues and I went to the 218 project in Glasgow. That project is for women who have been in and out of Cornton Vale and who have had alcohol rather than drug problems, which was quite surprising. As they spoke to us, it turned out that many of them had been in care and that many of their children were in care. There was a vicious cycle of people who had been in care as children going to prison and then their children going into care. How do we start to sort that out? I do not know; it is not simple. However, if 513 children who are defined as looked after left care in 2010, it does not take a lot to work out how many of those will end up in the criminal justice system if we do not do anything. Kevin Stewart referred to a project in his constituency. In the Borders, we have Peebles Youth Trust. When it is seen that a child in primary 6 in a Peebles high school feeder school is beginning to become disconnected, the trust is invited in before the child gets into trouble. The trust has 22 mentors, who are each allocated to a child, their family or carer and their siblings, and who work alongside those families and the child’s teachers. The cost of that project is £30,000, which is less than the cost of keeping one prisoner in Cornton Vale or anywhere else for a year. It is money well and successfully spent. That is an example of early intervention on the ground and I am sure that other colleagues have examples from their constituencies. I note that the Government has responded to the Scottish Children’s Reporter Administration report and set up a new centre for excellence for looked-after children, to which someone has referred already. I do not want to hit things, but I do not know anything about the place. I hope that it will work seriously with academics, criminologists and people in the criminal justice system, and speak to the women from the 218 project whom we met. We need to do practical things. We do not need more guidance, rules or legislation. We need practical things such as that wee project in the Borders or other, perhaps better, projects that other members can talk about. We need to see where we can intervene and break the cycle so that we are not looking at 45 per cent of the children who are in care getting criminal convictions by the time they are in their early 20s.

I advise the member also to consider alcohol abuse. That, not drug abuse, turned out to be the main problem of women who were in the 218 project.

The debate was proposed so that we could come forward with ideas. Members around the chamber have mentioned programmes that are working in their constituencies and regions. The committee should consider holding a symposium, conference or round-table discussion—members can call it what they like. Members can be asked for examples from their areas and constituencies and people can be asked to come along who are involved in early intervention with their budgets and it can be seen whether that works. I do not think that that has been done. The Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations could get involved. That is a practical example. I have heard many very good examples. People should be got together to find out what works and to come up with practical solutions.

Further to that evidence from Lord Hamilton to the Justice Committee, will the First Minister confirm that the Lord President will also consider the costs of travel and practicalities for witnesses, police and sheriffs of any redesign of access to justice, particularly in rural areas such as Peebles?

Will the member take an intervention?

Notwithstanding the somewhat bumpy ride that the bill has had, I am glad that it has been given full consideration at all stages in committee and the Parliament and has now come to stage 3. I am glad that the emergency legislation process was abandoned because, as I made clear at the time, that was not the proper approach. James Kelly mentioned the Lord Advocate coming to give evidence to the Justice Committee. I remind him that witnesses who give evidence to the committee are there with the committee’s agreement, so he must have agreed to the Lord Advocate’s coming. Nothing was sprung on Mr Kelly. I remind him that, at stage 2, although the Government lodged several amendments, Labour did not lodge a single one.

No—I have only four minutes. I commend Patrick Harvie and David McLetchie for participating in the dialogue, notwithstanding their views on the bill. They did not simply take a stand right from the start. James Kelly rose— I remind members that this is a bill of two halves. Let us have less hysteria and hype and more matter-of-fact statements. The word “sectarian” is not mentioned in the bill; instead, it talks about “offensive behaviour”, which could relate to all manner of things, including colour, race, nationality and sexual orientation.

In fairness, I will let James Kelly in, because he wanted to clarify an issue and I did not take his intervention.

I take it from that that you accept that the Labour Party lodged no amendments at stage 2, which is my point. Labour did not even argue the case by lodging amendments. The bill is not simply about offensive behaviour—it must be behaviour that expresses hatred and is threatening to people, or behaviour that a reasonable person would consider offensive. We had a lot of debate about the term “reasonable person”, but the reasonable person test is well established in Scots law. Members have asked for specifics, but in law we must always look at the facts and circumstances of any incident. I might use a word that is not offensive because of the manner in which I deliver it, but in other circumstances it could be offensive and an incitement to hatred. That is a perfectly practical way of looking at the situation.

There must be an incitement to public disorder and the reasonable person test must be met. There are many cases in law that deal with that. As we heard in evidence, breach of the peace is not a satisfactory way of dealing with the issue, because the behaviour always has to be in public. We had a big debate about including people who are travelling to and from football matches. At the beginning of the process, I was not sure that I supported that provision but, as the evidence came in, we found that most of the problems take place not in stadiums, which are well policed and where there are stewards, but outside stadiums and on the way to a match. Some people have no intention of going to a match and simply use the colours that they wear as a means of causing public disturbance. That was the evidence from the police. They said that they find it hard to deal with the issue. We must always remember that the police, the prosecution service and the vast majority of the public support the measures. I have taken some interventions, so I hope that I will get an extra minute, because I want to refer briefly to the threatening communications offence, which we keep missing out. It is important that the term “material” means more than just material on the internet—it includes paper, parcels, blogs, images and anything like that. The test is higher than that for the other offence, because there must be an incitement “to carry out a seriously violent act”. The Government did not have to put a freedom of expression test in the bill, but it did so. People should take comfort from that that satire and genuine debate—even strident debate—will not be suppressed, because they do not seek to incite a seriously violent act. Patrick Harvie has put forward a good argument for a review. At stage 2, proposals were introduced for such a review to be carried out at least two years hence, as well as for a report to Parliament and a consultation. That is important, because these are uncharted waters. At the end of the day, I support David McLetchie’s view that the great disappointment is that only now are the SPL and the SFA getting together to discuss an independent sanctions regime. If only such a regime had been in place beforehand. No one is better placed to police football matches than the clubs, the SFA and the SPL themselves. Perhaps this legislation will not need to be used if those organisations get on and do the job themselves.

Will the member take an intervention?

6. To ask the First Minister how many cases the Scottish Government considers might be affected retrospectively by the Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Act 2011. (S4F-00313)

I thank the First Minister for that reply, but does he consider that the enactment of the double jeopardy legislation, along with the potential abolition of corroboration, which Lord Carloway has recommended, raises concerns that the interaction of those two measures might make prosecutors and, indeed, the police less rigorous in gathering evidence for trial? To put it bluntly, will that give the Crown Office a second go if it gets it wrong in the first place? If the First Minister shares my concerns, will he give the Parliament an assurance that we will be given time to consider that implication?

In one of the responses to the review, one party said: “It would be very dangerous to remove corroboration for rape and sexual offences since” that “would result in a greater emphasis on witness testimony and would add further trauma for victims.” Therefore, there is a downside to not having corroboration in such cases. If the member will forgive me for saying so, it is quite simplistic to say that removing corroboration would make such cases easier to prosecute.

For the avoidance of doubt, Lord Carloway made it plain to the Justice Committee that the report was not unanimous. He had a review group, but the report was his. It is important to put that on the record, as there are many issues to be addressed. I agree very much with Mr McLetchie that what has been proposed would have a substantive impact on Scots practice and procedure—I do not know whether that will do his street cred any harm. One of my concerns is therefore that the motion refers to “an early opportunity to legislate”. I want us to take a great deal of time not just over the issues that Lord Carloway considered but over the issues that he did not consider—the wider remit, which I may have time to touch on in passing. For example, at First Minister’s question time today, I raised the issue of the cumulative impact of double jeopardy and the possibility of there being no necessity for corroboration. We are talking about major changes. I, too, intend to focus on corroboration, but I also want to touch on the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission and its independence from the High Court sitting as a court of appeal. I say to the cabinet secretary that I think that this will turn into a legal seminar, unfortunately. Lord Carloway gave the definition of corroboration at this week’s meeting of the Justice Committee, and it can be found at column 529 of the Official Report of the meeting. I will not go into that, but I say to Claudia Beamish that I have concerns. I think that she was beginning to go along the lines of saying that we might have no corroboration in certain kinds of cases. Lord Carloway’s view is that we should just get rid of corroboration in total. That is why we have to consider matters carefully. Claudia Beamish rose— Let me make progress, as I am going to deal with sexual offences cases. I want to raise concerns that have been raised by others who submitted responses on corroboration to the review, which I do not have answers to. That is why we must take our time. For example, it was said that “Abolition would place the prosecution in a very difficult position, potentially requiring the assessment of the likelihood of prosecution solely on the basis of the complainer’s evidence. Fiscals would be forced to undertake a quality control exercise and assessing credibility and reliability is very difficult in practice.” Another argument was that “If corroboration were abolished, but the current standard of proof in criminal cases, beyond reasonable doubt, was retained, there could be difficulty in establishing sufficiency of evidence.” One comment was that “The police find corroboration a useful tool in court preparation and in determining whether to move someone from suspect status to accused, i.e. where corroboration exists ‘suspect’ can be moved to ‘accused’.” Another was that “The purpose of corroboration is to protect vulnerable people from evidence obtained from an unreasonable source being used against them. For example where a person declines legal advice and then makes a confession, this could be sufficient to convict in the absence of corroboration.” Sexual offences and rape have been addressed. I have quoted the argument that “It would be very dangerous to remove corroboration for rape and sexual offences since” that might “result in a greater emphasis on witness testimony and would add further trauma for victims.” In those circumstances, the defence might have a right to challenge more robustly the credibility of the main witness—that is, the alleged victim—and that would not be in their interests; indeed, it might deter people from coming forward. There can be unintended consequences with the best will in the world. It was argued that “Abolishing corroboration would require every allegation of rape made by a believable complainer to go to trial and this would be unworkable in practice.” Finally, it was argued that “There is concern that abolition of corroboration would result in a hierarchy of rape complainers”. The distress and trauma of some rape complainers can be very obvious, but others deal with the matter in a different way. I have concerns that their credibility would be put to the test and challenged. I have quoted those arguments, as there are questions that I do not know the answers to. However, serious issues are involved. On the role of the SCCRC, when I read the recommendation that the High Court apply a double test—in which any referral from the SCCRC would be tested on whether there had been a miscarriage or whether it was in the interests of justice to come to a conclusion on the matter—I was pleased and thought, “That’s great. That’s sorted that out.” Of course it has not sorted anything out. On referrals and consideration of appeals, Lord Carloway’s report says: “it may be more appropriate for the Court to be able to bring matters to a conclusion in a reference by considering, in whatever order it deems appropriate in the particular case, but after a final hearing, whether: (a) there has been a miscarriage of justice in the trial process; and (b) it is also in the interests of justice that the appeal be allowed.” In other words, the individual might have their case referred to the High Court by the SCCRC and, although the High Court might hear the appeal and agree that there might very well have been a material miscarriage of justice, it might simply refuse the appeal on the grounds that it was not in the interests of justice to allow it. When I tested this argument with Lord Carloway, he cited two examples in which that might happen. First, between the SCCRC’s report and the referral, more evidence that was not available to the commission might come to light and accordingly the appeal could be refused. Secondly, after the SCCRC referred the case, the man or woman might confess. In such cases, of course, the High Court can allow the appeal and then seek a retrial. What concerned me was that, when I pursued the matter further and asked whether those were all the categories in which the High Court might accept a material miscarriage of justice but refuse an appeal, Lord Carloway said: “I am not trying to avoid directly answering your question, but I would not like to close the category of cases in which the interests of justice test might apply. That is part of the problem that we currently have. We are not really quite sure what the test ought to be, which is why I suggest that the High Court provide guidelines on the subject.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 29 November 2011; c 554.] The suggestion, then, is that the High Court provides itself with guidelines on what might be in the interests of justice even though we, the Parliament, have appointed a Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission to look at cases and decide whether there has been a miscarriage of justice and whether it is in the interests of justice to make a referral. It might seem like a technical issue, but it will certainly not be technical to those who have succeeded in having their appeal remitted only for the High Court to say, “It’s not in the interests of justice that we grant it.” These are substantial issues and I say to the cabinet secretary that, although getting rid of corroboration might have seemed like a good idea, it might have unintended consequences and impact on majority and not proven verdicts, on the SCCRC’s role and on rape, trafficking and other sexual offences. This Parliament, not just the Justice Committee, and the wider Scottish constituency must take time to consider the issue seriously before we legislate at all on this matter.

I do not want to focus only on rape and sexual offences, but we must deal with that particular issue. It might be counterproductive to abolish the corroboration requirement, because the credibility of a witness might be tackled more robustly by the defending counsel. A higher rateable value might be placed on a witness who looks distraught in the witness box, as opposed to someone who might appear to be composed but is, in fact, traumatised. I am concerned that there may be unintended consequences if we wish to succeed in such prosecutions by not requiring corroboration. Indeed, it might make things worse. Will James Kelly give that some consideration?

On the issues that are tangential and fundamental—I cannot remember the third one—will the cabinet secretary give us an indication of what they would be?

I, too, congratulate Neil Findlay on securing this evening’s debate. I begin by saying to Murdo Fraser that it is pretty costly to store nuclear material over centuries. Indeed, we just have to think of Chernobyl to realise the costs that nuclear power can have. I do not think that green energy is so expensive in comparison with that. In any event, green energy should be mixed, to include hydro power and deep-sea turbines, which have not been mentioned. I also agree that we need better insulation. I want to focus on commercial developments across the Borders, and particularly those that are already in train. In 2010-11, there are 11 applications for 156 turbines, and they are much bigger than those at Sutra. When the wind farm at Sutra went up many years ago, it was a bit of a tourist attraction, but there was some naivety about it because it was on its own. Since then, there has been an extraordinary and unwanted proliferation of wind farms across the Borders. By the way, the term “wind farm” is a misnomer. These are industrial developments in the countryside. The hills are gouged out to make tracks where there were none and great turbines are taken up our lanes and through our villages. Many years ago—in 2003, I think—I got involved in the campaign at Walkerburn to prevent turbines along the southern upland way. I think that Elaine Murray mentioned that. They were going to be about 9 feet away. I went up the southern upland way—I have to admit that I was in a four-wheel drive vehicle; I did not walk all the way up the hill, although I did walk a little bit. They were to be very large turbines. It is now eight years down the road and there have been modifications from the developers, but the battle has not yet been won. What often happens is that a community has a degree of success, the developer modifies the plans, and the battle goes on and on, wearing down the community. A community has to be pretty tough to deal with that. It is not just about location or size—it is, as other members have said, about the cumulative impact. There have been easy pickings in certain areas, and the fault has been with local authorities, which were naive in the beginning. It took the communities to point out what was happening beneath their feet. I have concerns about what is called community benefit, as it often seems to amount somewhat to a bribe from developers. A community benefit may benefit one community while disbenefiting others. I have seen communities divided, where one community is quite happy to have the turbines because they are getting a new community hall or a road built, while another community is looking at that happening and does not get anything except having its landscape defaced. Defacing the landscape is a terribly important issue. I have learned the new phrase “landscape signature”, and one can see no better example of that than at Walkerburn. When one looks at the shape of the hills beyond, one can see a real landscape signature, which was going to have a string of turbines against it. I am not letting the Government completely off the hook, but the first responsibility for smaller developments lies with the local authority, which needs to get it right and react responsibly to the community.

Before John Lamont overreaches himself in his intervention I will point out that, at a certain level of megawatts, the first responsibility is with the local authority. Quite often, the problem is that developers have kept the development at that level and then built other ones on top—I think that the metaphor is “a string of pearls”. They put in place a lot of small developments, thereby avoiding that particular process.

I do not want to get party political—I think that the issue deserves better.

I, too, stand in support of public sector workers, whether they are out on strike today or otherwise. As someone remarked, pension provision is a contract between employee and employer. A private pension is a contract with the provider; in the case of the public sector, the contract is with the state. As with every contract, it is bilateral and in breaking the contract unilaterally, the state has breached that contract. This is not the first time that it has done it—it does it all the time with the state pension. It is also the case that, in considering employment, an employee will look at an entire package including salary, holiday leave and pension provision. In some cases, they will accept a salary that is less because they know that they will have a good pension in the future. So, the breach of that contract has ramifications.

Let me make some progress. Christina McKelvie was right to say that most of the people who are suffering in this are women and that women in part-time jobs will be the worst hit. Let us compare that disgusting situation with the richness of bankers such as Sir Fred Goodwin, who gets close to £350,000 per annum in pension. That is after a cut—originally, he had £500,000 per annum. Who was in power when the bankers’ profligacy and gambling with our money led us to this precipice? Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling. When Sir Fred Goodwin’s pension claim was reduced from £500,000 to £350,000 per annum, Alistair Darling said: “I’m very glad that RBS have now resolved the matter with Sir Fred Goodwin. I think that Sir Fred, in handing back part of his pension, is doing the right thing.” Well, what a cut—£500,000 to £350,000 per annum. Was that the right thing? I think not. The Labour Government also failed to impose pension and bonus limits on senior bankers while ordinary people, out in the streets today, bailed those bankers out with their taxes to the tune of some £65 billion. We own the Royal Bank of Scotland almost lock, stock and barrel; yet, there was only a brief attempt at Westminster made by Ann Clwyd—a worthy attempt by a back bencher—to introduce a Bankers’ Pensions (Limits) Bill. It seems to me that the only pensions that are being limited are those of low-waged public sector workers. In 2009, Alistair Darling also imposed a two-year pay freeze and a £1 billion-a-year raid on the pension funds. By emptying the Opposition benches today, Labour members are demonstrating gross hypocrisy. Nor is it a choice between public and private sector. Westminster kens weel how to divide and rule. As Margaret Burgess rightly said, if public sector workers do not have money in their pockets, the private sector suffers as well. Let us look at the heading in The Scotsman today: “Strike-hit Britain faces permanent austerity”. Bankrupt Britain is not a choice for Scotland—Scotland is not bankrupt. Norway discovered oil and gas around the same time as Scotland, 40 years ago. Norway’s oil fund is currently around $15 billion and is projected to grow by 36 per cent in the next three years. The Scottish oil fund—the UK oil fund—is nil, zilch, zero. Those are two nations: one independent, one tied to a failed union and a UK that told the Scots they were too poor, greedy and incompetent to run their own affairs.

We need no lessons from Mary Scanlon or Westminster—certainly not from the Tories. Those who are fighting for justice and fairness need to look beyond Westminster for that. An independent Scotland would have the resources and the political will for social justice in pay and pensions for all of its people. That is the choice for Scotland’s people, and it is one that they will have in the referendum.

I congratulate Kevin Stewart on securing this debate celebrating national identity. The increase in the celebration of St Andrew’s day is undoubtedly due in part to this Parliament reconvening some 12 years ago, and not least to Dennis Canavan’s act—the St Andrew’s Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Act 2007—which raised the profile of St Andrew’s day, although not to anywhere near the status of St Patrick’s day, as has been noted, or of Burns night. Google displayed the saltire on its home page this time last year, but it is not doing so today. I suggest that members encourage Google to display the saltire at this time next year, because that would be a huge advertisement for Scotland. St Andrew gave us the saltire, and flags are at the beating heart of a nation. It was in 832 AD at Athelstaneford that the birth of the saltire of Scotland came about. The saltire was also used on the nation’s coinage when it was introduced by King David I in the 13th century. It has an ancient and honourable lineage. On this St Andrew’s day in our capital city, however, there is no St Andrew’s flag, no saltire, in prominent position on the castle. Why not? There is a false argument that the castle is an Army garrison; it is not. It ceased to be a garrison in 1920, and the Army is now there largely in a ceremonial capacity. If one were looking for a conspiracy, one might say that that argument provides a fig leaf for the supremacy of the union flag. Neither the Ministry of Defence nor Historic Scotland owns the castle. Under the terms of the Scotland Act 1998, the Government of Scotland owns it. Ministers own it. Historic Scotland is simply a custodian, and the Army is a tenant. I suggest that it is time that we changed the terms of that tenancy. I am thankful that Historic Scotland saw the light and refused to have the Olympic rings erected on the castle ramparts, but I have another suggestion. Why do we not project a large saltire on the ramparts of the castle, just for the time being? Perhaps in these dark times, as we watch the dying throes of UK plc, it might inspire those who are on strike for fairness for pensions to recognise that the future lies not in Westminster, with its gloom, falling productivity and increased unemployment, taxes, VAT, pension contributions and fuel duty and that that is not the only choice. Independence, under the St Andrew’s flag of Scotland, the saltire, is another choice, and they and later generations can have a just and equitable future. Raising that vision would be the rallying call that we need—the flag of St Andrew over a capital city, not just today, but every day.

Yes!

I thank the minister for mentioning Scottish Borders Council, which held the holiday on Monday. I also point out that it flies the saltire every day of the week, every week of the year.

I am glad that you reminded a former lawyer of that, Presiding Officer. I will tell the story of Alex McCue of Galashiels, who is in the public gallery. These are his words. “In 1956 I was sent out to Australia as a Government official to take part in the Atomic tests in Australia. On 11th October 1957 a number of personnel and myself were flown up to Maralinga for a day trip to witness one of the detonations code named Kite. This was an airburst dropped from a Valiant aircraft and detonated at 150 metres. We watched from the airfield about 14 miles from ground zero. A month or so later, I was posted up to Maralinga to work in the Radio Chemical Department in the Village about 20 miles from ground zero and 14 miles from the airfield. This operation was called operation Antler and I was involved in 4 explosions. I worked in the Radio Chemical building for the scientists to calculate the dirtiness of the bomb. When an explosion took place and the fire ball had died down you get the familiar mushroom cloud with all the muck and rubbish from the ground (sand, rocks, earth) being sucked up. This caused the fallout. Rockets with containers are fired through the cloud and Canberra bombers with wing tip containers fly through the cloud to pick up samples of the fallout debris. These are then taken to the Radio Chemical building where the boffins broke them down into their elements and sent them into us to calculate their half-life. This determines the dirtiness of the bomb—for instance Strontium 90 has a half-life of 28 years. That is until it decays. We used to go to laboratories soon after the explosion and we always knew when the canisters came into the building because the Geiger counters used to go crazy. One of these tests, Taranaki, was the biggest—about the size of the Nagasaki bomb. This was a balloon explosion at 300m at night. We were invited up to the forward area (about 5 miles from ground zero). They said it was to relieve boredom. We assembled in rows and our instructions were to turn our backs from ground zero and on the counts from the loud speakers of minus 20 we had to shut our eyes and put our hands up to our eyes until plus 10 when we could turn around and open our eyes. The flash was quite bright to say the least. Even with our eyes shut and hands in front of them it was like a very bright sunny day and we could see the bones in our hands like an x-ray. When we turned around the fire ball was just forming and it was like a giant sunset but up in the air. I think the word awesome is not an exaggeration. What we did not know at the time was that the tests were not just to show the world we were still a world power but to test its effects on personnel. Personnel called the Commonwealth Indoctrination Force stood just a mile from Ground Zero. They were mainly middle ranking officers with good career prospects who would be sent back to their regiments as visible proof that there is life after a nuclear attack and conventional warfare could continue. In fact of those taking part in the exercises in the forward area 30% have died, mostly in their 50s. Another interesting fact was that after the Canberras landed after flying through the cloud they were—should we say—humming so they had to be decontaminated. The aircraft taxied into a roped off area and the contamination squad went over to them with buckets and mops and washed them down. It was very hot so they usually only had shorts and shoes. A few years ago I was at the AGM of the Nuclear Test Veterans Association and was talking to someone who had known some of them. He told me they were all dead.” I ask members to bear in mind the fact that many of those men were conscripts. As has been said, the rates of cancer, early death and infertility are all disproportionate in that group and extend through the generations. Members should also bear in mind the fact that some 30 Scottish claimants who would automatically qualify for compensation and pensions under the US and New Zealand schemes do not qualify here. The MOD denies liability and, even if it were liable, claims are time barred. Rule Britannia.

I refer the First Minister to Lord Carloway’s report, which was published today. In paragraph 32 of the executive summary, Lord Carloway recommends that the High Court should not be able to refuse a referral from the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission, as it can currently do under the Criminal Procedure (Legal Assistance, Detention and Appeals) (Scotland) Act 2010. He recommends that that provision should be repealed. Is the First Minister minded to accept that recommendation?

Does John Lamont accept that all the evidence to the Justice Committee was to the effect that short-term prison sentences do not work and that recidis—recidivsism—I will say that again: that reoffending takes place in nearly three quarters of people who have been out for less than two years? Short-term sentences really do not work, and the Conservatives should get rid of their mantra once and for all.

I do not like to bandy statistics about, but I inform John Lamont that 74 per cent of the public said that local crime had stayed the same or that the situation had improved in 2010-11. That does not gel with the facts that Mr Lamont cited. I might have time to talk about rehabilitation in due course. The cabinet secretary has reprised many of the good-news stories on recorded crime, on front-line police officers and so on. The one thing that he did not touch on, which everyone welcomes, is the £42 million that has been committed to cashback for communities, much of which has gone to youth activities. Communities apply for the money and benefits are brought in; that creates a virtuous circle in which crime is shown to pay, but to pay back into communities.

If the member has a difficulty with the way in which the programme operates, she should take it up with the Cabinet Secretary for Justice. As far as I am aware, the distribution is done in a just and fair way, with applications being made throughout Scotland and the money going to local projects, depending on the status and quality of the application. An end to automatic early release was a good move. To pick up on one of the only things that Labour has come up with, which is mandatory sentences—

Let me get on for a moment, please. Mandatory sentences for carrying a knife was a completely daft idea that would have been fraught with problems. It is not just me who has said that; many others have said exactly the same. In particular, Tom Harris, the Labour member of Parliament who is standing against Ms Lamont for Scottish Labour leader, said: “We didn’t have a vision. Our vision could be summed up as send everyone who carries a knife to jail. That’s not a vision. It’s not even much of a policy.” John Lamont said: “It would be churlish not to point out the positives in these figures, although before the SNP pat themselves on the back we note that grave offences like non-sexual crimes of violence, rape and attempted rape and crimes of dishonesty such as housebreaking have all increased.” However, Ken Clarke then said: “Anybody who is guilty of serious knife crime will go to prison but I’m not in favour of absolute rules. I’m in favour of actually allowing judges to see how nasty the offender is, see what the offence was, see what the best way of protecting the public from him is.” Hugh Henry, too, is not in favour of mandatory sentencing, so I hope that Labour members will drop that stupid and counterproductive idea, even though it is the only one that they seem to have come up with. On the other issues that are in the pipeline, I am prepared to say that the anti-sectarian bill that is before the Justice Committee needs to be improved, but it is a step in the right direction. The reform of police and fire services will, in time, save money. Are eight human resources departments and procurement departments necessary for Scotland, which only has 5 million people? A victims’ rights bill and paying attention to the victims of crime is also very important to the balance in society. There is a stench of hypocrisy now around minimum unit pricing. Before the election, minimum unit pricing was opposed for purely political reasons in the face of all the evidence to the Health and Sport Committee from all the health professionals, and from all the criminal justice and enforcement professionals, that it would have a major impact on the health and criminal justice budgets. We just need to think about violence and domestic violence, which Ms Lamont has been very good at debating and pursuing in the Parliament. That violence would be greatly reduced if we did something about getting rid of cheap alcohol—firewater—which just makes people go crazy and leaves them with no regard for their partners or themselves.

I say to Mr Lamont that the last thing we need is more prisons. They do not work. Building prisons will just make things worse for people. Of course we must protect society, but we have to do more rehabilitation and throughcare. I agree with the Tory amendment on that, but it is the only bit of the amendment that I agree with.

I am delighted to say that the lines were all provided by the Labour Party’s manifesto.

I open the debate as convener, and accordingly my contribution will be apolitical. I offer my gratitude to my deputy convener, who for perfectly valid reasons wishes to be freed from those apolitical shackles, thus consigning me to summing up. That is worse for members, as they will have to listen to me for a tight 14 minutes and possibly another 10. I got my revenge and my sympathies in first. On behalf of the Justice Committee, I thank the Minister for Community Safety and Legal Affairs and the Lord Advocate for their responses to our report, and the Lord Advocate for providing the committee with his draft guidelines, which I think the committee and the wider public found—and will find—helpful. It is unusual to find ourselves debating a committee report on a bill when stage 1 is long over. However, it is appropriate that we have been given chamber time, because the bill has aroused a lot of interest in the wider world, and the issues that the committee uncovered deserve a wider airing. Further to that, the debate underlines the significant role of committees in holding the Government to account. The bill was introduced in June. It is a response to the events of the previous football season both on and off the pitch. There were a number of incidents, ranging from the small to the sinister. The latter included the sending of suspect packages to particular individuals, apparently for no reason other than their faith background or footballing allegiance. We might disagree on the best approach in legal and policy terms to deal with the problem, but we all agree that that type of behaviour is utterly unacceptable and needs to be tackled. The events of the previous season have tended to be labelled as part of Scotland’s sectarian problem. It may be news to some, but the word “sectarian” is not to be found in the bill. Each of us probably thinks that we know what it means, but it emerged in the evidence that there is no one clear definition. As the evidence from Nil By Mouth put it, sectarian is a word that “transcends its dictionary meaning” in Scotland. Nevertheless, it is clear that the bill’s intention is to tackle sectarianism along with other types of unacceptable behaviour. The committee unanimously accepts that there is a continuing sectarian problem in Scotland, and that it is not found only at football matches. We agree with the Scottish Government that no one piece of legislation will solve the problem. I turn now to procedure and evidence. Members will recall that the Government’s original plan was to deal with the bill by the summer recess through the emergency procedure, to have it ready in time for the new football season. As members know, as convener I expressed my disagreement with that, as did others. However, in the very limited time that the Justice Committee had in June, we undertook to hear evidence from the police, legal experts, representatives from football and civic society, and the Government. There was a mixture of views about the merits of the bill and about the appropriateness of the use of the accelerated procedure. Shortly afterwards, the First Minister announced that he was minded to propose a lengthier timetable for consideration if Parliament agreed to the bill’s general principles at stage 1, which duly came to pass. It may be that the committee’s evidence sessions contributed to that change of heart—I certainly hope so. In any event, I think that of all the new committees, we hit the ground running—and we were the better committee for it. As convener, I am glad that the committee had the opportunity for more extended consideration of the bill. There can be circumstances in which it is necessary, on balance, to expedite procedures on grounds of urgency, but in general, legislation benefits from robust, measured and careful scrutiny. It is no secret that there are differences of opinion—to put it mildly—between committee members on the bill. However, if Parliament agrees to it we will end up with a better and stronger act because of the longer time that we have taken over it. I thank committee members for dealing with one another in committee in a civilised and collective manner, despite their differences. I am sure that that will continue and will be reflected in the tenor of the debate. The committee heard from 33 individuals or organisations that gave evidence in person. We also received 83 formal written submissions on the bill as well as letters and e-mails from the public. I thank all those who provided evidence, particularly those who gave evidence at extremely short notice in June. Four committee members—myself included—attended an old firm match at Ibrox in September. That was extremely instructive, especially for those of us—I am one—who had not hitherto rated ourselves as aficionados of the beautiful game. We did not simply attend the match, which we hardly watched; we spent time with the police, stewards and supporters before and after the game to get a rounded picture of the reality of an old firm encounter and the preparations involved in it. I express my thanks to all who facilitated our visit. I turn to the content of the bill, which is a bill of two halves—there end the footballing allusions—that creates two new and distinct offences. That fact, too, is often overlooked. One offence relates to offensive behaviour at football; the other relates to threatening communications. The more complex aspects of the bill are found in some of the details of those two new offences. The chamber is well aware that the committee divided on the key question whether the new offences were necessary. A majority of members accept that we need a new law to address offensive behaviour at football that is not based on the “fear and alarm” formulation found in the current law. The majority likewise accept that there may be shortcomings that prevent effective prosecutions for some threatening communications. The majority also note what the Lord Advocate referred to as the “transformative effect” that legislation can sometimes have in changing attitudes towards what is and is not socially acceptable—we have the example of the ban on smoking in public places. A minority in the committee disagree, doubtful that the case for new criminal laws has been made, and think instead that the existing laws should be more rigorously applied. We will hear both sides of the argument this afternoon. As convener, I will focus on the many areas in which the committee speaks with one voice. Much of this relates to the detail of the two offences. Whatever committee members’ overall views, I hope that we can at least agree that there is continuing potential to test the robustness of the bill at the amending stages, which is a task for all of us, including the chamber at stage 3. The first offence—I will call it the football offence for shorthand—requires three elements to be proven: first, that there is offensive behaviour; secondly, that that behaviour occurs “in relation to a regulated football match”; and, thirdly, that the behaviour is likely to provoke public disorder. I stress that all three elements must be present.

I thank Margo MacDonald for that intervention and direct her to the Lord Advocate’s guidelines, which address such details in particular. I will deal with the issue later in my speech if I have time; if not, I will address it in my summing up. The committee had some queries about the drafting. There is more on that in our report and I will use what time I have to focus on just two points. The first of those is the meaning of “offensive behaviour”. The definition that is used in the bill is wide. It is not restricted simply to behaviour with a sectarian element—something that, as I have said, has been missed in the hubris surrounding the bill so far—as it includes expressions of racist or homophobic hatred, for instance. Committee members generally accept that approach. One area in which we had concerns relates to the definition of offensive behaviour as including “other behaviour that a reasonable person would be likely to consider offensive.” The catch-all nature of that provision concerned some witnesses, including the Law Society of Scotland and the Scottish Human Rights Commission. The Scottish Government has made the point that the reference to a “reasonable person”, which has a definitional track record in existing case law, ought to prevent the provision from being misapplied. Nonetheless, I expect some further discussion of the issue at stage 2. The second of the three elements—that the behaviour must be “in relation to a regulated football match”— relates, broadly speaking, to a match involving the national team, a match involving teams in the Scottish Premier League or the Scottish Football League, or to cup matches involving those teams. I point out that the bill gives a wider meaning than we might expect. For example, offensive behaviour in and around a football match may also be caught, but so is offensive behaviour when people are travelling to a match, including breaks—even overnight breaks—on the way there. People do not have to make it to the match, or to have intended to get there, to be caught by the bill.

Can I make some progress? I think that what Mr Henry wants to ask me about is dealt with in the Lord Advocate’s guidelines, which give examples of how one might evidence the offence.

Does Mr Henry still wish to intervene?

I was wise to ask Mr Henry to look at the Lord Advocate’s guidelines because they deal with that point. I will discuss televised matches and matches shown in public houses. Behaviour in the vicinity of a televised match—unless the TV is in the person’s home—is also caught within the definition. If I have time and nobody else addresses it, I will give examples in my closing speech. If Mr Henry has read the Lord Advocate’s guidelines, he will know that they addresses his concern on that. The committee fully accepts the evidence that some of the worst behaviour from a very small number of people occurs when they are on the way to a match, often little concerned about whether they get there. We also recognise that there can be a problem with fans’ behaviour while they watch a match in a pub. Nonetheless, we found the wording to be wide ranging and found ourselves discussing some hypothetical examples and whether the bill would cover them. I do not have time to cover those, so I ask members to have a good look at the Lord Advocate’s guidelines. I know that they are in draft and that there are concerns with them—the committee would like some of their content to be in the bill, where appropriate—but examining them would assist members. I will address the second offence—threatening communications—which I do not want to miss out, as many have done. It has been mostly overlooked by the media in particular and, thus, the public. I am tempted to refer to it as the internet offence, as that is how it has largely been seen. However, it is important to stress that communication means practically all forms of communication, with the important exception of direct speech. There are two circumstances in which the crime can be committed. One—condition A—is where a communication is made that “contains or implies a threat … to carry out a seriously violent act” of a sort that would cause a reasonable person fear or alarm. That is a high test. The other circumstance—condition B—is where the person makes a threatening communication with the intent of stirring up religious hatred. Members should note that football has nothing to do with that offence. The Lord Advocate’s guidelines give examples that show how freedom of speech still exists. The Government is considering introducing a freedom of speech section into the bill. Monitoring what happens online, identifying the culprit, assembling the evidence and enforcing the law would be a challenge. That is potentially a Herculean task, particularly when one takes into account the bill’s extraterritorial aspects. For that reason among others, I welcome the Government’s acceptance of the committee’s recommendation that the bill should contain a review provision to enable its effectiveness to be evaluated in the future. Football is Scotland’s national game, with many thousands of passionate followers. Songs, chants and banners are part of the theatre of football. Fans are integral to that excitement and drama. I do not think that any members want the game to be conducted in what one witness described as “a Mary Poppins atmosphere”, so sanitised as to be sterile of emotion or passion. Heaven forfend. Indeed, the committee remarks in its report that the majority of fans keep firmly on the side of passionate support, not hateful provocation that is often detached from the match itself. A minority let the side down. However, the fans have perhaps been let down by the football authorities, which have failed to provide a clear lead. Where necessary, such a lead should include taking sanctions—such as a points deduction—against clubs whose fans behave unacceptably. The committee has been concerned about a lack of urgency on the part of the Scottish Football Association and SPL in determining which takes the lead disciplinary role. I have no doubt that members will want to develop that point. We all agree that the forces of law enforcement have a key role to play in ridding our game of bigotry, but the clubs and the football authorities most certainly also have such a role. A greater sense of urgency needs to be instilled. The committee does not believe that the SFA and the SPL have made that commitment yet. On that consensual point and within my allocated time—despite interventions—I will move the motion. I look forward to a stimulating, informed and civilised debate. I move, That the Parliament notes the Justice Committee’s 1st Report, 2011 (Session 4): Report on the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 (SP Paper 21).

Will the member give way?

Will the member take my intervention?

I wanted to come in when David McLetchie quoted the Lord Advocate’s draft guidelines by referring to “Songs/lyrics in support of terrorist organisations ... Songs/lyrics which glorifies or celebrates events involving the loss of life or serious injury”. What he did not go on to say was that “It should be noted that in order for a criminal offence to be committed under this offence, in addition to proof that the song/lyrics are threatening or offensive, it must be proved that the conduct was likely to incite public disorder.”

Will the member take an intervention now?

Mr Findlay should at least give me credit—I think that I was the first person to say publicly that the bill should not be emergency legislation and that it should follow the normal track. Will Mr Findlay please advise the Parliament whether he opposes the bill’s second part, which is on threatening communications? I hear his arguments about the first part, but what about the second part? Nobody is addressing that.

The debate was relatively temperate and civilised, with flashes in-between. I thank all members who spoke. I point out that the committee agreed that sectarianism is a problem in Scotland; no one on the committee said otherwise. I was interested in what Graeme Pearson and Johann Lamont said about the domestic violence that takes place after football matches. Interestingly, on the day that we went to the match at Ibrox, the police had made early visits to households with a history of domestic violence to warn the people there not to carry the result of the match home with them one way or another. Although that issue is not pertinent to the subject of the debate, I wanted to remind members of it. Several points were not touched on in our report. I think that there is a role for the media, which can sometimes pour fuel on the fire with regard to what happens on football terraces and pitches. The committee took note of that. If the bill proceeds to stage 3, the committee would want a review of the legislation’s operation. I say to Neil Findlay that we were cautious about the communications part of the bill with regard to young people’s online language, which will be very different from that of people of my generation. We are aware of difficulties in that area. Aside from that, though, the committee was pretty well fully supportive of efforts to prevent hateful and inflammatory communications online, although not everyone agreed that the bill would deliver that. It is a pity that not enough attention has been paid to the second part of the bill, although I understand why that is the case. I say to Margo MacDonald that the police fully supported the bill. If it is enacted and its proposals are implemented, we hope that they will be preventative and will not require additional policing. As to the test of what is offensive, that takes place in courts in Scotland every day in the context of different cases. I am grateful to David McLetchie for drawing attention to the 2003 legislation, which got me in a bit of a pickle. He is right to say that it was, in fact, lopsided. That is where I felt that there might be a gap in the law. John Finnie was challenged on where the guidelines might be found. The draft guidelines are in the public domain; they are on the committee’s website for anyone who wants to look at them.

The guidelines do not exist in a vacuum; they are already being consulted on with all the parties involved. The thing about good law is that people should know where these things are and that work is taking place. I realise that I am paraphrasing, but Mr McMahon was correct to say that football provides an arena for sectarianism and that it exacerbates the problem. Although I did not agree with the rest of his speech, I thought that that was a fair point. I do not want to lean on the Lord Advocate’s guidelines too much, but if Mr McMahon looks at them again he will find that they contain some common sense and should help people understand the direction of the legislation.

I want to proceed, but I might give way to the member in a while. In any case, the key point is that public disorder has to be incited, which means that context and intent have to be taken into account. Colin Keir’s contribution was very useful to the committee. I am not a football person myself, and he—correctly—drew the committee’s attention to the role of the SFA and SPL and reminded us that Premier League clubs are commercial entities that rely on revenue from advertising and television coverage. Measures such as not allowing them to play in public or deducting points from them and therefore causing them to lose their position in the table might prove to be a very important sword of Damocles to be hung over them. We all agree that they have been slow to do anything about this. I have huge regard for Graeme Pearson’s experience as a match commander and thought that he gave a useful speech outlining the ancillary things that could be done outwith the legislation. I am very glad that he mentioned the co-operation between the police, the staff and the club stewards, which we saw clearly on our visit to Ibrox. It was a well-oiled machine, a disciplined army of people ensuring that nobody came to any harm. I said that I was a bit disappointed that not much was said about the second part of the bill. Alison McInnes is quite right: we must start with solutions and start early. I remind her, however, that we were standing outside Ibrox with a family and the mother said that she had brought her children to the ground for the first time because the behaviour had improved. Education does not take place just within the school; it takes place on the terraces, watching the way other people, players, managers and officials behave at the match. There were problems for the committee about hate crime. I will not go into it, but at paragraph 170 of our report we indicate concerns about whether anyone has to be present for there to be an offence. The Government will look at that. Humza Yousaf reminded us, as the minister has, that we are in a funny position: we are going into stage 2. This is the raw state of a bill. By no means, if it proceeds, is this what it will look like at the end of the day. That is very important. I think that people were taking the view that this is it, this is the tool. He also reminded us that some songs are toxic and meant to be toxic—they are meant to provoke—and have very little to do with enjoying the match. All is context and intent. Roderick Campbell—as usual he was very lawyerly, as befits his advocate background—analysed the law as it stands. He reminded us of the requirement under the breach of the peace provisions for a public element and for intention and that, according to the Lord Advocate—I take this, to some extent, from Roderick Campbell’s contribution—there is a gap in the law, in that some matters cannot be dealt with under the criminal law. The bill is intended to fill that gap, on top of its intention to be—the word of the day—transformational. In other words, the bill is intended to make a change in the way the public behave, such as we have already dramatically achieved with the ban on smoking in public places.

I welcome vigorous debate, which is what we have had. That is exactly why the committee wanted to bring the report to the chamber and have a debate. I welcome all these matters. Finally, I say to Neil Findlay that I have been called many things in my life, but a sycophant is a new one. Hugh Henry is witness to the fact that, on the news at 10, I was the first person to say that the bill should not be emergency legislation and that I wanted the Justice Committee to have an opportunity to take evidence and bring it to the chamber. That is exactly what we have done today. My goodness, I am looking forward to stage 2.

Is the minister not disappointed that no one from the Opposition parties has spoken in the debate? I make it plain that I was to be somewhere else tonight and, had I known that I would be attending the debate, I would have spoken in it. I am embarrassed and ashamed that no one from the Opposition parties has contributed to the debate. Does the minister share my views?

He just did that.

It has been a long debate and much has been said so far. However, the highlight for me has been finding out that Keith Brown’s number 1 fan is Helen Eadie. I tell him to be very afraid. However, if I want grit for my road, I will call Ms Eadie. “Drivers in the Borders have been urged not to travel as heavy snow continues to cause problems across the region. The A7 is said to be passable only with extreme care and the A68 is shut, both at Soutra and south of Jedburgh. There are also reports of cars getting stuck, while the A1 is closed at Berwick because of an overturned lorry with further problems at Cockburnspath. Schools in the region were on holiday on Monday but no decision has yet been made on reopening for Tuesday. The main roads which remain open are said to be generally only passable with care—sometimes extreme care. That is said to be the case right across the Borders from Berwickshire through to Peeblesshire. Many bus services have also been affected and the situation will be reviewed throughout the day.” That was not a weather forecast; it was a news report from 29 November last year about the first heavy fall of snow across the Borders and Midlothian. We have heard lots of anecdotes about what happened, and I have one to add to them. It took me three hours to travel from Peebles to the Sheriffhall roundabout. I did a wee twirl at the Auchendinny road, which I did not mean to take, and had to get back on the main road and go through Penicuik on black ice. I say to Anne McTaggart that I do not blame Scottish Borders Council or Midlothian Council. Wonderful though we have all decided Keith Brown is—I have not actually made up my mind yet—I do not expect him to keep every road in Scotland clear. Things will happen suddenly. Black ice can occur at the drop of the rain. These things happen: some cannot be avoided, but some can. This might not go down well, but I had little sympathy for the lady who, with two young children in the car, got stuck on a motorway in blizzards—which had been predicted—while she was taking presents to somebody. She should not have done that. The task was not important. Delivering a blood transfusion, for example, is important. Some people think that they have a divine right to travel on the roads or the railway, notwithstanding what comes down from the heavens. That, of course, is a nonsense. Co-ordination, which has been referred to, is extremely important. I know that adversity is the mother of invention, and that a lot of lessons were learned following last winter. In particular, I commend the voluntary sector, from the neighbour next door, to the Red Cross, to the groups of people in communities who help one another. The experience where I live was extremely good. We should not always blame people for not keeping their pavement clear. I know that, as soon as I cleared mine, the snow came and froze, and the pavement was covered again. I even took the Saxa salt out to try to get it off, but it was impossible. As Jim Hume knows, farmers play a huge part across the Scottish Borders. They go out with their tractors and so on, doing a really big job. We have all said something about checking on our neighbours. I feel like I am in the war, saying, “Get your food cupboard stocked, your candles and so on”, but those are all things that are required. Having lived in a rural area for many years, I had all that in stock—I had hurricane lamps and everything. Maybe some of the city dwellers are going to have to do that. It can be quite fun, actually, making toast over an open fire—if there is one. It is a change. Of course, someone who has done that will wake up in the morning with a bright red face, which they will not have noticed because they were in the dark when they got it. I want to say something cheery about the snow. I was in Helsinki when it was -20°C. It was beautiful—it was like being in Zhivago territory. Last winter, the most hideous rubbish sites in Scotland very briefly looked beautiful, with the moon shining on the snow. It is absolutely great for children when schools close. While we are all in here being stuffy and saying that the schools have been closed for five days, Scotland’s schoolchildren are out having free exercise and fun, coming in soaking wet with bright red faces, as happy as Larry. I commend grippers to everyone. I learned about them from Mary Scanlon. One day in the winter, she was marching up the High Street at a rate of knots while Bill Aitken and I were falling all over the place. We thought that she was a very special person until we saw that she had on her feet these little rubber things with whirly metal bits on them. I immediately bought a pair for myself and a pair for my elderly next-door neighbour, who, for the first time in seven days, was able to get to the paper shop. If somebody wants to make a lot of money, they should start stocking up on those grippers now. I would have brought them with me to show Gil Paterson, but product placement is not yet allowed in the Scottish Parliament—if it were, I would have lifted up my foot and shown them to him. There are other manufacturing opportunities. I recently found out about an international business in my constituency called Findlay Irvine. I am sure that members will not have heard of it, but it makes special machines that detect where skidding is going to happen on roads and at airports and exports them all over the world. I want somebody out there with a pen and a pad who is listening to us talk about the difficulties with snow, black ice and everything to say to themselves, “Okay, blue-sky thinking: how can I get manufacturing productivity going in Scotland by devising things like grippers for feet, ways to sort things out or a device for Dennis Robertson so that his dog knows whether he is walking into a wall, a lamp post or snow that the snowplough has thrown up.” There are advantages to the problems that we face. On that point, I have one final thing to say—about pavements. I would rather that Keith Brown was the minister for pavements because it is the very last area that gets treated. Kevin Stewart’s point about sheltered housing was well made because sheltered housing residents’ pavements do not get cleared. We should think about the money that the NHS could save by not having to treat broken and fractured limbs and so on if someone would just take care of the pavements. I ask that person with their pen and pad to get something sorted for the pavements.

I apologise for the long title. I thank all the members who have stayed behind, whether or not they take part. In representing Midlothian South, Tweeddale and Lauderdale, and in my previous capacity as a South of Scotland member, I am acutely aware of the deficit in national and local commercial television coverage, as a substantial area of my constituency and beyond is unable to receive STV—although when I went recently to a presentation by Jeremy Hunt and the Office of Communications about local TV, the Ofcom mannie actually debated with me that Selkirk received STV. That is news to me and to Selkirk. Worthy though ITV Borders is, as it broadcasts from Gateshead and covers the north of England and the south of Scotland, it cannot provide a satisfactory service to my constituents, who regularly complain that they are left out. The deficit exists not only in relation to local and national news and sport but to coverage of Scottish elections. For example, the leaders debates earlier this year were broadcast at or around midnight. Someone would have to be a political devotee, an insomniac or, indeed, both to stay awake for that. Some would say that it was a good time to put it on. Therefore, I was more than disappointed when I examined Jeremy Hunt’s list of potential sites for local TV delivered via digital terrestrial television, otherwise known as Freeview, to find that the south of Scotland—I exclude Ayr—did not appear. In Jeremy Hunt’s own words: “These new local services will be a fundamental change in how people get information about their own communities and how they hold their representatives to account”. As far as my constituents are concerned, and as I explained above, they meet that test better than any other area in the United Kingdom. In correspondence with Jeremy Hunt—the responses have been, how shall I put it, perfunctory—the apparent problem is the technical capabilities across the region. I am certainly no techie buff but others are and I have sought expert opinion, which challenges the UK minister’s assertion. Indeed, in exchanges with Ofcom that I have seen, it states: “Our assessment was carried out on a subset of the UK’s transmitters and given limited time and resources we prioritised those that might serve the largest number of people.” Without getting too deep into the techie stuff, I understand that the transmitter at Selkirk has the capability to provide local TV but is not on the eligibility list. The Ofcom test of technical capabilities therefore does not stand up. Are we then left with population? If we add together the population of Dumfries and Galloway and of the Borders, according to the most recent figures that amounts to 260,000. Even if a critical viewing mass is not met, surely that is counterbalanced by the democratic deficit argument. I have put all these points to Jeremy Hunt and, frankly, I have been stonewalled. I compliment the South of Scotland Alliance, which I know is pursuing the case vigorously. I continue to campaign—I hope, with other members—to at least give the south of Scotland an opportunity to bid for funding. In the meantime, in parallel, I have been impressed by the operation of URTV in Helensburgh. People can watch it online, which would be a foot in the local TV door. Let me explain, with an example of an online TV service that might cover the south of Scotland. I have chosen the regional name “Southern Television”. If we go online to that site, we get a whole host of content. Let us say that I live in Peebles. I click on the Peebles image on the left-hand side of the screen and I get Peebles news, sport and information. I live in Gala, so I click on the Gala image, and so on. All that is provided on one site that gives regional and local information in one place. Televisions are already on sale, for example in Tesco, that allow us to call up online services on our TV screen in the living room. That is what is called convergence—see, I have been doing my homework. The term has been used many times before but now it is taking useful shape. Therefore, I could call up Southern Television on my laptop, personal computer or smart phone. I could call it up on my television at home, while I sit on the sofa. That example of local television could become a key player in the sector. How does that get funded? Perhaps as a pilot with Government funding? Perhaps, then, a local television network could help to deliver the basis of a new digital network. I am enthused by that prospect and I hope that the minister will be equally enthused and will not only press the case with Jeremy Hunt but examine the Helensburgh example and perhaps—if I could put in a bid—commission a pilot in, say, Peebles or Gala. Of course, it is nonsense that broadcasting is not devolved to this Parliament. I welcome the fact that the Scotland Bill Committee will be taking evidence—after the recess, I think—in that regard. I will provide the committee with a link to this debate. I hope that progress can be made on all the fronts that I have described. What better place to start than where Scotland is worse served. I look forward to contributions from colleagues.

Can I further remind the First Minister that, on the Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration’s watch, the cost of the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line went from £23 million to £85 million and was two years late—incidentally, with not one piece of the Borders line being laid, notwithstanding—

There was a question.

Tavish Scott, the minister, said that the Borders line would be up and running by 2007. Does the First Minister therefore agree that he needs no lessons on delivering transport projects on budget or on time from the Opposition?

Midlothian South, Tweeddale and Lauderdale is part of the south of Scotland. Does the First Minister share my concern that the south of Scotland—notwithstanding the fact that it does not even receive STV—is not on the eligibility list for consideration in Jeremy Hunt’s consultation on local TV? Is the Government in communication with the Department for Culture, Media and Sport at Westminster about that omission?

4. To ask the First Minister, in light of the reported discovery of documents relating to the Gaddafi regime’s connections with the United States and United Kingdom intelligence services, whether the Scottish Government has requested access to any such documents that might be relevant to the bombing of Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie. (S4F-00101)

The First Minister is aware that I, along with many others, believe that the conviction of Abdelbaset al-Megrahi is insecure. I welcome the announcement of legislation to facilitate the publication of Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission reports on abandoned cases such as Lockerbie. According to the First Minister’s answer, Lockerbie is an open case. Given that, is the Crown Office in active contact with the National Transitional Council in Libya to ensure the preservation of documentation that might relate to the atrocity? In the interests of justice, if such evidence exists, what steps will be taken to secure its delivery to Scotland?

In his statement, the cabinet secretary said that he would establish new independent bodies to hold the chief constable to account. However, the consultation document, which I have just got my hands on, says: “the Scottish Police Authority, will ... hold the Chief Constable to account.” What are the other independent bodies?

I will, as probably expected, focus on justice issues in the coming five years. I will start with the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill, which is currently before the Justice Committee. Everyone in the chamber opposes bigotry and sectarianism, but there was an interesting debate at the Justice Committee yesterday between Pat Nevin, Graham Spiers, Professor Walker and Dr Waiton that illustrated the conflict and tensions between freedom of expression and the proposed legislation. It is important that members look at the bill, as issues are raised about freedom of expression and the state’s intervention. It opens up a large debate. I speak not as convener but on behalf of the committee. During yesterday’s debate, we required the supporters clubs that were giving us evidence in a round-table format to bring forward their own proposals for remedies, either as an alternative to legislation or in addition to legislation. There was consensus that what was out there was not working. I am pleased that the committee, and members of all parties, persuaded the Government that the issue was not suitable for emergency legislation. I agree with Iain Gray—it is probably all that I agree with him on—that we must take our time. If anything, yesterday’s debate in the Justice Committee demonstrated how careful we have to be on the issue.

Yes. The Official Report is online now, so the member can read some of the suggestions that were made. On knife crime, for reasons that we have exhausted previously in Parliament, I take an entirely different view on mandatory prison sentences on conviction for carrying a knife—an approach that Labour pursued at one point. Such an approach would be crude and ludicrous and would have led to indefensible imprisonments. I talk about legislation not being the answer in the context of reducing bigotry and sectarianism. Legislation is not always the cure; indeed, through unintended consequences, it can lead to greater ills. That is illustrated by the attempt to make carrying a knife a statutory offence. Policy action in the context of knives—the no knives, better lives campaign—is to be commended. On access to justice in the Government’s programme, I am reasonably proud of Scotland’s record on its legal aid system. As I understand it, we are not taking the route taken by Westminster, which has removed legal aid from certain important categories such as family matters. Not all is well within the legal aid system, however, and the legal aid bill will be challenged by the fallout from recession, bankruptcies, redundancies, broken relationships and debts. There will be pressures there. Reform of legal aid is some way down the track and I look forward to seeing the bill. On the matter of reform, the Government proposal for a single police service and a single fire service raises interesting opportunities—and legitimate concerns. The current democratic accountability through police boards is—how can I say it kindly?—quite insufficient. When members attend police and fire board meetings, they may be completely overawed by the brass and scrambled egg in front of them. Indeed, if they deign to challenge the chief constable—which they usually have to do in his office, which is not good psychologically—such an inquiry might be rebuffed with the answer “It’s operational.” If we are looking for local accountability and delivery and national administration and procurement, a single force may be—as my old history teacher used to say—a good thing. No doubt the robust interrogation by the Justice Committee will prise open any deficiencies. While I am on the subject of committees, I commend Nigel Don for what he said about back benchers. I will not get railroaded by anybody in any party in this chamber. In this fourth session of Parliament, with an overall majority Government, it is important for members of committees to get into the mindset that they are their own masters and that they require to demonstrate robust independence right across the parties in the interests of good government, good law and a good Parliament. It is important that whips of whatever party do not leave their marks on the backs of members who dare to challenge the party line if it conflicts with the evidence that they have heard in committee.

Does Hugh Henry accept that the clubs and the Scottish Football Association have a huge role to play, and that there is much more that can be done and should have been done?

My speech is in three parts, covering the historical perspective; Lord McCluskey’s review, which, as most will acknowledge, sets out a reasonable way forward for the UK Supreme Court, especially with regard to parity between the various jurisdictions; and the ECHR itself. Could we have foreseen the reach that the UK Supreme Court would have? Certainly not. In the debate on the Sewel motion on the UK Supreme Court’s establishment that we had in 2005, the motion was moved by Hugh Henry, the then Deputy Minister for Justice. At the time, he said—and I am being fair though selective in my quotations: “Those areas relate to the rights of appeal in civil cases from the Court of Session on non-devolution issues.” That is what people were focusing on. Mr Henry also said: “We must also ensure, as Pauline McNeill said, that the independence and integrity of Scots law are maintained. The separate nature of the Scottish legal system is an important part of how Parliament can operate differently, reflecting the needs and aspirations of the Scottish people.” He also mentioned that the Justice 2 Committee “proposed that there should be enshrined in legislation the requirement for a Scottish majority in the supreme court for cases that emanate from Scotland that give rise to devolution issues.” Those issues were aired in the debate at the time. The Conservatives opposed the move—indeed, there is a delightful comment from Bill Aitken about happening to find himself for the first and perhaps last time on the same side as the then shadow minister for justice, Kenny MacAskill—with Annabel Goldie making it clear that their opposition was based on the fact that the legislation was rushed, that no royal commission had been set up and that there was no real consideration of the proposal. Mike Pringle of the Liberal Democrats supported it, but even he focused on civil cases. Everyone had their eye on the House of Lords’s dual judicial and legislative purpose and it was felt—appropriately, I think—that there was a conflict of purpose and interest in its sitting as a legislator and as a court of appeal on Scottish civil court cases. As far as I can see, no one in that debate seemed to think for a moment about criminal cases. That was the position in 2005 and, as a result, I think it really rather impolite to say that a senior bench of Scottish judges should have seen this train crash coming down the track. They know a lot more about Scots law than anyone sitting in the chamber and if they could not see it coming, I do not know how anyone else was supposed to. I also find it ironic that, in that earlier debate, the current Cabinet Secretary for Justice said: “Ultimately, we have to ensure parity.”—[Official Report, 19 January 2005 ; c 13629-33.] Of course, he was talking about civil cases; as we now know, the flow has been the other way. As Nigel Don pointed out, criminal jurisdiction has partly shifted towards the House of Lords in a way that, I think, was never envisaged. I welcome the interim report from Lord McCluskey’s review group and look forward to the publication of the final report in August. However, I say to Johann Lamont that she should take a look at some of the cases that are before the UK Supreme Court. One particular case, which involves AXA General Insurance Ltd and others as appellants against the Lord Advocate and others, seeks to reduce the effect of legislation on pleural plaques, an act of this Parliament that her party campaigned for. They are attempting to challenge the Parliament’s competence in passing that legislation under the European convention on human rights. As we know, every bill that comes before Parliament has to be certified as competent under ECHR, but the fact is that all those people who are waiting for damages under that legislation are not getting them anymore. We need to consider the unforeseen breadth of the cases that are coming before the Supreme Court. For example, one case, referred to as Her Majesty’s Advocate v Ambrose (Scotland), relates to the evidence obtained when an accused person responded to police questioning at the roadside without any legal presence. That is where this is taking us.

With respect, I think that the member misses my point. The Supreme Court is challenging the Parliament’s competence to deliver its own acts and is, in fact, reviewing our own legislation. The legal advice that we received on this particular legislation, which as I recall was passed unanimously, was that it was ECHR-compliant; however, that is now being reviewed. No one envisaged that happening. I turn, in my final minute and a half, to the convention itself, which the Council of Europe established when it had only seven members. I fully support the principles and rights that are embodied in the convention, but the Council of Europe now has 47 member states, all of which have very different cultures, economies, jurisdictions and rules. In Scotland, people have a right to silence, from which guilt cannot be inferred. In Scotland, independent corroboration is necessary in criminal cases. In Scotland, people have access to criminal legal aid. In Scotland, people have a right to apply for bail in certain cases. Does all that apply in other nation states? I do not think that it applies across the board. I suggest that, after 60 years of the ECHR, rather than challenge the rights and duties that exist under it, we should ask for a review of its operation across nation states to take account of the different jurisdictional checks and balances that are applied in those nations. That way, we might avoid judgments coming through that are not sustainable.

I want to pick up on the point about our focusing on the criminal. Does the member consider the AXA case to be hugely significant? It is a civil case in which a huge insurance company is relying on the right to possessions—in other words, its funds.

Will Mr Kelly kindly acknowledge that some people on this side of the chamber shared his view on the timetable and made their views plain—perhaps even before Opposition members did so?

3. To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Government has had with the legal profession regarding the attendance of solicitors during interviews following the Cadder ruling. (S4F-00084)

I welcome the continuing discussions with the Law Society of Scotland and recognise that Scotland’s legal system is clearly capable of adapting quickly to the demands that are placed on it, but does the First Minister agree that, at the very least, Scottish courts must be given parity of referral, under certification, to the United Kingdom Supreme Court as soon as is practicable?

In fairness, what the Justice Committee did was cross-party.

I must not take it personally, Presiding Officer, but every time I stand up there is a warning. I accept David McLetchie’s argument on the pragmatic approach, and the minister’s good purposes. That said, I have some comments to make. For new members, I say that usually in a stage 1 debate I would speak as convener, but this is not a committee stage 1 debate because the business bureau did not refer the bill to my committee. In passing, I say to James Kelly that this is not a competition about which political party wanted scrutiny; scrutiny came from across the parties. As convener of the Justice Committee, I made my view on that clear at the beginning, when the bill was introduced. If members will forgive me, I will speak as convener, even in these unusual circumstances. I thank the committee staff, the official report—which published the oral evidence for us, which was helpful to us and, indeed, to the minister—all the witnesses, including the minister and her officials, and the Lord Advocate. Not least, though, I thank committee members for attempting at breakneck speed to give some semblance of disinterested scrutiny to the proposed legislation. The Lord Advocate said in his contribution at the committee yesterday that draft guidance for clubs and the police—which no one has mentioned so far—will be published on Friday. The guidance will, I hope, be extremely helpful. However, I have to say to the Lord Advocate that to imply that because it is a short, sharp bill, it should not be contentious or flawed, is not a compelling argument from him or the minister. If there were ever a one-section bill—I do not know whether there ever could be one—it might be extremely contentious, so that is not a principle that one can rely on. Many witnesses, particularly the Law Society of Scotland, the Church of Scotland and the Equality Network, were extremely unhappy about the use of emergency procedure. When I put it to him that the proposed legislation had been well trailed in the media, Tim Hopkins of the Equality Network quite rightly said: “We knew that it was coming but I have to say that when we saw it on Friday morning it came as quite a surprise to us—it was quite different from what we were expecting.” I replied: “That is a fair response.” There is a big difference between trailing a policy and having specific legislation before us. An interesting comment was made by the representative from the Church of Scotland, who compared the bill with the legislation to ban smoking: “Law works at its best when the majority of the population think that it represents a collective will ... Measures that have been effective, such as the smoking ban, work not because they are enforced but because the passage of the legislation was taken to mean that people supported it—it was seen as the collective position.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 22 June 2011; c 88 and 82.] That is a fair argument. Representatives of the clubs, the Scottish Football Association and the Scottish Premier League confirmed that they had not sought legislation but that their concerns had been somewhat assuaged after the briefing by the Lord Advocate yesterday morning, particularly with regard to the guidance. I am grateful to the Lord Advocate for that. I am also grateful to him for distinguishing from breach of the peace—raised earlier by Willie Rennie—which is one of the criminal offences currently utilised in cases of aggressive threatening behaviour inter alia at football matches. I look forward to the response from the Law Society, which took a distinctly different view. On balance and in fairness, I should say that the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland fully supported the legislation. No doubt others will deal with the funding arrangements. Questions that have arisen on specific sections of the bill will have to be addressed at stages 2 and 3. An example is section 1(5)(b). I will not quote it—members can see it—but does it exempt public houses showing a match on a widescreen when only one team’s supporters are present? Does it apply to supporters’ club rooms? The Lord Advocate could not answer that question when I asked him about it at yesterday’s meeting, when he said that he would give it consideration. We need to know about that, because it is a serious issue. The provisions in sections 2(4)(a) and 2(4)(b) seemed wide to me, and I did not fully understand the explanation. I may be dull of wit and mind but I hope that someone will explain those provisions to me because they may be open to challenge under freedom of movement legislation. No doubt that will be explained in due course, during the amendment stages. Section 6(2), which another member addressed earlier, excludes unrecorded speech. I ask members to look at what is said in the interesting submission from the Equality Network about why that is excluded, because I believe that it is not excluded in other, comparable legislation. We all wish to see a reduction in sectarian violence but if, as predicted, the bill proceeds to stage 3 and is passed, I give notice that I intend to lodge an amendment or amendments at stage 2—and possibly at stage 3, if my stage 2 amendments are rejected—to require either a review or a sunset clause after two seasons of football, because the very people who should be engaged in this debate, namely the supporters and the fans, have not been engaged. We have not heard from them.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give me 10 seconds?

Will the member take an intervention?

I refer the First Minister to the lead story in today’s Scotsman, which casts doubt on the viability of the Borders railway. As the constituency member—indeed, as the founder member of the cross-party group in the Parliament for the Campaign for Borders Rail in 1999—I ask the First Minister to give me a categorical assurance that the Government is fully committed to the reinstatement of the line, which is essential to the economy of my constituency.

I shall not take that last part of your remarks personally, Presiding Officer. In this broad debate, I shall focus on criminal justice issues, in particular short sentences, Cornton Vale, the Supreme Court and sectarianism. I separate my comments on short sentences from John Lamont’s remarks on serious crime and the serious criminals from whom the public definitely need protection. It is indisputable that short sentences do not work—they do not act as a deterrent. They also offer no time for rehabilitation of those with alcohol, drug or literacy and numeracy problems. That was the case in 2002, when I convened the Justice 1 Committee, and the situation remains unchanged. Therefore, I fully support alternatives to custody and the presumption—I emphasise that it is a presumption, not a mandate—against sentences of three months or less. I also note Johann Lamont’s comments, which were well made, about the need for pragmatic progress and delivery on alternatives to custody in which the community has faith. In 1999, the cry was that too many women were being imprisoned in Cornton Vale. Although the prison population overall has increased by some 25 per cent, the female prison population has increased by some 90 per cent. I recall Lord Wallace of Tankerness—then Jim Wallace, the Minister for Justice—agreeing in 1999 that too many women were being imprisoned, yet successive Governments have failed to remedy the situation. Therefore, I welcome the appointment of Elish Angiolini as the chair of the commission. Let us also put down a marker that, in the five years that we have, the Parliament will seek a real improvement in the area. Although, as a Scottish nationalist, I fully understand the furore at the erosion of the finality of the decisions of the High Court when it sits as a court of appeal, it must surely be conceded that the Supreme Court is and was acting intra vires and that the European convention on human rights has rippled across many aspects—often unforeseen—of our justice system, both civil and criminal, and including quasi-judicial hearings, which has often been welcomed. Nevertheless, what is distinct and different is that, whereas in England and Wales the UK Supreme Court cannot overrule the Court of Appeal when the Court of Appeal refuses leave to appeal unless the Supreme Court certifies that the case raises a matter of general public importance, that is not the case in Scotland, so there is no level playing field, even at the start. However, I await the report of the review group and look forward to a lot of light and a lot less heat. I turn to the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission, which should be another bulwark against injustice, although its role was regrettably emasculated, ironically, by the emergency legislation that followed the Cadder decision. I know that Lord Carloway is considering the matter as part of his review of that legislation, and I look forward to his findings, which I believe are due around August. I also look forward to the promised legislation to ease publication of the SCCRC’s findings in the Megrahi case and ask the cabinet secretary whether he has a timescale for it. The proposed anti-sectarianism bill is to be laid before Parliament some time this week, so we have not yet had sight of it. Notwithstanding that, I share the concerns about the fact that it is to be dealt with through emergency or truncated procedure, with little time for parliamentary, let alone committee, scrutiny. That rather contradicts the recent statement by the Cabinet Secretary for Parliament and Government Strategy that he wants to improve pre-legislative scrutiny. As I understand it, there will be only token scrutiny during the passage of the bill. As a back bencher and convener of the Justice Committee, I cannot say that I find that appropriate. I really do not see why the bill is emergency legislation. The joint action plan that was produced in May, during the recent summit on football and sectarian violence, has a lot to commend it. It recommends “Greater enforcement of existing legislation to deal with sectarianism and drink related offences”— minimum unit pricing would have helped with that. It also calls for “The establishment of a task force comprising senior police officers, government representatives and club security personnel to deliver more consistency in policing of football matches across Scotland”. The recommendations are worth reading. I would have preferred those actions to have been given a chance while we considered legislation—indeed, while we considered whether we even need legislation—at a measured pace. However, if the Government is to push ahead, I respectfully suggest the insertion of a sunset clause of, say, a year or 18 months. That would give some comfort to those of us across the Parliament who have experience of the past 12 years and who are uneasy about legislating in haste and finding out that there are unintended consequences. I am not informed about how such a sunset clause could be drafted, but I submit the suggestion as a practical way of addressing some of our concerns. I have time to refer to the Labour Party’s proposal on knife crime. Much of Johann Lamont’s speech was welcome, but the examples that were given were misguided. I share the horror at previous and recent crimes, but surely the suggestion that there should be a mandatory sentence for a conviction for carrying a knife has been discredited. Such a step would remove judicial discretion in relation to the circumstances in which such a conviction took place and would lead us down the road of the law of unintended consequences. Someone of good repute who had no problems but was convicted of carrying a large knife—just for carrying it; not for what they did with it—would receive a mandatory prison sentence without anyone looking at social inquiry reports or conducting an inquiry into the person’s background to establish the reasons for what happened. There are issues with that proposal. As a final full stop, on serious organised crime—which I do not have time to address—I note that the Government has said that there will be a prohibition on security companies with links to organised crime being awarded public sector contracts. I ask the cabinet secretary to look at contracts that such companies are given for recycling and dealing with waste. There was a great presentation in Parliament by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and serious organised crime officers. I had no idea that recycling and dealing with waste was how serious organised crime laundered much of its money and I would like the Government to look at that issue.

Will the member give way?

That is a presumption.

The member knows that I share many of his concerns, but does he support as a way forward the possibility of inserting a sunset clause into any legislation that might be introduced in order to ensure that it is applied pragmatically and that we have the opportunity, for example, to reconsider it?

Constitutional change—independence—is not an end for its own sake. A quick glance at the world map tells us that independence is practical, ordinary and normal. It would give Scots the opportunity to have a more egalitarian society and to reduce health inequalities so that wellbeing and life expectancy might not be matters of a person’s postcode. In a rich nation such as ours is, it is a disgrace that one in five of our children lives in poverty and that an estimated 100,000 children live in homes in which there are drug and alcohol problems. As I say, independence and devolution are practical, so my speech will, I hope, be eminently practical and will focus on health issues. I have chaired health committees in the Parliament for six years. I suggest to the First Minister that the remit of the Health and Sport Committee in the previous session of Parliament was excellent. I have no idea whether that will be continued, but bringing sport into the health portfolio took us away from a focus on elite sports towards simply ensuring that young and old in our nation become more active, thereby saving us a great health bill. I also endorse what the First Minister said about the achievements of this Parliament when Labour and the Liberals were in power: free personal care—which we all supported—and concessionary fares are excellent levelling measures. The achievements of the minority Government are not to be overlooked. Delayed discharges went down, the health service workforce increased and hospital infections, which are literally a great blight, went down. Hospital car-parking charges, which are very unjust, were removed where possible—apart from where public-private partnership or private finance initiative contracts were in place. The abolition of prescription charges, which the Labour Party supported, was a very just measure. However, the biggest loss in the previous session of Parliament, to which Iain Gray referred in his speech, was the failure to endorse minimum unit pricing for alcohol. Annabel Goldie said that she had her commonsense hat on. I say to her that I do not support minimum unit pricing just because I think it is a good idea from Christine Grahame; I heard all the evidence, along with the rest of the Health and Sport Committee. The chief medical officers of all parts of the United Kingdom, the health professionals, the police, the social workers, youth organisations, the voluntary sector and the churches all supported minimum unit pricing not because it is the only means of reducing our alcohol problems—which are reflected in behaviour, health, broken marriages and lost work—but because it is a fundamental tool for dealing with those problems. Those who opposed minimum unit pricing were some supermarkets and Whyte & Mackay, which came back to the Health and Sport Committee and admitted that there would not be 500 job losses in Scotland; there would be none. Whyte & Mackay was concerned not about its whisky but about the cheap vodka that it produces, so it had a self-interest in the matter. I hope that when the new health committee is established, whoever is on it will approve minimum unit pricing. I am pleased that the Government is pursuing it. While I am at it, I want to mention my constituency. Scottish Borders Council—which has a Liberal-independent-Tory administration—has unanimously supported minimum unit pricing. That is pretty ironic, given that one of the arguments that opposition parties made against minimum unit pricing was that white-van man would go through the Borders to Berwick, buy the booze and bring it into Scotland. Scottish Borders Council is not bothered about that—neither are the Borders supermarkets. I hope that other local authorities will pick that up. For the sake of the front bench and for the sake of new members, I refer to the Health and Sport Committee’s legacy paper. I do not want the paper to gather dust, because there are really good things in it. The Deputy First Minister and Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy might already have dealt with some of the issues that are raised in it, so I will touch on just one or two of them. First, the legacy paper dealt with something that has been much neglected over the years, and which has a very strange name: the clinical portals, telehealth and e-health programme. It is a good way of delivering health services to remote areas and it saves money, so it should be developed. We are 12 years into the Scottish Parliament, so let us get on with the job. The committee also looked at pathways into sport, which was terribly important. There has been a commitment throughout the Parliament over the past 12 years to having two hours of physical education in schools. I do not think that that has yet been delivered, although I stand to be corrected. Whoever is running council authorities—they all bear this responsibility—has to recognise that two hours of PE is essential, given that we are in a sedentary age in which most of the work that children do is with their fingers at the computer. Mental health services have long been Cinderella services, and I commend Mary Scanlon for pursuing the issue over the years. I will focus on one thing—I am looking at Richard Simpson as I say this—which is the transition from child and adolescent services to adult services. The committee was very clear that the services should be focused on the individual. Those services must not be neglected. Indeed, in times of recession, mental health becomes more of a challenge. I will, in my speech’s dying minutes, pick up on a final thing: the Commonwealth games legacy. We on the committee were not popular at the time for saying that all the evidence that came to us—there is that key word “evidence” again—showed that there had never been a health or sporting legacy in any nation that had held a large games production, if I can call it that. We have a heavy task ahead of us. We can build the buildings and the sports centres, but the key question at the end of the day is this: “Is Scotland going to be fitter and healthier or is the legacy of the games going to be people sitting on their sofas eating their crisps, with their lager at their side?” There is a real challenge there. When all the members of the committee addressed that point, it was not popular. I put down those practical markers. We could do so much more of a practical nature with independence. That is the key message that I want to leave: independence is eminently practical and eminently normal.

You are not one to blow your own trumpet.

4. To ask the First Minister what resources the Scottish Government has put in place to detect and prevent child trafficking. (S3F-2968)

Does the First Minister agree that one of the major advances in Scotland is the pioneering multi-agency resources service—MARS—which is a child-protection hub and is the first of its kind in the United Kingdom? It allows professionals from various agencies to work together more effectively and share expertise and best practice. However, as a recent report by Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People highlighted, more focused preparation is needed to deal with trafficked children’s specific and complex needs. How does the Scottish Government plan to take forward the key recommendations that are contained in that important report?

I acknowledge the commitment to the issue of both Dorothy-Grace Elder and my colleague Mary Scanlon. As a pre-emptive strike, I beg a little flexibility from the Presiding Officer, because I may digress a little. He is indicating to me no, but I shall try. My speech concerns a 53-year-old constituent of mine who has recently been in touch with me and who has been a bricklayer most of his life. He was hospitalised for abdominal pain about 18 months ago and has recently been diagnosed with type 1 diabetes, for which he has at least four injections a day. His abdominal pain has increased and is now chronic. His medication comprises Pregabalin, Merbentyl, Tramadol, paracetamol and Omeprazole, which are to deal with nausea and constant pain. At least the medication will be free from 1 April. My constituent has been unable to work since the first week in December and his doctor has signed him off from 3 March to 3 April, deeming him unfit for work. His consultant has said that he is unfit for work. However, the Department for Work and Pensions claims that he is fit for work. He completed the employment and support allowance questionnaire and then was sent, as people are, for an assessment with a private company called Atos Healthcare. The test that is given is not only for people with chronic pain but for everybody. The information about it states: “The assessment is likely to be different from what you would expect from your own doctor. The approved healthcare professional’s assessment is not to diagnose or discuss treatment of your illness or disability; it is to assess how it affects you and your ability to work. To find this out, the approved healthcare professional may not need to carry out a physical examination.” In the case of my constituent, there was no physical examination. The problem for people with chronic pain and, indeed, other illnesses is that how they feel can vary from day to day. However, the questionnaire asks: “Can you go up or down two steps without help from another person, if there is a rail to hold on to? ... Can you move from one seat to another right next to it without help from someone else? ... Can you stay in one place, either standing or sitting, for at least an hour without help from another person?” My constituent tells me that, on a good day, the pain is similar to a bad stitch in his side but that, on a bad day, he simply does not get out of bed. He states that there are more bad days than good and that they occur randomly, and that he sleeps only a little through the night. None of that kind of information is exposed in the test for the DWP. To compound the problem, even the assessor told my constituent that the system is unfair. He also said that his claim would be rejected—it was and he was awarded no points—but that his appeal would be successful. I wait to see whether it will be. In the meantime, my constituent is worn out and disgusted and upset that, after all his years of working and now having pain that gives him little respite, he is being rubber-stamped as—I think that the term is apposite today—a benefit scrounger, when he is anything but. I thought that it was important to bring that issue to the chamber because, although it is adjacent to the issue of the treatment of chronic pain, it is another unfairness for people who have chronic pain.

I rise to speak in support of Irene Oldfather’s amendment 5. I am very sympathetic to what I might term the fallback position posited by Elaine Murray in her amendments. I say to Liam McArthur that I speak not just with my heart but with my head, which is no bad combination. I say to the minister that I fully acknowledge that pest control is a necessity of life. I have a long-standing opposition to snaring, and it is not the result of blind prejudice. Indeed, I recently chaired a debate that the cross-party group on animal welfare held, when we had the gamekeepers and land managers on one side and the animal welfare groups, such as OneKind and the SSPCA, on the other. The debate was straightforward and it was held in a very civilised and informed manner. The result was 13 each—no white hats, no black hats. The SSPCA in particular showed respect to the gamekeepers. It made it plain that much intelligence on animal cruelty and unauthorised pest control is brought to its attention by those very gamekeepers—who incidentally pled the succinct case that if there were a more humane means of fox control in particular, they would opt for it. However, the evidence from, for example, veterinary pathologists who appeared at previous meetings of the cross-party group proved to me beyond reasonable doubt that snares can be indiscriminate and can cause severe distress and result in a prolonged death, not just for target species but for badgers, roe deer and domestic pets. I am not yet convinced that the stops and the regulations that have been brought in will prevent those instances. Regulation and licensing is better than what we have, but it is not enough. Let us look at reporting and policing. How would a member of the public who came upon a dead or dying animal in a snare know whether the snare was licensed? They would not know. I think that Parliament will accept that people with no scruples will lay illegal snares—or even legal snares—and not check them or even set them properly. In a previous debate, I asked who would go out in the various valleys in the pouring rain to check snares. Will everybody go out within 24 hours to check a snare? I doubt it. For me, simplicity in law and enforcement are key tests. I therefore ask members to consider whether they accept that cruel, slow deaths will still occur, notwithstanding regulation and reviews. The simplest, cleanest and most enforceable thing to do is to ban snaring—no ifs, no buts.

Does the minister agree that the small business bonus scheme to which he referred has protected local firms and safeguarded local jobs, that more than 8,000 local firms have paid no rates or have had their rates significantly reduced, and that that approach contrasts with the hypocrisy of the Liberal Democrats, who pose as guardians of local businesses but oppose taxing Tesco superstores that undermine the viability of small businesses?

In the Health and Sport Committee’s report on its inquiry into child and adolescent mental health and wellbeing, we made the point that there is a big role for nursery nurses and nursery schools in integrating with health visitors. As most children now have a nursery place between the ages of three and four, will Des McNulty agree that that is a way forward?

Those statements always seem to be made before I get up to speak. Members will be watching the clock now. I congratulate Ross Finnie and other members on their thoughtful contributions. However, despite Mr Finnie’s extremely interesting point about generational problems, I think that our society has a number of special problems. There are more single parents, more family break-ups, more people with several partners and more siblings who are half related to each other. Parents and, indeed, children have different expectations of relationships. We also have to take into account the pressure on relationships from being part of a materialistic society that puts people into debt and, if we put alcohol and drug addiction into what is already a pretty heady mix, it is clear that we are dealing with a situation that is perhaps worse than it was in previous generations. In that light, I commend to the Parliament the Health and Sport Committee’s very thoughtful report on mental health and wellbeing, which was published on 23 June 2009, and will highlight from it two or three issues by way of background. Of course, many of these points have already been addressed by other members. First, Dr Wilson from the Scottish needs assessment programme—or SNAP—core working group on child and adolescent mental health told us that neglect before the age of two was the strongest predictor of later childhood mental health and also made it clear that “Early neglect ... can take many forms ...” and was not limited to “neglect by parents whose drug and alcohol problems mean that they are so preoccupied that they cannot connect with the child.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 25 March 2009; c 1737.] Of course, as we heard in evidence, 100,000 children in Scotland live with a parent with a drug or alcohol addiction. In what is a very complicated situation, we have to tackle parents as well as intervening early with children. No one has mentioned this yet, but in some cases the child will have to be taken from a parent at a very early age. That happens under the auspices of the children’s panel system, in which the child’s best interests are always considered.

I am not familiar with the New Orleans model, but I am familiar with the children’s panel system. I know that children can be taken away from parents at a very early age after a discussion with all parties, because the panel always considers the child’s best interests. I have a great deal of sympathy with what has been said about the important and specialist role played by health visitors, but we must be practical. As we have heard, many of them are in their late 50s. That is not the fault of the Parliament, let alone the Government; it is simply a fact of life that this professional group is reaching the age of retirement. Moreover, the demographics are changing. The Scottish Borders, for example, has a very large elderly population, which means that more district nurses and fewer health visitors are needed. Nevertheless, we still need health visitors. I realise that both specialisms require different skills and know that it is terribly difficult for people to build in flexibility, but the fact is that flexibility will have to be built in here.

That might well be the case, but I am talking about existing district nurses and health visitors. They have met the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, who was very sympathetic to the fact that, despite the many years of expertise in their own areas, they would be facing difficulties, but I do not think that we can stay in the same position. That said, we should move from health visitors coming in only when they see difficulties towards a more universal approach, because under the current approach they are being stigmatised. I never thought that I would see the day when a health visitor who knocked on someone’s door would be treated like a social worker and rejected. I am not saying that social workers are to blame for that situation, but the family in question would say to the health visitor, “Why are you at my door? What’s wrong?” Previously, it would have been normal for the health visitor to show up. Such an approach was more subtle and less in the face of parents. In the very brief time that I have left, I will talk about the abolition of prescription charges. I say to Murdo Fraser that, first, most prescriptions are for chronic illness. As we have discussed previously in the chamber, it is impossible to compile a comprehensive list of conditions, so some people would pay for a large number of prescriptions. Secondly, the Murdo Fraser always cites MSPs’ salaries and says that MSPs should not have access to free prescriptions. However, it is necessary to draw a line somewhere and to say that people who are over it will pay. If I recall correctly, in a previous debate in which I participated, Derek Brownlee came up with the figure of £21,000. That is not a lot of money. People who are ill may have additional liabilities, as they must heat their houses more and must travel to clinics. It is not good enough just to cite MSPs’ salaries—members should cite the salaries of people who would be just over the barrier. Thirdly, medication is free if people are in hospital. Why should they be charged for it if they take it at home? What principle is in operation there? Prescription charges are an easy hit, but when we examine them, we find that they are not good. My final point is directed to Ross Finnie and concerns preventive spending, which the Liberal Democrat amendment advocates. However, as we saw clearly yesterday in the chamber, with a limited budget—I will restrict my comments to health—it is extremely difficult to strike a balance between preventive spending and firefighting. We cannot do that with our limited budget. I think that that is my only controversial point for some people; perhaps there were more. The Parliament must have more financial powers, to give us the flexibility to make real social change in Scotland. All of us would love to target women who are pregnant and need assistance, because troubles often start in pregnancy, but we will not be able to do that within the existing financial constraints.

I am delighted to hear that. When I raised the issue of local authority and health board money following the child—I called it backpacking—in the previous session of the Parliament, the coalition Government rejected it.

Yes.

I quite agree that we must have long-term investment. The problem is that the Parliament has budgets only for four years and that we will be unable to plan according to that kind of trajectory unless we are in charge of our own finances.

4. To ask the First Minister what discussions have taken place with representatives of the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, given the likelihood of job losses in the third sector due to budgetary constraints. (S3F-2878)

The First Minister will be aware that, in England, citizens advice bureaux are being closed at a time when—as there is in Scotland—there is increasing demand for advice about debt, changes to the benefits system and eligibility for benefits, and homelessness. As CABx in Scotland are substantially funded by local authorities, will he enter into discussions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities on the matter, given that money that is spent on keeping CABx doors open is, in my opinion, spending to save by preventing ill health, family break-ups and loss of homes?

I speak as convener of the Health and Sport Committee on yet another cheery topic for the committee. Going from patients’ rights and palliative care to certification of death with, for some, a detour through end of life assistance was a logical but grim direction of travel—that is the popular phrase, I think. The process was lightened by gallows humour off camera, none of which I can repeat on the record for reasons that members will understand. Suffice it to say that the deputy convener’s sonorous baritone voice seemed most appropriate to the business at hand. Speaking of business, I turn to our stage 1 report. It is a bit difficult when speaking as convener if a minister has addressed in advance many of the things that the committee put in its stage 1 report. Perhaps we should turn round the procedure so that the committee gets to speak to its report first and the minister then addresses our concerns. However, that is for another day. The bill was introduced on 7 October 2010 and was referred to the Health and Sport Committee. We launched a six-week call for written evidence, during which we received 39 written submissions. We began taking oral evidence on 24 November, when we heard from the Scottish Government’s bill team officials. We went on to take evidence from witnesses representing the University of Dundee, the Information Services Division of NHS National Services Scotland, the Association of Anatomical Pathology Technology, the Scottish Pathology Network, the Federation of Burial and Cremation Authorities, the National Association of Funeral Directors, and from the chief registrar of the City of Edinburgh Council. We concluded our oral evidence taking on 15 December, when we heard from the Scottish Council of Jewish Communities, the Muslim Council of Scotland and, last but not least, the Minister for Public Health and Sport. On behalf of the committee, I put on record our thanks to everyone who provided evidence, especially the people who braved the inclement weather and lengthy and testing journeys in December—through blizzards or black ice and sometimes both—to give oral evidence to the committee. I also thank the minister and her officials for the evidence that they provided. As the minister said, the bill’s overall purpose is to introduce a new system for the scrutiny of death certificates in Scotland. The primary objective is to increase the quality of, and confidence in, the system of death certification. The bill will introduce a new system in Scotland for scrutiny of medical certificates of cause of death, which will be useful in public health planning. It will create the posts of medical reviewer and senior medical reviewer, whose functions will be to review the accuracy of death certificates. It will provide for the form of MCCDs to be amended to show additional relevant medical information, for example to indicate whether it is safe to dispose of the body by cremation. It will make it an offence in Scotland to dispose of a body or body parts without authorisation. The bill also provides that if a person has died outwith Scotland and the body is to be cremated in Scotland, medical reviewers will determine whether it is safe to cremate the body. In a case in which a person dies outside Scotland and the body is to be buried or cremated in Scotland but no cause of death is available, the bill provides that a medical reviewer may assist with arranging a post-mortem to establish the cause of death. The committee published its stage 1 report on Friday 21 January. Although we supported the general principles of the bill, we sought more clarity from the Government on several areas. To some extent the minister has pre-empted what I will say in that regard. The bill will introduce arrangements for a sample examination of death certificates by medical reviewers on a random basis. We welcomed the steps that the minister announced to increase the random sample size—indeed, we welcome much that she said today, which we will consider. We were concerned that there should be rigorous statistical analysis of the sample, to create confidence in the system. As a result of the evidence that we received, we were concerned that the proposed new system for scrutiny of death certificates could prove to be less rigorous than the system that is currently in place. In the light of recent controversial cases, the most notable of which is the Harold Shipman case, the committee thinks that it is essential that the public have confidence in any system for examining and scrutinising causes of death. That is vital, in the context of the identification of possible cases of medical negligence or criminal activity, and in the context of accurate recording of public health data. The committee thought that the proposed new scrutiny system could be improved through the use of modern technology to collect, collate and analyse information on causes of death. We were surprised—that is the diplomatic word—to learn that the Government is not taking this opportunity to specify a modern electronic system for death certification in Scotland. Instead, the bill calls for the continuation of a paper-based system. An electronic system would have obvious advantages. There could be prompts and guidance for completion of death certificates, and the need for repeated data entry would be reduced. There would also be benefits from having a readily accessible audit trail. The committee did not make this point, but the activities of a Shipman, who I understand regularly moved practice and area, thereby covering his tracks, would be more readily detectable, because the electronic database would surely uncover a suspicious pattern. In the light of the benefits of an electronic system, the committee strongly urged the Scottish Government to provide for the use of such a system for death certification before national roll-out. We accept that it would not be possible to use such a system in the pilot. The committee was anxious to ensure that the new system for death certification would not give rise to undue delay for grieving families who must make funeral arrangements. Such delays could present issues for various faith communities and for remote communities, and would potentially cause difficulties in relation to organ donation. The bill should be amended to clarify such matters. I think that the minister is addressing the issue. Another area of concern that emerged from the committee’s scrutiny related to the role of inexperienced junior doctors in signing death certificates. To ensure the accurate recording of causes of death, the committee thought that a doctor should be required to attain a specified level of experience before he or she is considered eligible to perform that function. In the absence of any oversight of that process by an experienced consultant, junior doctors should not be allowed to sign a death certificate without having completed appropriate training. I am sure that the committee will consider what the minister has said on that today. The committee welcomes the provision in the bill to strengthen the current procedures for dealing with circumstances in which a death occurs outside Scotland. However, under the current proposals in the bill, examination of the relevant paperwork and certificates provided by the authorities in the country where the death occurred would fall to staff of the crematorium or cemetery here in Scotland. As only a small number of such cases occur each year—the Government estimates the figure to be around 250—the committee felt that the assessment of the validity of such documentation should be carried out centrally by the Scottish Government. I note the minister’s comments in that regard, which we can consider. On the financial aspects of the bill, the committee welcomes the abolition of the higher fee that relates to the disposal of a body by cremation, which currently applies in about 64 per cent of cases, in favour of a lower and universal fee that will cover all cremations and burials in Scotland. The committee also supports the Government’s original policy intention that any new system of death certification should be self-funding; I note that the minister reinforced that intention today. We noted the rationale for giving the responsibility for collecting the fee to registrars, but we acknowledged the concerns that their representatives raised on that issue. I welcome the opportunity to debate these important issues, and I look forward to hearing contributions from other committee members in developing the general concerns that I have highlighted.

Aw!

I remind the member that the committee agreed unanimously in our stage 1 report that we would not seek to have an electronic system brought in before the test sites commence.

I understand the member’s point about the mandatory aspect, but I seek his advice. Is it not the case that such tests would be  mandatory for young men who were looking forward to a football or athletics career?

I congratulate Jim Hume on bringing the debate to the chamber; I know that he has had a difficult day, so I congratulate him even more for staying the course. I pay tribute to other members of the Parliament who have raised awareness of cardiomyopathy and the work of Scottish HART. Euan Robson, one of Jim Hume’s predecessors in the Parliament, first lodged a motion on the issue in 1999, followed by Johann Lamont in 2001, me in 2003 and Rosemary Byrne in 2004. The campaigning by outside organisations that are involved in cardiomyopathy prevention has made progress, and all parties have responded to it. I thank Malcolm Chisholm, who was then the health minister, for meeting Wilma and Kenny Gunn, who are my constituents as well as being constituents of Jim Hume. Malcolm Chisholm—and more recently Nicola Sturgeon—gave up a lot of time to discuss the issues with them. That shows that, with a heartfelt commitment to an issue that requires attention, ordinary people can, with determination, change things in the Parliament, and it shows that politicians do listen and that there are results. Jim Hume referred to the petition that Kenny and Wilma Gunn submitted following the tragic death of their son, Cameron, as a teenager, after taking part in very active sport, and he described how that was another step forward. As Jim Hume said, the condition affects young people who are very active in sports. Cardiomyopathy is a thickening of the muscles in the heart that often goes undetected but is present at times of rapid growth in adolescence. It can manifest itself in the teenage years, particularly when someone is taking strenuous exercise, so a lot of young sporting people can be vulnerable to it. Following the petition, and further meetings with and representations from Kenny and Wilma Gunn and Scottish HART, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing launched a pilot screening programme, in conjunction with health professionals and the Scottish Football Association, at Hampden park. It involved screening amateur athletes aged 16 or over for life-threatening conditions. As a little caveat, I have some concerns about blanket screening. The pilot involved voluntary screening, but blanket screening could give rise to issues in relation to applying for jobs and insurance, when people are asked whether they have any underlying health conditions. We should consider those issues carefully, so I am content at  present with voluntary screening for particular groups. The cabinet secretary has put in a further £150,000 of funding to extend the screening pilot over the coming years. So far, it has found 400 youngsters who have exhibited risk factors that range from mild to serious. Even one life saved is excellent, so the programme is making wonderful progress. I congratulate Wilma Gunn for continuing to work hard on the issue. She has been campaigning for the provision of defibrillators in public areas such as large supermarkets, airports, train stations and bus stations. Scottish HART has so far managed to get 30 of those in Scotland; that is the most recent figure that I have. That is another excellent step forward. I congratulate Kenny and Wilma Gunn, who have embraced all political parties and none, pursued the issue and worked with Professor Stewart Hillis. Wilma never lets go—she is a determined woman, and her determination has probably saved lives.

My late mother was prone to saying that half a loaf is better than no loaf. She had been brought up with low expectations in life, unlike her daughter. I do not believe that half a loaf is a good deal when I am entitled to the whole loaf. It therefore follows that 15 per cent of a loaf is, in principle, a worse deal. There are no surprises there. As for Calman, no one out there beyond this bubble or, indeed, the unionist bubble has the word “Calman” on their lips. The Labour benches, the press gallery and the public gallery are all  empty. In my very popular Saturday supermarket surgeries in Tesco, constituents are talking to me about job losses and the banking crisis, which was all a result of the mismanagement of the UK’s and, therefore, Scotland’s finances. Of course, we Scots have been told that without the strength of the union, the economic repercussions would have been dire. Well, here is breaking news: the union took us into the crisis that exposed the incompetence of the UK Government’s fiscal management, courtesy of Gordon Brown, first as the iron chancellor and then as Prime Minister. As for the protection of the union in the economic tsunami, mention has been made of the example of Ireland, but let us consider the example of Norway, which has an oil fund that is worth billions, and with which it supported its banks. It is plain as a pikestaff: independent Norway set up an oil fund, whereas Scotland’s oil revenues have been spent, spent, spent by the union.

Please sit down. Even the 15 per cent of the loaf is crumbly. Frankly, to tamper with income tax alone would be disastrous and regressive. For example, bands, allowances and thresholds are set by Westminster. A range of taxes are levied on the Scottish public, most of which are stealth taxes—national insurance, VAT, excise duty, fuel duty and corporation tax, to name but a few. They all count, they all interact and the revenues from them are all retained by Westminster. The offer is not only not tempting, but to accept it would be counterproductive for economic growth and, more important, would be unjust as regards the redistribution of wealth. Any increased tax take from Scotland following economic growth would be siphoned off to Westminster, just as the oil revenues were. When we add to the mix the Scotland Bill’s failure to devolve control over benefits to the Scottish Parliament, which Linda Fabiani touched on, the offer becomes even messier. Members will recall that the money that is saved through not requiring attendance allowance as a result of the implementation of free personal care, which is currently running at £40 million per annum, is retained by the Treasury. Money that is saved by Westminster as a result of devolutionary activities simply goes south. Even the proposed changes to UK benefits and the bringing in of the universal credit may not be an improvement. In the meantime, housing benefit is excluded. Although housing—social housing—is our responsibility, in practical terms Scotland, unlike Northern Ireland, which at least administers benefits, cannot integrate any tax powers such as those over housing benefit with its requirement to deliver socially rented housing, in which there is a major crisis throughout Scotland. The current proposals represent a pig’s breakfast of an offer; they do not even make up 15 per cent of a loaf. I offer this postscript by way of example: can someone explain why the power to change speed limits for cars is to be devolved, but not the power to do the same for cars that are towing caravans? Answers on a Calman postcard, please. Devolution, like this debate, is dull; independence is exciting.

Notwithstanding and certainly not understating the serious consequences arising from the prevailing wintry conditions referred to earlier, does the First Minister share my delight at seeing Scotland's schoolchildren enjoying fresh air  and vigorous exercise in the snow? Does he agree that winter sports should be on the school curriculum and that that would undermine the resistance of some children to compulsory exercise?

I, too, pay tribute to Margo MacDonald. I also pay due regard to Jeremy Purvis, who first set the Parliament on the path of examining the issue, and to his thoughtful contribution as well as those from members with diverse opinions on all sides of the chamber. I have changed my view on the issue, from being opposed in principle—I stress it is in principle, which is what stage 1 is about—-to support in principle. I wholly respect those who oppose the principle of end-of-life assistance—or assisted suicide; I do not shy away from that expression—for religious or moral reasons. I hope that they will reciprocate and respect my democratic right to hold a fundamentally different view. I make a distinction between suicide, which is surely an act of desperation, and assisted suicide, which is an act of compassion. Why have I changed my view? The death of both my much-loved parents in recent years made me focus on my own mortality and the manner of people's deaths, which is something many of us choose to avoid. I reflected on the marked contrast between my mother's lingering morphine-controlled hospital death, and that of my father, with his biscuit and cup of tea by his side, in his own chair in his own home among generations of family photographs.  Incidentally, when my mother was taken as an emergency into hospital for those final weeks, my sister and I were asked out of the blue, little realising then how dire her condition was, who had authority not to resuscitate. They did not ask my mother, but her two daughters, who were put on the spot. My mother's life and death in extremis was for us, not her, to decide on. She was resuscitated. The family were told that with increased levels of morphine to kill the pain, her death would surely be accelerated. Controlling the awfulness of that pain, whatever it took, was all that we could think of. Other members have mentioned double-effect doses, and I accept mens rea, but, in a way, end-of-life assistance as a side effect is already an everyday occurrence in hospitals throughout Scotland. I listened to the arguments of the member who introduced the bill, and I have considered the evidence and the committee's report. I will touch on the concept of dignity and the divergence of views in that regard. The committee's report states: "whilst those in favour of assisted suicide see it as a means of preserving dignity in the terminal stages of life and in the moment of death, those against present an equally compelling argument that a hastened death is undignified by its very hastening ... The debates that took place in the evidence taken by the Committee served to demonstrate that it is impossible to reconcile these arguments." I have no problem with that—of course it is impossible to reconcile those arguments. Dignity is in the eye of the beholder, who is the person going through the experience; it is highly subjective. I would not expect people to have the same views on what constitutes dignity in death. The key issue for me is the choice that is exercised by an individual in relation to his or her own continued existence. For those of certain religious persuasions there may be an absolute prohibition on accelerating one's own death for whatever reason. I have no problem with that. They may hold that belief, but it should not be imposed on others who do not share it. I note in passing that the bill provides for an opt-in, rather than an opt-out, process. I speak as an atheist, so no such prohibition pertains to me. I must therefore consider whether I think in principle that someone with the capacity and the informed knowledge that their illness or disability is, in their judgment, intolerable—I accept that there are difficulties with that definition—and for whom the prognosis is six months or less, should have the option to choose whether to accelerate with third-party medical assistance his or her death. I must answer in the affirmative—not to say that that option should be taken, but that someone should  have the option for that choice. The choice is for that person alone to make, not for others.  In life, I may choose to take medication or have a life-saving operation—or refuse. It seems, setting aside arguments of compassion, that I may reject medication when I am aware that it will accelerate death but that I cannot request such medication. That seems perverse and to defy logic and consistency. The choice as to whether a practitioner would assist would also be a matter of choice. It would be an opt in, not an opt out. For me, that is the principle, and I will therefore support the bill at stage 1—but with many caveats. I share many of the committee's concerns, including its concern about definitions. I say in passing that it is not an either/or; it would not be end of life assistance or palliative care, it would be both. For me, there is a point at which palliative care has to have some kind of conclusion. As I said in passing, in practical terms it is probably happening in hospitals elsewhere. However, I appreciate that the path from principle to process and practice is tortuous. I know that we will not get that far at decision time, but the member has said that, if she is re-elected, she will return to the issue afresh. It is my hope that, next time round, the proposed legislation, which endeavours to provide choice with in-built protections from abuse, will move a stage further so that we can see whether anything can possibly be put in place. I fully support a right to life. There is also a right to self-determination—which I think we are denying people at present.

I want to get some clarity. I think that all of us agree that HMRC, in its words, "mothballed" SVR in 2000.

That is what is stated in the briefing note that was given to the permanent secretary and ministers in May 2007. It is a fact. Paragraph 4 of the note states that, following the Labour-Liberal Administration's "decision not to invoke the power in 1999 a Memorandum of Understanding ... was agreed between the Inland Revenue (now part of HMRC), the Department for Work & Pensions (DWP) and the Scottish Executive 'to maintain the [then] existing tax infrastructure in the period that the SVR is not being used; and to introduce the tax should the Scottish Executive decide to use the power'." I would like to know what else the memorandum of understanding said. Was the Labour-Liberal Administration aware that, effectively, the power had been mothballed, on a care-and-maintenance basis? Labour members say that the arrangement is news to them but, apparently, it was known about in 2000. I presume that there were discussions between the Treasury and the finance department.

I will take some interventions at the end of my speech. I turn to the silly suggestion that the power has somehow been lost and that, consequently, the constitution of the Parliament has been entirely undermined. That is utter nonsense. We are  dealing with a contractual matter between the Treasury and the Scottish Government that relates to payment for the facility. The power is not lost—we are dealing with a contract, not the constitution. This morning Andy Kerr said as much when pressed during an interview on "Good Morning Scotland". He said that John Swinney had "given away the major power that the Scottish Parliament has without coming to the parliament". The interviewer, Aileen Clarke, responded: "To be fair though Mr Kerr, it's not gone away forever. This isn't irreversible."

Let me finish. Aileen Clarke went on to say: "If you're willing to stump up the seven million, then you can get it back." Andy Kerr replied: "The power remains in statute, but your ability to use it is gone". The power is still there. I am sorry if that is too simple a constitutional question for those who are trying to rabble-rouse on the back benches. The contract still exists, if members want to pay £7 million for nothing—unless the breaking news is that Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives intend to raise tax if, sadly, they get into power next year. Why would they pay money for a system that they could bring into activity within 10 months, which is not a big deal?

No. It is a complete nonsense to say that Calman is irrelevant. Why on earth would we pay Westminster money for an IT system for something that will be abolished within months, that we will not use and that will cost us nurses and teachers? I say to Gavin Brown that the example that was given was illustrative of what the funding could provide, instead of buying fresh air. Why should Scotland pay money for something that Westminster has brought about? Let us look at the terms of HM Treasury's statement of funding policy. It says: "the devolved administrations will meet all the operational and capital costs associated with devolution from within their allocated budgets". Fair enough. If we want to introduce free personal care, we have to pay for it. If we want to pay up-front fees for students, that is fine. If we want to have concessionary fares, that is fine. We must bear the costs. However, in this case, the system has been introduced by Westminster without consultation and without discussion, and it  therefore does not fit within the contract that has been agreed.

I have sat listening long enough. We have heard not a squeak out of Mr Brownlee so far—or from others on his party's benches, or the Liberal benches. It is they who are now in power. The Treasury keeps £40 million a year because we introduced free personal care. That is a one-way flow of money. The Treasury takes and takes, even when we do something that saves it money.

I am on a roll. I understand that, during the previous eight years, hundreds of millions of pounds that the Executive did not use went flowing back to Westminster. In answer to George Foulkes, the money that he mentioned is being put into capital projects, because we use Scotland's money for the right things, not for a system that nobody will use—it will be abolished, and there is no purpose to it unless it is intended to raise tax.

It will be difficult to bring something fresh to the debate, as we debated the issue in January and I am speaking late in this debate. However, I will try to bring a fresh angle. I begin by laying it down that, as Ian McKee said, prescriptions are not free—they are paid for through general taxation, and the richer somebody is, thankfully, the more tax they pay. As I came into the chamber, I picked up a booklet from the Long Term Conditions Alliance Scotland, which has a display outside. There is an interesting section called, "Impact of the Economic Downturn on People with Long Term Conditions". As Jackie Baillie said in the debate in January, 92 per cent of prescriptions are free and 8 per cent are charged for. Many of the people who are charged have long-term conditions. I will try to drift away from the ageing aspect and not take it personally. About 600,000 people are not eligible for free prescriptions but have an income of less than £16,000. Several issues arise out of that. People with long-term conditions have not only the costs of multiple prescriptions, but higher transport and child care costs because of the need to access services. Interestingly, the booklet by the Long-Term Conditions Alliance states:  "Citizens' Advice Scotland ... found that 41 per cent of their CAB debt clients listed sickness or disability as a reason for their debt. Furthermore, 'sick or disabled' CAB debt clients have greater financial problems and, on average ... Have six debts and owe an average of £20,588." So for somebody who is maybe on or just above £16,000, no account is taken of the liability that they already have for debts and other payments that must be made, which greatly reduce the income that they have to pay for prescriptions. That issue has been missed in the debate. Against that background, it is important to consider the impact of recession on people's health. There are all kinds of difficulties for people, such as job loss and marriage break-ups. It might be then that they need to go to their GP to access prescriptions. If they are earning above the threshold, they will have to pay for their prescriptions. As Ian McKee said, that might compound their illness and, at the end of the day, cost the NHS a great deal more. Thresholds are fraught with difficulty. Derek Brownlee suggests raising the threshold, but to what level would he raise it? I invite him to respond.

Let us say that Derek Brownlee has suggested that £21,000 should be the threshold. So somebody who was on £21,500 could not access free prescriptions. They might have substantial debts, which would not be taken into account. Raising the threshold is not a simple matter. There are injustices with thresholds, which is why it is better not to have them at that point, but to have them at the point of taxation and to bring in general taxation to pay for the NHS. That is the way to remedy the issue and it is far more just. Endeavouring to extend the list of exemptions for long-term conditions is also fraught with difficulty, as we well know. The BMA has examined the issue carefully. In the debate in January—I must now refer to it—I pointed out that the BMA has said: "Moves have been made to exempt patients with cancer from prescription charges, but already this looks set to create a new set of winners and losers depending on which side of an arbitrary line you fall. If the current system is to continue to exist, then we believe that consideration of more radical proposals is needed rather than a simple extension of the list of medical exemptions."  So that is not a solution and, for me, a threshold is not a solution. The issue comes down to the question of why medication should be free for in-patients, when out-patients, who are taking it home, are charged. That seems unjust.

I remind the Parliament that, as the Presiding Officer was right to say, I speak as the Health and Sport Committee's convener, so I am—properly—constrained in my remarks. Here we go—another week, another day and another Health and Sport Committee debate. I tell the team that we should get an award for stamina. I thank the entire Health and Sport Committee team—clerks, the official report and Scottish Parliament information centre staff—for such dedication to duty. I also thank all those who gave written and oral evidence. Enough of gratitude—to business. The Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill was introduced in the Parliament on 17 March this year. The committee held a seven-week call for written evidence between 25 March and 13 May that resulted in 41 written submissions being  received. The committee took oral evidence between 8 September and 6 October. We heard first from the Scottish Government's bill team, Citizens Advice Scotland, Consumer Focus Scotland and the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman. On 29 September, we took evidence from Inclusion Scotland, Long Term Conditions Alliance Scotland, the Scottish Association for Mental Health, the Royal National Institute for Deaf People Scotland, the Royal National Institute of Blind People Scotland, the British Medical Association Scotland, the Royal College of Nursing Scotland, the Royal College of General Practitioners Scotland, Unison and the Law Society of Scotland—a motley crew. We are beginning to bond with many of those organisations, so frequent are their visits. We concluded oral evidence when we heard on 6 October from the NHS Forth Valley patient focus and public involvement steering group, NHS Lothian and—last but not least—the cabinet secretary. The stated aims of the bill as introduced are to set out the rights of patients who receive health care from the NHS, to introduce a guarantee for eligible patients to start to receive medical treatment within 12 weeks of treatment being agreed—I stress the word "agreed"—and to provide for the rights of patients to make complaints about and provide feedback on their treatment by the NHS through the provision of a new patient advice and support service. That service will be provided by the Common Services Agency of NHS Scotland on a contractual basis with a service provider. PASS will include the establishment of patient rights officers in each of NHS Scotland's 14 territorial health board areas. It is fair to say that it will be more of a conduit for complaint services. The committee published its stage 1 report on Thursday 4 November. Consideration of the bill was based on the bill's four principal aspects, to which the cabinet secretary referred: patient rights; the treatment time guarantee; complaints and feedback; and PASS. I will turn to the first, patient rights, and thereafter deal with the others in, I trust, an orderly fashion. One of the main issues that we considered was what constitutes patient rights and whether primary legislation is the most suitable means of promoting them. Another was the fact that the bill covers some rights but not all rights, which is a point that other members might develop. The committee also considered the need for rights to be enforceable while ensuring that Parliament does not create a charter for lawyers—tedious expression though it is—in relation to the NHS. The committee welcomed and shared the commitment of the Scottish Government to  promote the rights of patients but, notwithstanding the cabinet secretary's comments, we considered that there is an "inherent contradiction between, on the one hand, setting out patient rights in primary legislation giving the impression of enforceable rights and, on the other, making express provision in the Bill to limit the legal enforceability of these rights." The committee went on to state that the bill "may raise unrealistic expectations amongst patients regarding their rights due to the limitations on legal enforcement under section 18 of the Bill." I heard what the cabinet secretary said and I think that we accept the point, but we are creating a right without a remedy. Members of the committee differed in their views on the use of primary legislation to promote patient rights. The report states: "Some Members of the Committee believe the Government's objective would be more effectively achieved by bringing up to date a revised and comprehensive patient rights charter. This should be in plain English, enshrining the healthcare principles set out in the Schedule to the Bill, all of the rights available to patients (existing rights, new rights provided for in the Bill, including", as the cabinet secretary said, "an alternative dispute resolution mechanism),"— such as mediation— "to be published by the Cabinet Secretary using the powers of direction under the NHS (Scotland) Act 1978." On the treatment time guarantee, which the cabinet secretary also dealt with, the 12-week treatment time guarantee is for elective/in-patient treatments for patients and there are a number of exclusions—the cabinet secretary referred to some of them. Some that she did not refer to are assisted conception; diagnostic tests; outpatient treatments; and alcohol and drug misuse services, although I think that there may be reasons why it would be difficult in some circumstances to provide those within a treatment time guarantee. Members of the committee again differed in their views regarding the introduction of the treatment time guarantee and the decision to place it in primary legislation. The report states: "Some Members consider that the treatment time guarantee will be beneficial to patients by providing reassurance about the maximum time they may have to wait for treatment following diagnosis. Other Members consider that the proposed guarantee would add little to the existing 18 week referral to treatment target and are concerned by evidence that a new target could have unintended consequences including the potential for distortion of clinical priorities. In addition, these Members question the value of a statutory 'guarantee' which cannot be enforced." The report continues:  "The Committee also noted the concerns raised about the proposed exclusion of a number of services"— I have mentioned two or three— "most notably mental health services." I again note the cabinet secretary's remarks. The report goes on: "While the Committee accepts that it would be illogical to set targets for the treatment of patients accessing mental health services in response to a crisis, it is disappointed that access to services such as cognitive behavioural therapy are deemed to be outside the scope of the 12 week guarantee". On complaints and feedback, the committee fully supported the aim of the Government in seeking to develop a more open and accessible system of patient feedback within the NHS. However, we were not clear what practical difference the provisions of the bill would make for patients who want to "give feedback, raise concerns or complain about the health care they have received. Patients already have a 'right to complain'"— notwithstanding that it is not enshrined in statute— "and the provisions of the Bill will not alter that right in any way." On PASS and patient rights officers, the committee considered the proposed structure and the costs for the establishment of a new patient advice and support service and noted the variations that have developed in the level of service delivered by the current independent advice and support service, which is operated by citizens advice bureaux. We accepted that the service is not uniform throughout the country. Many of the issues relate to the current contractual and funding basis for the IASS, which varies from one health board area to another. The committee believed that the role of PASS and patient rights officers "are not sufficiently clearly defined in the Bill". The committee went on to note that the role of a PRO will be to act as a "signpost" for patients, assisting them with feedback, providing them with advice and supporting them in making complaints. However, PROs will be prevented from carrying out any advocacy role on behalf of patients. That seemed a bit cluttered and, given that, the committee failed to see how PASS and the PROs will be an improvement on the current service provided by the IASS—forgive me for using all these acronyms. In the committee's view, "a more effective and efficient approach could be to build on the current IASS structure by developing it through a new national contract. Such an approach would retain the best elements of the present system whilst addressing the concerns regarding the inconsistencies in the level of service and funding between health board areas."  That would ensure that we do not throw out the baby with the bathwater. I turn to our overall conclusion. The good news for the cabinet secretary is that we were unanimous in our support for the promotion of patient rights and the Government's aim of placing patients at the centre of the NHS in Scotland. The bad news is that the committee was divided on whether primary legislation is the most appropriate means of achieving that goal. The report states: "Some Members feel that the Bill has the potential to offer a renewed focus on patient rights, including a new treatment time guarantee and an enhanced patient advice and support service. These Members consider that the Bill will provide the necessary impetus to help overcome any organisational or cultural obstacles to change which may exist within NHS Scotland." However, it continues: "a majority of the Committee is not persuaded by the evidence which has been advanced to date, that primary legislation is the most appropriate means of promoting patient rights." Some members went on to recommend, as an alternative, that the Scottish Government publish a comprehensive patient rights charter, to be enforced in the way that I have described. The report states: "Some Members consider that the Bill, as introduced, will not contribute significantly to the goal of achieving a patient-focused health service and, contrary to the Government's policy intentions, may potentially cause confusion regarding the legal rights of patients." It concludes: "Consequently, the Committee is unable to make a recommendation to the Parliament on the general principles of the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill." We agreed to disagree.

Not in my car.

This has been a busy week for the Health and Sport Committee, with our regular meeting on a Wednesday morning, the stage 3 debate on the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill yesterday and now a committee debate this morning.

I mean this afternoon. I am just checking that members are awake. I feel in particular for my colleague Helen Eadie, who rounds the week off with her members' business debate tonight. Next week for the team, it is stage 1 of the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill. Perhaps we should look at the legislative agenda closely and read the runes—the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill, the Palliative Care (Scotland) Bill, the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill and the grand finale in more ways than one, the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill. It could drive us to drink. That said, it is time to turn to the topic. It would be useful to remind members why the committee undertook an inquiry into out-of-hours health care provision in rural areas. It reflects not only the radical changes to general practitioner contractual duties, but the facts that so many members, including me, represent wholly rural constituencies and that even some urban members—if I may call them that, because of Scotland's rural nature—have rural corners of their constituencies. In the days of Dr Finlay and his casebook and his very worthy Janet the housekeeper—this is a generation test—and right up until 2004, GPs had 24-hour responsibility for care of their patients. They could not delegate that responsibility and were required to make arrangements for any cover that was needed. However, as demand for out-of-hours care increased steadily, and perhaps because of raised expectations of medical care—which is no bad thing—together with the demographic shift in population, it was recognised by the mid-1990s that GPs who were providing out-of-hours care were under significant pressure. As a result, new ways of working developed and GP co-operatives became the main vehicle for delivering out-of-hours services. Those new ways  involved GPs giving one another shift cover, as it were. Step forward into the picture NHS 24, which was launched in 2001 and which has three core functions. It provides nurse-led consultations, aided by clinical-decision support software, or triage by phone; it provides referral, where appropriate, to a range of other services; and it provides health information through health information advisers. It is fair to say that, in the early days, the news for NHS 24 was not all good. Some high-profile cases rightly set alarm bells ringing as to the efficacy and even safety of the service, but I believe that today it is realised that NHS 24 is a different kettle of fish. It is not perfect, but it is improved and improving. However, damage was done and our report emphasises that there remains "a substantial degree of work to be done to re-build confidence in NHS 24, in order to ensure that it operates as a fully effective element of the out-of-hours range of services." On the plus side, NHS 24 now takes responsibility for the Scottish centre for telehealth. Established by the previous Scottish Executive in 2006 to promote the use of telehealth by health boards in Scotland, it could have a much enhanced role to play in delivering health care in remote and rural areas, with the prospect of saving some patients what can amount to a round-the-globe trip to see a consultant, with costs to the health service in personnel and cash, to patients' wellbeing and even to their pockets. To date, the centre for telehealth has been a bit of a Cinderella operation, but the move to NHS 24 will give it impetus, changing its modus operandi from advice to advice and action. We hope that it will go from having no teeth to having a full and biting set, which all committee members want—I mean its efficacy, not its teeth. I refer Parliament to our earlier report, which was debated on 22 September this year, busy little committee bees that we are. I digress. Into the mix with all those pressures was added the UK-wide GMS contract, or, to give it its Sunday name, the new general medical services contract 2004. The days of team Dr Finlay, Dr Cameron, Janet and the unforgettable Dr Snoddie, were not just numbered; more than just being television history, it was curtains for the likes of that couthy doctorial team. What did that GMS contract change? It brought in two key changes, with ramifications that were perhaps not fully appreciated at the time. It freed GPs to opt out of providing any services out of hours—not in itself a bad thing, because a tired doctor is not always the best doctor—and it transferred the responsibility for securing that out-of-hours provision to NHS boards.  How was the 24-hour service to be delivered and has it been delivered? NHS boards are free to enter into contracts with GPs who wish to provide out-of-hours cover and/or to employ salaried GPs to deliver services. That has had financial consequences for some boards, which might find themselves buying GP time at an expensive ad hoc hourly rate. That consequence was noted by Audit Scotland in its 2007 report, but more on that later. New service models have developed and some now have multidisciplinary teams comprising doctors, specially trained nurse practitioners and paramedics. Members are no doubt familiar with that arrangement from their constituencies. Done well, and ensuring that patients are part and parcel of that kind of delivery, the arrangement can be a plus. How are the arrangements doing in general? In August 2007, Audit Scotland published its report into primary care out-of-hours services. That investigation found that 80 per cent of patients were happy with the care that they had received, but the report also warned that with fewer GPs choosing to provide out-of-hours services, there was a risk that the service was not sustainable in its current form. It also said that NHS boards, particularly in rural areas, had borne the additional costs of the new service because, as Audit Scotland found, of GPs who opted out of providing out-of-hours services, 1,440 re-provided those services for NHS boards on a fee-for-service basis. I alluded to that earlier and I might come back to it later. Audit Scotland also raised the concern that, in some areas, GPs dictated the rate of pay for working out of hours because there was no nationally agreed rate. Boards often had to enter lengthy discussions about pay rates, particularly in remote and rural areas where the cost of providing out-of-hours services is greater for self-evident reasons. I referred already to the cost to NHS boards of that solution, to which I also refer in the penultimate conclusion of our report. I might not have time to talk about it further today, so members can read it for themselves. In September 2009, Randolph Murray lodged public petition PE1272, calling on the Scottish Parliament to urge the Scottish Government to ensure that there is adequate provision for out-of-hours GP cover in all remote and rural areas in Scotland. That petition presented the out-of-hours situation in the community of Kinloch Rannoch, subsequent to the introduction of the new GMS contract. Out-of-hours care in that part of NHS Tayside is now provided by first responders. We had already decided to undertake an inquiry into the impact of the new GP contract on remote and rural areas and so subsumed that petition into our inquiry and travelled to Kinloch Rannoch to take evidence from the petitioners in situ.  Our committee report was published in April 2010. In it, we express concern that trust and confidence in the out-of-hours service had been lost and that a substantial amount of work remained to be done to rebuild confidence. That can be achieved only when the system can be depended on to work properly, which will require out-of-hours services to be fully joined up, which they are not currently. An example of that is the confusion and lack of clarity over when to access ambulance services and, indeed, the reliability of accessing those services. That is not the only example, but it is probably one of the more dramatic ones. The committee recognised the Scottish Ambulance Service's stated commitment to service enhancement, but community groups reported grave problems with the availability of ambulances to deal with emergency situations. There was also a worrying 41 per cent increase in emergency calls made out of hours since the GMS contract was introduced in 2004. That seems to suggest—and reasonably so—that the Scottish Ambulance Service is filling a gap in service that, properly, NHS boards should have filled and that, as a consequence, ambulances are not always available for real emergencies. The committee concluded that NHS boards should be given the responsibility for devising—and should be enabled to deliver—specific, sustainable and often innovative arrangements for out-of-hours services that meet the needs of individual communities. Those should, and must, be delivered in consultation with those communities. That is how we build trust. There are shining examples that we urge other boards to examine, such as in the Borders—I refer to paragraph 87 in our report. The Borders success was achieved in part by making extensive use of salaried out-of-hours doctors with appropriate training and, therefore, by having a handle on costs. Lochaber and Wester Ross also come out with a pat on the back; I refer to paragraph 88 in our report. I hope that colleagues will expand on those and others matters that I have mentioned. The committee received a response from the Scottish Government in June 2010. The response sets out the actions that the Scottish Government and NHS Scotland are taking. I am sure that the minister will expand on those during the debate. I commend the report by the Health and Sport Committee. I look forward to the informed speeches of colleagues and, indeed, to the informed update from the minister. We all wish our constituents, who are supportive of the NHS and the personnel within it, to trust that when they need medical attention—or simply  advice or reassurance—the NHS will be there for them at the appropriate level. We also all wish that the people who live in our remote and rural areas feel secure that there will not be a rural health care postcode lottery. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Health and Sport Committee's 4th Report, 2010 (Session 3): Report on out-of-hours healthcare provision in rural areas (SP Paper 421).

On the issue of heritage, the minister is aware of concerns regarding the John Buchan museum near Broughton in Peeblesshire, which is currently operated by a family trust. Given the worldwide significance of John Buchan, who of  course was the author of "The Thirty-Nine Steps" and a hundred other books and who was governor general of Canada, it is crucial to protect the vast collection of letters and other memorabilia in the museum. What opportunity is there for the trust to access the Heritage Lottery Fund or any other funds, if it has not already done so?

Hooray!

It is nice to get a clap before starting. This is a spontaneous contribution. It is many years since I did my highers in physics and chemistry, but it is not so long since my son's MSc in chemistry and a PhD in a physics-related subject. His experiences in research and development are not the subject of a special pleading; they reflect much of what is going on in research and development, which I will address. The last three lines of Bill Wilson's excellent motion, on which I congratulate him, read: "to sustain science research along with supporting greater industrial research and to assist in the practical application of world-beating research." Judging from the experience of my son and his university colleagues—which I think is repeated elsewhere—it is extremely difficult for people working in research and development to obtain funding and support for pure research with no industrial connection, or even to find support to go into contracts for practical applications of technology. My son's area of research and development is very attractive, as it is in the green development of sustainable energy, but his colleagues find things extremely difficult. They have to prepare business cases, the process is fraught, projects become mired in difficulty and they have to battle for funding while protecting their intellectual property. They tend to work on short-term contracts. Therefore, there is a great temptation for many of them to quit the shores of Scotland and go elsewhere—to Canada, New Zealand or Australia, where research and development for their own sake, as well as their practical applications, are valued. That is the only issue that I wished to bring to the Parliament's attention in this spur-of-the-moment speech—it is rather like a long intervention—but I would like the minister to comment on it. It is an issue that has been raised many times. With the failure of the business community to understand the language of the science community and those in the science community having to prepare business cases without support, people are deserting our shores for elsewhere.

Less heat, please, and more light. To continue the quotation that Michael Matheson gave, Chief Superintendent Hamilton of Strathclyde Police told the Health and Sport Committee: "As a result, I do not think that banning Buckfast would lead to a significant increase or decrease in violent crime." He went on to make the interesting point that "Over the past 10 or so years, there has been a 10 per cent swing from violence occurring outdoors as a result of drinking to that occurring indoors."—[ Official Report , Health and Sport Committee , 15 September; c 3308-9.] That has happened because of the availability of all types of alcohol and its relative price. It is not to do with Buckfast. Dr Forsyth, who is a senior research fellow at the Glasgow centre for the study of violence, when asked about banning Buckfast, said in relation to young men in Polmont: "What is missing from the discussion is the fact that members of the group in Polmont were consuming a lot of other substances along with alcoholic drinks. In particular, they were taking prescription pills—the main one being diazepam—along with their drink. In my view, that is a far more serious issue than caffeine."—[ Official Report , Health and Sport Committee , 15 September 2010; c 3315.]  The evidence on amendments that the committee took at stage 2 concluded that banning caffeine was not to be considered and it was not related to violence; the shift had been to simple binge drinking and front-loading on cheap alcohol.

All law should be evidence based. I had the privilege of sitting with my colleagues in the Health and Sport Committee through the vast evidence that was taken on the bill and am utterly convinced that minimum unit pricing is the way  forward. As members have noticed, on many matters I am not always on my party's team—often I am in disagreement with it—but when the chief medical officers of the UK and a heavyweight list of professionals in both the health and crime services tell a committee that we need to introduce minimum unit pricing, we need to do that. Richard Simpson spoke about the pensioner couple who drink a bottle of vodka or sherry a week, but he should tell that couple that the effects of excessive drinking of alcohol in Scotland are costing each of them a contribution to the criminal justice system and the health service of £900 a year. It was suggested that white van man would become involved if the price in Scotland were different from that in England, but when the Labour Party lodged amendments to set different prices for caffeine-related drinks north and south of the border, white van man—and his van—disappeared. I did not understand that. Labour members did produce an alternative to deal with the issue. It was called a floor price. I am delighted to recount briefly the evidence that Professor Brown, who chaired Labour's alcohol commission, gave under interrogation by my colleague Ross Finnie. He noted that she had "suggested that we will get a better effect by adopting the mechanism of the basic cost of production plus duty plus VAT" and asked what evidence there was for that assertion. Professor Brown said: "We do not have any argument that says that our proposal would be better in relation to the outcomes that you have mentioned. We simply do not know."— [ Official Report , Health and Sport Committee , 15 September 2010; c 3323-4.]  Professor Brown and the commission rejected the Sheffield study, but she said that she had no evidence that what she proposed was any good whatever. That answers the question about the effort that Labour members put into dealing with Scotland's alcohol problem over the eight years in which they were in government with the Liberal Democrats.

Amendment 26 is a probing amendment, which is supplementary to my intervention during the cabinet secretary's opening speech in the stage 1 debate and further develops my concern about section 7. There has been a focus on the Supreme Court's role, the Scottish criminal legal system and the period of detention during which representation is required, and the ramifications of section 7 have been overlooked, in the main. I intend to redress that problem. The current position is that if, after consideration, the SCCRC thinks that there might have been a miscarriage of justice, it will make a referral to the High Court if an appeal is in the interests of justice—full stop. Section 7(3)(b) will insert a further test, which can override the current criteria. The test is: "the need for finality and certainty in the determination of criminal proceedings." Therefore, the interests of justice can be outweighed by the need for finality and certainty. Finality for whom? Certainty for whom? In whose interest? Further to that substantial change to the SCCRC's remit, section 7(4) will introduce for the High Court the power to reject a referral if it is not in the interests of justice, having regard to "the need for finality and certainty"— that phrase again. The current position is that when the SCCRC makes a referral to the High Court, the court must accept it—it has no discretion in the matter. The approach in section 7(4) is a substantial change. The court of appeal will be able to reject the referral, even if the case has met the test in section 7(3)(b). Bill Aitken referred to the Megrahi case, so I will use that case as an example. Let us suppose that on Abdelbaset al-Megrahi's death a third party steps into a dead man's shoes and applies to the SCCRC for referral to the court of appeal, and the SCCRC says—even though the finality and certainty test has been introduced—"Yes, we agree to that referral to the High Court." However, the High Court says, "No, we do not think that it is in the interests of justice that the referral is taken up by us; that is not in the interests of finality and certainty." The problem is that the judges who make that decision are the very judges whose previous judgment is being challenged. There is a conflict of interest, which compounds the problem. I referred to the Megrahi case because Bill Aitken mentioned it. Let us consider the general purpose of the SCCRC. In 2010, 97 cases were referred to the High Court. Of those, the High Court determined 73, with 44 appeals granted, 20  refused and nine abandoned. The success rate was therefore 60 per cent. If two extra hurdles are put in place—that the SCCRC and then the High Court must say that the appeal is in the interests of justice, having regard to the need for finality and certainty—how many cases will proceed in 2011? My concern is that the provision not only deals with the Cadder case but affects all cases that are referred to the SCCRC and we have had no evidence on it. It is a substantial change to what the SCCRC can do and to the powers of the court of appeal, but not one shred of evidence have we been able to hear on it. It also follows that the amendments that the Conservatives propose would make the situation worse by taking away discretion and making the exercise of the power mandatory. I look forward to hearing what the cabinet secretary has to say—it is important to put that on the record—and I hope that, if the provision is agreed to, the Megrahi case does not follow the path that I suspect it might if it is taken to the SCCRC.

Will the member give way?

On the question of finality and certainty, I have concerns about section 7. It appears to undermine the Scottish Criminal Cases Review  Commission's role and purpose by introducing what seems to be something new, which is "the need for finality and certainty in the determination of criminal proceedings". That can apply to many cases. Section 7 will also allow the High Court, when it sits as an appeal court, to reject a reference from the SCCRC.

I return the First Minister to the report and quote the following: "We could not within the report, and should not make any estimate of mortality for centres without formal access as a number of potential outcomes could occur including successful conservative management, provision of an ad hoc/informal service or transfer to a neighbouring centre." Does the First Minister agree that the headline in Scotland on Sunday that said "Patients dying", was, to put it politely, not only misleading but scaremongering?

Why change the habit of a lifetime?

I refer the minister to the expression "democratic deficit" in her statement. Nowhere is that better exemplified than in the Scottish Borders, where the STV franchise does not run, so my constituents receive ITV Borders, which is located in Gateshead, and do not get Scottish news or Scottish football. I hear what she says about local opt-outs. Will the Scottish digital  network panel specifically consider the difficulties in the Scottish Borders?

I refer the minister to Sheriff Drummond's observations in the case that concerned the matter. Sheriff Drummond said that there is scope to resolve the issue within current legislation, without the need to change the law. I presume that he meant English legislation that perhaps predates the setting up of the Scottish Parliament. In the circumstances, will the minister and her  department consider exploring the matter with their counterparts in England?

Because of all of the concerns that have  arisen in relation to the Delhi games, will the minister take this opportunity to give a progress report on Scotland's preparations for its games in 2014?

The example given by Richard Simpson, which I tried to intervene on him about, was a good one, but I have concerns about information sharing. The minister gave an extreme case as an example, in which housing and other departments would have access to medical records, which might be a grey area. However, I want an assurance that there is protection for individuals and that it would have to be in specific cases, after a specific application, that there would be such sharing of information.

Will the member take an intervention?

It was a little tongue in cheek to call it dull. In fact, I said that it was full of little gems.

Going by my helpful note from the clerks, I fear that I have 13 minutes for this speech. A pattern appears to be emerging of my having extensive time to speak on subjects on which I have restricted capabilities and knowledge. I believe that that is some kind of revenge on me, but I shall try not to share or spread that revenge round the chamber. I deliver this speech with a health warning, in that I am most probably the least technological member of the Health and Sport Committee. I think that brass bands should celebrate when I successfully replace a fuse, and I am in persistent communications with the Parliament's information technology helpline; its number, 86100, is engraved on my heart. I will reach the report, but first I commend the committee members, some of whom served on Monday and Tuesday on the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill Committee. Some, who had not been sufficiently tested, proceeded to the Subordinate Legislation Committee. We then spent all this morning considering stage 2 amendments to the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill. The committee members are here this afternoon in body, if not in spirit. So here we are. The report looks dull and sounds dull, but it is actually very worthy and important. "Worthy" is a most abused word, but the report is worthy, because its recommendations would assist in delivering a better health service not only generally, but individually for the patient by saving—a mot du jour—resources in staff time and financially. In December last year, the Health and Sport Committee undertook a short inquiry into the development of clinical portal technology and telehealth in the national health service in Scotland. Members correctly felt that the issue was much neglected but had a great deal of potential. The inquiry's aim was to examine the current pace of development in the use of technology as a means of delivering a more efficient, responsive and patient-centred health service. The inquiry focused on two specific areas. The first was the development of a Scotland-wide clinical portal project by health boards and the role  of the Scottish Government in co-ordinating that. The second was the level of use of telehealth applications by health boards and the role of the Scottish centre for telehealth in promoting their use. The committee report was published in March 2010. Although we recognise the good work that some health boards have undertaken on portal projects—NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and NHS Tayside get the plaudits—and the use of telehealth systems by NHS Highland, the committee's overall view is that we need a much more focused and coherent approach to delivering the systems. The committee was also concerned that, a decade into the 21st century, a culture still seems to exist in the health service in which telehealth systems are regarded as Cinderella services rather than as core tools by which the NHS delivers health care in Scotland. The report—as someone somewhere once said—is a game of two halves. If members are sitting comfortably and are still awake, I shall describe a clinical portal and then telehealth. To ensure maximum attention, there will be a question and answer session at the end. On clinical portals, most data relating to the treatment of patients in the health service are collected, processed, analysed and stored electronically. For example, IT systems in the NHS allow patient X-rays to be stored and viewed by clinicians and general practitioners throughout the country. When I recently broke my foot—yet again—by the time I reached the consultant, he was busy logging on and we both had a good look at a rather dramatic fracture, which he understood and I did not. In recent years, technology has been used to store and examine medical information relating to blood tests, prescription medicines and specific surgical treatments. The IT systems vary from health board to health board depending on the specific needs of clinicians in the area. Here comes the bit that I think I understand: a clinical portal is a computer-based software system that provides an electronic gateway to allow easier access by health professionals to patient information that is stored in various systems. How proud my sons would be of me for understanding that. The trouble is that there does not seem to be a substantial degree of commitment or prioritisation in NHS boards to engage in the development of a clinical portal or, in other words, in a system that allows the individualistic systems of various boards to speak to one another, as it were. The committee agrees with the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing that to ditch existing data systems and to try to impose one  system would, frankly, be a disaster waiting to happen. Nevertheless, it seems appropriate that, when NHS boards are selecting systems, they might try to engage with one another in advance, so that there is a possibility of harmonisation of the systems. We were also not too sold on the prospect of simply opting for Microsoft software as the basis for IT development, but I shall leave any technical development to others because I fear that I have already overreached my technical limits and will be found out. The sharing of medical health data is, as my history teacher would say, a good thing, but it also raises the spectre of data protection—the security of who knows what, when, why and where about our medical history. Hot-desking—I am modern—and shared passwords are not unknown and failure to log out and so on all rightly give rise to patient anxiety. That is why patients should be right slap bang in the middle of developments and kept informed in order to allay their fears and suspicions. We make that clear in our report and we also call for proper staff training so that staff are aware that their duty of care does not begin and end at patient clinical care, but extends to patients' rights, the ability to track accessing of their records and privacy. Telehealth is a term that is used to describe the use of modern technology to remotely deliver health care to patients via land lines, mobile phones and broadband services, often involving videoconferencing—of which, incidentally, Health and Sport Committee members are masters, as one would expect of such a talented bunch. The effective use of such services can improve the patient's experience of health care by reducing the need to travel to main urban centres and hospitals to receive care and treatment. It also allows patients to be proactive in the treatment and management of their conditions, which is important. As members can deduce, telehealth is particularly relevant, although not exclusively so, in remote and rural areas, which no doubt will be illustrated by committee colleagues. The Scottish centre for telehealth, known, as members are probably aware, as SCT—I will be asking questions later—was established by the Scottish Government in 2006 to promote the use of telehealth by health boards in Scotland. It has now been absorbed by NHS 24, which we hope will give it more clout, and has changed from being just advisory to making change happen. There is no doubt that a more forceful approach to the use of telehealth by health boards is overdue. Change is not a welcome guest, and institutions as well as individuals within them like to stay in their comfort zones, fearful perhaps, and reasonably so, that change means a threat to their security of  employment. However, telehealth has the potential to make much better use of professional skills. I vote for fewer chiefs and more Indians any day. The committee received responses from the Scottish Government and Tunstall Healthcare UK Ltd, the major private sector provider of telehealth systems in Scotland, but I will refer to only a couple of issues in the Government response. I understand that the Government is currently funding a UK-wide initiative to develop a framework of competencies for postgraduate medical training in e-health. I would like to know how that is getting along, so a progress report would be handy. Reference is also made in the Government response to the "NHS Code of Practice on Protecting Patient Confidentiality" to which I referred earlier and which was published originally seven years ago. The cabinet secretary's note of 4 May to the committee states that the code is currently being reviewed. Again, the committee would be pleased to hear of progress in that regard. I am sure that other members will develop in a much more confident and informed fashion other aspects of the report. However, let me conclude—I said that I would not take 13 minutes—by restating that a report that appears on the surface to be as dull as the proverbial dishwater is actually full of wee gems, which if mined could enhance our health service and redirect staff time and funding elsewhere in the NHS, which is to be much commended in belt-tightening times. However, I say to the minister that one of the wee gems is not "an architecture vision", which is not in our report but in the Government's response. It has nothing to do with hospital buildings, but as the committee knows, I will gleefully add the phrase to my compendium of banned phrases to join inter alia "virtual scenario", "direction of travel" and "landscape signature". In fact, I have an architecture vision of the landscape signature that I wish, as my direction of travel, to take me to the virtual scenario. It has been a long, long day, Presiding Officer, and I am in need of caffeine. [ Interruption .] I concur with Mr Stone that it is getting longer by the second. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Health and Sport Committee's 3rd Report, 2010 (Session 3): Clinical portal and telehealth development in NHS Scotland (SP Paper 399) .

We are forewarned. Does the cabinet secretary have a timescale for the completion of BT's review of its system resilience? Can she detail any further actions that BT has taken or is undertaking?

I congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing the debate, which is relevant and topical, given the national team's recent success in the test series against Argentina. That success was hardly reported during the dismal wall-to-wall coverage of the failed English national football team—indeed, Andy Murray only got a look-in once the England team was en route home. It would be remiss of me not to recall, as Sarah Boyack did, the delightful, friendly and informed voice of the late Bill McLaren, who was famed for comments such as: "To see a Borders rugby game is to witness the intensity, fervour, rivalry and spirit of the Scottish Borders", or my favourite: "They'll be dancing in the streets of Hawick tonight." The Borders has produced an abundance of national players: Roy Laidlaw, Gary Armstrong, Tony Stanger, John Rutherford, John Jeffrey, Jim Renwick, Gregor Townsend, Alan Tait and, indeed, Scotland's greatest ever points scorer, Duncan Paterson—a Gala man. Forgive me, Presiding Officer, I will move on to media coverage in a moment. I promised to mention Jamie Hepburn's father-in-law, Ian Shackleton, a Kelso man who played for Kelso and Melrose seconds. It all counts. Those rugby successes happened despite minor coverage on terrestrial television. As we all know, much sporting coverage has been removed to pay-to-view and subscriber television channels, although the Department for Culture, Media and Sport at Westminster has its list of listed events, such as the Scottish Football Association cup, the open golf tournament and the rugby union world cup tournament. I note that the Scottish Government's submission to last year's DCMS review of listed events recommended that the independent advisory panel "should consider allowing the Governments of the devolved administrations ... powers to add or remove events for their nation" and said: "We strongly urge you to introduce such a mechanism, since it would allow Scotland in future to maintain a list more specifically relevant to Scottish citizens."  I think that that would encompass rugby at various levels. I regret to say that I am not aware what the response to the Government's submission was, but the issue is highly relevant to the debate. There is good news about the playing of rugby throughout Scotland. I understand that, from 2006 to date, the number of those who participate in youth rugby has gone up from 15,000 to 25,000—a 64 per cent increase—and that there has been a 50 per cent increase in participation in adult rugby. On the minus side, rugby grounds are being lost and rugby clubs at all levels have very difficult finances because of the loss of fees and advertising at games, for example. Even in the Borders, where there is a strong rugby tradition—football hardly gets a look-in there—people are finding the finances difficult at various levels, notwithstanding rugby's role and the fact that the Border league was the first rugby minor league to be set up in the world. The Scottish Rugby Union's high debt and the redevelopment of Murrayfield are part of the reason why the Border Reivers were disbanded in March 2007. With better terrestrial coverage, fees and advertising at the grounds, which I have mentioned, would follow, and the money would trickle down to clubs at all levels. People in the Borders rightly take their rugby seriously. Indeed, in 1983, when the victorious French donated their Melrose sevens medals to local lassies as a token of affection—that is very French—there was uproar among Borderers, as they regarded a Melrose sevens winner's medal as the next best thing to a Scottish cup. I say in praise of rugby that it is one of the few games at which a person can sit beside opposition fans and applaud good play by whomever, even if England is beating Scotland.

To ask the First Minister what discussions have taken place with the United Kingdom Government, under the auspices of the respect agenda, regarding protecting front-line NHS services. (S3F-2520

As the First Minister will be aware, divisions have already emerged in the Con-Dem coalition over its commitment to ring fence the NHS in England from Westminster cuts. I heard what the First Minister said about the consequentials. Notwithstanding the tough financial choices, whatever happens does he remain committed to high levels of patient care as being paramount in Scotland?

I want simply to draw to the minister's attention the fact that, at the lip-reading learning class last week, it was brought to my attention that there has been a reduction in lip-reading tutors. I hope that the Government will consider that as part of what it is doing. We need more, not fewer.

Don't look at me.

I advise the member that his moustache and beard can present a difficulty for those trying to lip-read, so he might want to be clean-shaven.

I congratulate Bill Kidd and thank the National Deaf Children's Society for its helpful briefing—in particular, for the flyer with the finger-spelling alphabet, as well as the dos and don'ts to assist lip-reading. I taught myself the finger-spelling alphabet many years ago but completely forgot the sign for Z—not that one uses it much—and shall pin the flyer on my office wall. Last Tuesday, with the Royal National Institute for Deaf People, I hosted a lip-reading learning session for MSPs. I hope to repeat that later in the year because, for the MSPs who made it to the session and the members of the Parliament staff who attended, it was a steep learning curve. Lesley Stewart, who is the RNID Scotland hear to help project co-ordinator in the Borders—she is always entertaining and informed—became deaf as an adult. She was accompanied at the session by Molly, her hearing dog who, although small, is a right wee scene stealer and always makes her presence felt. Lesley told us how her husband would put the light off for sleep, keep talking—she could tell he was talking because she could feel his face vibrate—and then complain when she did not answer. She also told us how, often, if they were at a speaking event and people did not face her directly or covered their mouths, she would have to ask him what was being said, only to be told, "I'll tell you later." However, she got her own back at a conference for the deaf: because communication was by signing and lip-reading, he had to ask her what was being said, so she signed to him, "I'll tell you later." The don'ts to which I referred were addressed by Helen Shannon and Alison Pendlowski, who are lip-reading tutors. We pupils were presented with hand mirrors to demonstrate to us how certain sounds look the same on the lips, such as M and B, which are indistinguishable. F and V are also indistinguishable and K and D have the same mouth formation. That illustrates what Mary Scanlon said about only 30 per cent of the alphabet being lip-readable We then had to try to follow a joke by lip-reading so that we could learn how important context is to working out what is being said, with the 30 per cent of sounds that one can recognise. It was a joke about the First Minister visiting a ward, by the way. I will tell it to members later. We also learned  that some people lip-read successfully face on and some from the side, so the lip-reading tutors said the joke three times so that we could see which way we could read their lips. I was hopeless. Gavin Brown MSP, the Tory colleague in the class, was not too bad—he was my partner in crime at the session. One of the Parliament staff who said that she had never done it before was brilliant. As I said, I was complete rubbish. Contrary to what Bill Kidd said, I put it down to being a politician. It is not so much "Read my lips" but "Watch my eyes and body language, because I speak with forked tongue." It was exhausting. That is another thing that I see in the dos and don'ts. It is tiring to concentrate on lip-reading, so it gave us a small appreciation of the effort that goes into it. I will finish with a don't that should be a motto for politicians. I direct this not just at Mary Scanlon, but at all members of the Health and Sport Committee, which I chair. We were told, "Don't take forever to get to the point. Avoid rambling." I hope that all members of the Health and Sport Committee are listening. I am going to learn how to sign that motto in BSL.

I refer the cabinet secretary to the Health and Sport Committee's 2009 report on child and adolescent mental health and wellbeing, and in particular to the evidence from speech therapists on the impact of communication skills on the socialisation skills of our very young children. Will he look at our recommendations, particularly on training to help nursery staff to identify any communication difficulties in their charges as early as possible?

On closure, will the cabinet secretary continue to press the United Kingdom coalition to hold a public inquiry into the Lockerbie bombing so that the concerns about the safety of Mr Megrahi's conviction that were identified by the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission can at last be publicly tested?

I congratulate the Liberal Democrats on  using their limited debating time to allow us to debate this motion. In March 1999, when the report on long-term care of the elderly that recommended that personal care, wherever delivered, should not be charged for came out, I was a green backbencher. On reading the report, I phoned Sir Stewart Sutherland—as I did, in those days—and that autumn visited him in his office in Old College to discuss how his recommendation could be implemented. My boldness matched my naivety. However, some now consider that the Parliament, though bold, was also naive when it introduced that policy in 2002. Again, I commend the Liberal Democrats for their conduct during the period from 1999 to 2002. I am well aware that they were the coalition members who drove the policy through—if I recall correctly, the minister with responsibility for health at the time, Susan Deacon, was not in favour of a universal scheme and would have preferred there to be some form of means testing. Implementing free personal care for people aged 65 and over, particularly in an era when the shift is from hospital and residential homes to people's own homes, was, in principle, the right thing to do, because that care is just another facet of the universality of our health service. As others have said, the implementation of the policy has not been without flaws, and David McLetchie has quite rightly campaigned to end the situation whereby his constituents are charged for food preparation, which was also charged for in the Scottish Borders. In April 2009, the Government introduced legislation to try to end that invidious practice and, in September 2009, guidance on a common eligibility framework and a consistent approach to waiting lists was introduced, in an attempt to close loopholes that councils were busy trying to open up. Currently, 47,000 Scots receive free personal care at home and 9,000 long-stay residents in care homes also benefit from the policy because they are self-funders. Given that the number of elderly people is always increasing, cost will always be the main issue. However, as a Parliament, we have choices to make, and the right choice is to protect the most vulnerable in society. The bill will rise, and I agree with the comments made by other members about merging social work and health budgets, where possible, to enable us to deliver services and aids and adaptations in a sensible fashion that avoids duplication; an issue to which the Health and Sport Committee returns regularly. The issue of the lost attendance allowance has become imperative. On 15 May 2008,  Conservatives, Liberal Democrats, Greens and independents backed a Government motion that said that Parliament "notes Lord Sutherland's clear conclusion that the UK Government should not have withdrawn the attendance allowance funding in respect of self-funding clients in care homes, currently valued at over £30 million a year, and urges the Scottish Government to pursue vigorously with UK Ministers the reinstatement of this funding while longer-term work to re-assess all funding streams relevant to the care of older people in Scotland takes place." It is ridiculous that we are still losing £40 million per annum in attendance allowance that could be put back into systems for the care of our elderly. I note the individual members who supported the reinstatement of attendance allowance. Malcolm Chisholm said: "I agree with the cabinet secretary on the specific attendance allowance issue".— [ Official Report , 7 May 2008; c 8293.]  Alison McInnes—whom I will quote as she is in the chamber today—said: "The UK Government was wrong to withhold the attendance allowance. It is surely time for UK ministers to acknowledge that and pay up."— [ Official Report , 15 May 2008; c 8720.]  We should go with that calling card, now that we have a Conservative-Liberal Democrat Government at Westminster. When our Liberal Democrat Secretary of State for Scotland, Michael Moore, visited the Parliament, I raised the issue with him. I said to him that I hope that he is Scotland's man in the Cabinet, not—to use the old phrase—the Cabinet's man in Scotland. He should put his money where his mouth is and say to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, "Here is the respect agenda for Scotland: we will deliver respect for the elderly not just through words, but by getting the attendance allowance back and putting it towards the care of Scotland's elderly." I hope that there is movement on the issue. I am glad that the Liberal Democrats and Conservatives agree with free personal care for the elderly, on which Scotland led the way. We should ask ourselves what would have happened to attendance allowance if free personal care had been introduced in England. It would have been kept and ploughed back into care for the elderly there, so we should have justice for the Scottish elderly here.

Given that the delivery of free personal care has saved the Treasury £40 million per annum in attendance allowance, would it be equitable if the Conservative-Liberal coalition were to return that money to Scotland?

Does the minister therefore accept—considering the thesis that I put forward about presumption and the fact that there may be doubt—that if the woman is the perpetrator but the father or man is removed, that compounds the tragedy and distress for the children?

Will the member give way?

I am glad that Nigel Don has made a distinction between the Crown Office and the police. I have every sympathy for the police who deal with situations in which there is doubt, but the problem is that a presumption is exercised in situations in which there is doubt.

Will the member address the issue that I raised in relation to the majority of abusers? I said that men were the abusers in 60 per cent of cases and women in 38 per cent of cases—I think that that is what I said; I am trying  to find the figures. The figures come from the Scottish crime and justice survey and do not reflect reported cases. Does the member accept the statistics?

I commend Mike Rumbles for his dogged commitment to the issue over 11 years. I also commend my second favourite committee, the Public Petitions Committee—which I consider a second home—for its thoughtful discussion with witnesses when considering the petition on male victims of domestic violence. I have read the Official Report of the committee's considerations and view the contributions with interest and regard. Indeed, as Bill Butler said at that session and repeated today: "Domestic abuse is domestic abuse is domestic abuse."—[ Official Report , Public Petitions Committee , 26 January 2010; c 2337] That said, like other members, I make it unequivocally clear that nothing that I say in the debate reduces my regard for those who challenge violence against women in all its forms and those who, over the 11 years of the Parliament, have campaigned to reduce abuse against women, particular in the domestic setting. I saw direct evidence of that in my former profession as a court lawyer who specialised in family matters. I have spoken about that in other debates in the chamber. I want to move on from the prevailing and, in my view, unhelpful gender divide to an agenda of policies, publicity and practical assistance that recognises that all victims of domestic violence require equivalent—though perhaps not the same—support, and to the implementation of that agenda. I do not want to play the numbers game. As John Forsyth said in his evidence to the Public Petitions Committee, "There should not be a competition between victims."—[ Official Report , Public Petitions Committee , 26 January 2010; c 2332.] I will endeavour to say little on the subject, save to comment on the evidence in the 2008-09 Scottish crime and justice survey module on partner abuse. I distinguish the evidence in that document from that which we have from reported cases. Based on a random survey of 16,000 adults aged over 16,  conducted through face-to-face interviews in their homes, it is clear that "In the majority of cases, where partner abuse was experienced since the age of 16, the gender of any abusive partner was male (60%) compared with 38% ... female." I hope that that addresses, in part, the point that Johann Lamont raised in her intervention on Mr Tolson. Of course, the figures do not chime with public perception. Therefore, the situation of male victims is not reflected in our treatment or recognition of abused men. We need to recognise that there are abused men, and that their number is growing. The same research exposed the situation of those who did not report abuse. It found that 21 per cent of women did not tell anyone and that the figure rose to 40 per cent for men. We need not guess why; we need only quote Mr B's evidence to the Public Petitions Committee. He said: "I never had anybody to speak to. The subject was embarrassing and I did not want to speak to my friends or family about it. Domestic abuse just did not happen to men."—[ Official Report , Public Petitions Committee , 26 January 2010; c 2336.] How does the perceived reality and not the reality itself translate into our interventions, policies and how agencies deal day to day with domestic violence? I will reprise some of Mike Rumbles's concerns. When police are called to a domestic and they are in doubt about the perpetrator, who do they identify as the victim and who as the perpetrator? Who is presumed guilty until proven innocent? In our television ads, who is always depicted as the victim? Have we ever seen even one advert that recognises that, just occasionally, the victim might be a man? When our children are taught to respect one another, do our teachers recognise that domestic abuse can be a two-way street? The consequences of a wrongful, prejudged intervention can be substantial, because the presumption that the man is always the perpetrator can and often does lead to a chain of events that are almost impossible to reverse: loss of contact with children, loss of employment and loss of home. The TV and poster ads that children see reinforce the view that only women are victims, so the public perception is reinforced in our policies. The consequences of and fallout from domestic abuse for all victims are severe: fear, anxiety and psychological as well as physical injury, with loss of self-worth and self-respect. It breaks the body and the spirit, and inflicts damage that can last decades and poison relationships with children and subsequent partners. It does not matter whether the victim is a man or a woman. How do I know that? I quote a male victim, who said:  "I find it painful that the Scottish Government has funded a series of TV ads for Christmases highlighting the awfulness of domestic violence in which every example is of male violence against women. It hurts to see messages on buses that men are violent and women are victims. Not a hint that it can ever be the other way. I have no sympathy for men who assault a wife or partner. But I object to my own experience being disregarded. It's not just the violence that hurts. It's the confidence that was destroyed and has never come back. It's the knowledge that the policy makers don't want to know. You are on your own." I recognise that there has been some movement, including from Labour members, but we still have an awfully long way to go. If we insist that this is a gender issue, we do a grave disservice to all victims of domestic violence.

It would be helpful if John Lamont gave us the source of those percentages. Were those reported cases?

She has remembered!

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Does the member accept that, when duty is increased, many supermarkets make it a point of sale to say, "The chancellor has raised the duty but we are not passing it on," and that it does not impact on the sale price?

I make this speech purely in my capacity as convener of the Health and Sport Committee, and given the range of views on the Government's proposals, substantially but not exclusively on minimum pricing, I am equally constrained, substantially but not exclusively. It is a tough call because such constraints will make my speech quite dry, so I thank Murdo Fraser for lodging an amendment, which cuts my speech by four minutes. The Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill was introduced to the Parliament on 25 November 2009 and the committee held an eight-week call for written evidence. That resulted in receipt of 185 written submissions. I take this opportunity to thank our support staff—the clerks and the Scottish Parliament information centre—for providing us throughout the process with a rather too steady and frequent supply of written material, summaries and updates. The deputy convener, Ross Finnie, was in danger of invoking health and safety rules as he lugged the growing bundles into committee. I thank him especially for his advice and support on what was a difficult bill for committee members who, in the main, kept their humour and tempers. Only occasionally did I have to invoke the "headache coming on" alert.  We took oral evidence from 12 panels of witnesses over 14 weeks and we heard from 50 witnesses in total. We received 27 pieces of supplementary written evidence from those witnesses, along with a revised report from the University of Sheffield on minimum unit pricing based on updated Scottish statistics. Despite the fact that the minimum pricing issue attracted most of the media attention during the evidence taking and is controversial to this very day, there is much more to the bill. The committee was determined that all the proposed policies in the bill should be given due consideration in its scrutiny. As a result, the committee has spent a great deal of time considering written and oral evidence as part of its stage 1 consideration of the bill. I am told that it all took 29 hours and 56 minutes. I am obliged to the clerk for that information—it seemed much longer from the convener's chair. The committee thanks all those who contributed to the stage 1 evidence, but I single out Petra Meier of Sheffield university for her detailed oral and supplementary written evidence; John Beard, chief executive of Whyte and Mackay Ltd for appearing before the committee twice to clarify—is that the word that I really want?—his views on the economic impact of minimum pricing; and the cabinet secretary and her officials, who also attended the committee twice to provide oral evidence as well to provide requested supplementary evidence at quite short notice to allow us to meet deadlines for consideration. As part of our oral evidence sessions on the bill, the committee held a videoconference with two panels of witnesses in Ottawa and Toronto on the Canadian policy of social reference pricing for alcohol sales. We thank them for making the time to take part in the scrutiny process. They seemed a nice bunch. Regrettably, our attempts to let Ian McKee and Helen Eadie journey to Canada, even by canoe, were thwarted by the conveners group, whose members are tough cookies when allocating funding to committees. I never want to go therapy shopping with them. However, they allowed four committee members to undertake a fact-finding visit to Helsinki, which is beautiful in ice and snow with a temperature of -23°, and Paris—forever charming—in January 2010. Not to digress into a travelogue, the focus of the visits was to examine public health policy in those countries. Finland is a country that is comparable with Scotland that has experimented with alcohol pricing via taxation. In France, rates of alcohol consumption and alcohol-related disease had dropped progressively and significantly, although admittedly from a high, for reasons other than tax and other retail controls. The committee spent five weeks considering thereafter all the written and oral evidence and  drafting its stage 1 report on the bill, which was published on 27 May. That was another hard grind that ended with our amending the report as we scrutinised changes on an overhead screen to cries from the exhausted chair of "Paragraph signed off; no going back". I stress that despite our many differences—again, I thank the clerks for diplomatic drafting assistance—the committee was unanimous in its recognition of the serious public health problems that are faced by Scotland because of its unhealthy relationship with alcohol, and of the genuine attempts of the Government, other political parties and stakeholders to address the issue. As in much of the written and oral evidence that was received by the committee, members had a range of views on the potential benefit of introducing minimum unit pricing and how it might affect the level of alcohol consumption in Scotland. However, we agreed that a full debate on all the potential benefits of minimum unit pricing as well as on the legality in European Union law of the policy will not be sustainable in the absence of knowing the actual minimum unit price. The committee was also of the view that a much more detailed debate is required between the Scottish Government and key stakeholders on the operation and impact of the proposed social responsibility levy. There was considerable consensus that the levy might be, as my history teacher used to drum into us, "a good thing". The committee acknowledges the desire of the Government to allow itself maximum flexibility in defining the details of policy areas such as minimum unit pricing and a social responsibility levy, by using subordinate legislation under the bill. However, on policy areas of such importance and widespread debate, the committee believed that Parliament must have the opportunity to scrutinise the key provisions fully, in the form of proposed primary legislation. In plain speak, that means "on the face of the bill". The measures should indeed be put on the face of the bill at stage 2, so that further evidence can be taken, if necessary, prior to consideration of the amendments. I note what the cabinet secretary has said in that regard. The committee was not wholly persuaded by the argument that licensing boards should be granted the power to raise the age of purchase for off-sales alcohol from 18 to 21. However, members fully support the proposal to bring the regime for off-sales alcohol discounts and promotions into line with those that currently exist for the on-sales trade. Concerns were expressed by some committee members, however, about the possible unintended consequences that might result from that change, including potential increases in  revenues to the drinks industry. The committee considers that those concerns must be addressed by the Government. The committee looks forward to hearing from the cabinet secretary about whether the Government will accept the committee's recommendations. The cabinet secretary has already indicated that to some extent. Should the bill proceed to state 2, we look forward to considering amendments to address the range of issues that are highlighted in our report. I again thank our robust clerks and committee members. I ask Helen Eadie, who has offered me first aid before, to have the paracetamol ready for stage 2.

With reference to sections 8(3)(a) to 8(3)(c), and notwithstanding his reservations about provisions being put into statute, does the member accept that clinicians will have discretion? I am sympathetic to the Liberal Democrat amendment, but I cannot support it, because there is always discretion for clinicians.

I, too, welcome Murdo Fraser to his new position. There have been so many welcomes in this debate that I think that I shall go to the Official Report tomorrow and hit control-F to see how many there were in total. I say to Murdo Fraser that the gender balance on the Health and Sport Committee is equal: we have four men and four women. He can rest assured that he is not a lone male soul wandering about in the health portfolio. I do not want to reprise everything that has been said about waiting times. Of course, we all congratulate everyone—including administrative staff, cleaners and so on—who has increased the efficiency and the tender loving care in our NHS. I note what Jackie Baillie said about cancer treatment times improving—we are so consensual today; it is lovely, is it not? That has made a huge difference, because, when people hear the C word, they think that their life is ending, and that feeling can get worse as they make themselves ill waiting to be treated. I turn my attention to the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill. Ross Finnie is right to say that we must not get hung up on waiting times at the expense of care. I know that that is not the cabinet secretary's position. The issues belong together. I am interested in the fact that the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill will introduce a further provision around the treatment time guarantee that will, in certain cases, guarantee a period of 12 weeks from referral to treatment, although that is not an absolute. Ross Finnie expressed concern that certain patients might be parked somewhere, just so that the NHS can meet its time guarantees, but I take solace from section 8 of the bill, which says, that, if there is a breach of the treatment time guarantee, "The Health Board must ... make such arrangements as are necessary to ensure that the agreed treatment starts at the next available opportunity". It also says that, in making those arrangements, the health board "must not give priority to the start of any treatment where such prioritisation would, in the Health Board's opinion, be detrimental to another patient with a greater clinical need for treatment".  There, in black and white, it is stated that, at the end of the day, clinical need must take priority. Further, section 8(3)(c) says that the health board "must have regard to other relevant factors", which is a catch-all provision that will deal with, for example, circumstances in which it would not be clinically appropriate for someone to be treated in that timescale, perhaps because of some other condition that they have.

Indeed, but it is important to set national targets so that we have accountability and something that we can measure. We can at last stop the postcode lottery that I know exists in some areas. The work is incremental, but great progress is being made. I am glad that we have acknowledged what the previous Administrations and my own Government have done, because we all want to achieve the same end, and it cannot all be fixed in a oner. This Parliament, through its very existence and its concentration on health issues, can move things forward. There is a fairly consensual view among members from all parties on many issues—although not on others, I say to Jackie Baillie. To focus only on the issue of waiting times, as if that is somehow the antithesis of high standards of care, is the wrong way to view the issue. It involves a balance; waiting times can be measured, and they give people a sense of where they ought to be. They can be used as a benchmark, but they will never work against the clinical treatment of a person. If treatment is not required at a certain time or is not suitable to be carried out within the guarantee, it will not be done, and someone else will not be left to perish untreated elsewhere.

I welcome the strategy, as one who is known to recommend to any witnesses who come before the Health and Sport Committee that they should restrict their use of the word "strategy", to which I have an aversion. I also share Ross Finnie's sometime nausea about managementspeak and jargon, and I appreciated very much his speech, which was as thoughtful as usual.  With the greatest respect to Jackie Baillie, if she did not hector so much, I would not stop listening to her speeches. The way in which a speech is made is important and if it is made in the right way, people will listen to points, even if they do not always agree; sometimes they will find bits that they agree with. I make my contribution against the background of the recent budget cuts from Westminster, and those that are coming down the track. Quite frankly, the recession has not hit us full-on yet. For any Opposition party to indict the Government for real or imagined cuts, as at this afternoon's First Minister's questions, is indefensible. With an emergency budget coming from Westminster in a few weeks, and without the funding to which the First Minister alluded in answer to Iain Gray, how can any Opposition party possibly say—in particular, how can the Liberal Democrats and Conservatives at Westminster say—that Scotland's front-line services, whatever they are, and its national health service, will be immune? It is a nonsense. Even in the face of recent budget reductions from Westminster, the Government has put in additional funding, and the NHS boards that came to yesterday's meeting of the Health and Sport Committee acknowledged that. I will talk about their evidence later. I make the distinction between the actual reduced budget from Westminster and efficiency savings. As we know, the latter are retained by the health boards to be reinvested in front-line services. I appreciate Ross Finnie's caveat about how we define those services, but in practical terms, we are talking about treatment, diagnosis, preventive measures, hygiene and so on. Of course, that list is not exhaustive. We must use our funding more carefully, while keeping in mind the watchword of quality of care; the committee referred to that, because it is concerned that care should not be the victim. No one can disagree with the priorities of patients that are set out in the document: care and compassion; communication and collaboration between all who are involved in patient care, including the voluntary sector; continuity; and clinical excellence. For example, patients should not feel too inhibited to complain because they fear that they might get a diminished service by way of retribution. I am not saying that that happens, but there is a genuine perception, particularly among the vulnerable elderly, that if they speak up their tea will be brought to them cold, or something like that. I welcome the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill, which will give people an opportunity to make complaints and more confidence about doing so.  In evidence taken by the committee yesterday, it was mentioned that the chief executives of Borders, Tayside and Orkney health boards, for example, are looking to make their money work more effectively by reducing the use of bank nurses, locums and agency staff, which is a costly practice, and transferring that money to investment in permanent staff, while saving at the same time to reinvest elsewhere. That ties in effectively with the communication and continuity priorities of patients. There is security for the patient in kent faces at their bedside, for the staff to see the patient as an individual, and for a relationship to be built between the patient and ward staff. Undoubtedly, that improves the quality of care. The committee was told about demographic changes. Lothian NHS Board's director of finance emphasised how the elderly population is growing in the Lothians, so the pressure on that board's resources is skewed differently from those of other areas. For example, remote and rural areas, as Jeremy Purvis said, face different challenges. It is obvious that the delivery of quality health care will be different in different areas, and it will be different from the bulk of health care delivery. That said, much is shared between health board areas, so sharing good practice is also key. Indeed, the boards seem to be doing that, for example by making more effective use of theatres and consultants' time. I return to my own patch—that issue was raised by the new chief executive of NHS Borders at yesterday's meeting. It is interesting that he is a former nurse, as is the newly appointed chief executive of NHS Orkney, who was also at yesterday's meeting. I was comforted by the fact that they had come up from the grass roots. Another issue is the use of technology. The Government's strategy refers to NHS Lothian using technology in the home, which is another way of using resources better. The Health and Sport Committee has pursued greater use of telehealth and e-health, which we must make a move on. When I say "we", I mean the Parliament collectively.

When we examined the budget, we found that some of the money had moved—[ Interruption .] I do not know who is answering; I will leave the minister to deal with that, as she seems to want to.  Much good practice is shared by the boards. I return to early intervention—I cannot remember who mentioned the issue. At yesterday's meeting, a representative from NHS Borders talked about the treatment of ulcerated legs. Early intervention stops patients being confined to bed and prevents a great deal of expenditure. Mary Scanlon mentioned the example of optometrists, who can diagnose other illnesses in advance; the same can be done through a call to the pharmacy. The boards have embraced such practice. Leadership is key, not only at Government level, but at board level. What came through from yesterday's meeting is that if we are to make real change, the chief executive and the director of finance must provide leadership at board level. During questioning, Ross Finnie made the important point that we must get the boards to help their chief executive and director of finance to see what their job is, which is to act in the interests of the public whom they represent, not just to put up defence walls. I hope that directly elected board members will assist with that. Yesterday, Rhoda Grant made the interesting point that because belt tightening has had to happen, it has exposed wastage. The director of finance of NHS Tayside gave an example of how duplication—which had involved two depots and two sets of staff being used to deal with aids and adaptations across health and social care—had been ended. He announced that as if it was a wonderful achievement but, frankly—as I said at the time—if something is easy-peasy lemon-squeezy, you do not need to be a director of finance to come up with it. Michael Matheson said that such ideas were being talked about 20 years ago. There is wastage in the health service. The money from that could go into the front line. An overview of progress will be provided by the quality alliance. It is most important that we have accountability. [ Interruption .] I do not know what I have done. Shall I proceed, Presiding Officer? I have a chorus beside me. Through the unions, we must speak to the staff. It is important that we do not make them concerned. We do not want to make the health service good only at ward or hospital level; we want to make staff pleased to be part of the health service and to let them know that, as Jackie Baillie rightly said—in an otherwise relatively negative speech—they are excellent staff who do an excellent job that is highly valued. I conclude.

Given the Labour Party's understandable concerns about the impact of minimum pricing on low-income families and groups, I refer the cabinet secretary to her letter of today's date to the Health and Sport Committee, in which the final bullet point states: "Low income harmful drinkers tend to drink more and are much more likely to be admitted to hospital or to die from an alcohol related cause." Will she please expand on that?

To ask the First Minister what measures the Scottish Government is taking to encourage women to give up smoking during pregnancy. (S3F-2368)

A pilot project is under way in NHS Tayside that offers grocery vouchers to pregnant mothers in exchange for their agreeing to quit smoking. What plans does the Government have to extend that pilot throughout Scotland?

I, too, congratulate Angela Constance on securing this evening's debate. I raised the matter of criminal acts—particularly acts of violence—committed by former members of the armed forces some years ago, and I am disappointed that we do not have clear data on those with a forces background who are serving custodial sentences. I therefore support any measures to ensure that the data are up to date and accurate. The member is right to emphasise that a forces background does not exonerate anyone from criminal activity, but specific difficulties are undoubtedly faced by some servicemen and women on discharge and, perhaps more particularly but not exclusively, by those who have been emotionally and psychologically scarred by warfare, which, I suggest, by its very nature might have desensitising and destabilising long-term consequences. The dignity of the funeral corteges that process through Wootton Bassett cannot hide the fact of the broken bodies under those flagged coffins, but at least the dead are given that last respect. What of our physically and psychologically wounded? As Bill Aitken stated, many join up young. The roll call of the dead and injured is testimony to the age of our serving forces. For many, the forces have been their family. Life will have been disciplined and structured, the days and weeks and years mapped out for them, yet it has long been known that the MOD does not have sufficient support systems in place for those vulnerable returnees who may find that relationships are hard to sustain. As Richard Simpson did, I commend the many voluntary organisations that give that support. Too often, refuge is taken in alcohol or other opiates because, for example, there is no home to come home to. Once the sustaining discipline and order of service life is withdrawn, returning men  and women can be, quite literally, on their own. The war that they fought for is far away and forgotten by the many. They do not even have public gratitude as returning war heroes. They are often anonymous except to loving family and friends. Is it any surprise that some find the challenges of adapting to civilian life so difficult or that some will fail and fall, eventually, into the criminal justice system? Many years ago I suggested that local authorities, at the very least, should set up one point of contact for veterans to assist with directions for employment, housing, medical care and so on. I stress that they should assist—I am not calling for preferential treatment. They should at least plug the yawning gap that is left by the Ministry of Defence. That would at least be a bridge to help people to move from the support of the forces, through the support of the local authority, to adjustment to civilian life. In that way, there would be practical help for those veterans who might become criminalised for whatever reason. I checked with Scottish Borders Council today and there is no such provision in place. I also checked with Midlothian Council, which hosts the barracks at Glencorse from where many are sent to the front line, and I commend its support for the drop-in centre for veterans at Dalkeith. However, when all is said and done, it is the Ministry of Defence that should shoulder the responsibility for volunteers and recruits, who deserve better both in and out of service. I commend my colleague again for bringing this evening's debate to the chamber.

I start by applauding the member's bill mechanism. After 11 years in the Parliament, it is delightful to have the chance to have a bill of my own—this is the closest that I will ever get.  I thank NEBU, which is very much unheralded and does a great deal of work. It is rare that it gets a bill to this stage—often members' bills do not get beyond proposals. NEBU is hugely supportive, as we all know, and I applaud its work. I will pick up some of the points that members have made in the debate. Michael McMahon expressed some concerns, which were undermined to some extent by his colleague Patricia Ferguson's contribution, about the cost to local authorities. At stage 1, Dundee City Council told the Local Government and Communities Committee that it agreed with the figures in the financial memorandum and believed that the bill could be implemented using existing resources. It also highlighted the point that the threat of a dog control notice might reduce the number of notices needed—as the cabinet secretary said, the notices are a preventive measure. In any event, all local authorities already carry out dog-related duties under the Dog Fouling (Scotland) Act 2003, the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 and animal health and welfare legislation. I believe that councils must already be staffed appropriately to deliver those duties and that they can subsume the duties of issuing dog control notices within that. However, I am sure that the cabinet secretary will agree that if I am proved wrong it will be for COSLA to negotiate that with the Scottish Government in line with the procedures under the concordat. Further to Michael McMahon's point about dog control notices and criminalising people, I make it clear that a dog control notice is a civil order, not a criminal matter. The order has to be breached in order to transmogrify, as it were, into a criminal matter, so we are not criminalising people.

I apologise for misunderstanding. I am glad that that is now on the record. I make it plain that the bill is about early intervention before a dog becomes dangerous. We are talking about dealing with dogs that are out of control and preventing them from getting to the dangerous stage. I want to pick up the points that David McLetchie made. He was quite honest about the licensing issue, which came in very late in the day. I submit that a member's bill is not really the place to start putting in complexities, which can probably go in some local government legislation. However, there is cover in the bill. In the event of a dog being out of control while in the care of a dog walker—they  define themselves as professionals; I do not think that they have to meet any standards—it would have to be established who the proper person was. That is likely to be the owner and, therefore, the dog control notice would be served on them, rather than on the dog walker. An authorised officer would have to consider the appropriate measures to include in the dog control notice to bring the dog back under control. The notice could specify that the dog could not be walked with more than two other dogs at the same time, for example. The proper person would also have to consider whether there was a likelihood of the dog control notice being breached by the dog walker—the entrusted person—as a breach could result in a fine of up to the current maximum of £1,000. David McLetchie's constituent has been in touch with me about that matter. I hope that what I have said will allay those genuine fears. I hope that what I said about working dogs in my opening speech provided some comfort. There is a test under section 2(8)(d), which states that a dog control notice must include "the reason for the authorised officer concluding that the dog has been out of control (including a description of the circumstances on the basis of which the officer has come to that conclusion)". So, an innocent from urban life wandering about the countryside thinking that a sheep dog is harassing the sheep too much might find that it would not be reasonable to issue a dog control notice in those circumstances. It would certainly not stand up to scrutiny if that was put down as one of the reasons for issuing a dog control notice. At the end of the day, if such a circumstance arose, there would be a right of appeal, as there should be to comply with the European convention on human rights. I hope that that provides some comfort. I thank Patricia Ferguson for her contribution. I am now quite relaxed about her amendment. It was important to put the debate about it on the record. I absolutely support her view that the care, training and socialising of dogs is the key. I was once a dog owner myself, but I no longer have a lifestyle that would support my owning a dog. I wish that more people took that view before they bought a dog. The bill is about early intervention, but I found what Patricia Ferguson said about serious attacks on postmen extremely interesting. Although the bill is about out-of-control dogs, it does amend the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991 so that it will apply to a private place where the dog is permitted to be. That will not be the case elsewhere in the United Kingdom, but it will be the case in Scotland. The postmen and women of Scotland may rejoice because they can now do something about the problem.  I have dealt with Jim Tolson's points, including his points about working dogs and places where dogs are permitted to be. I am grateful for his support. I conclude by thanking all those who contributed to the development and scrutiny of the bill and all members who have been in the chamber to discuss it today. As a postscript, I remind canvassers that, even if the legislation is passed at 5 o'clock today, it will not be in force until next year, so they should watch out for those fingers, particularly if, as Patricia Ferguson tells me, there are sneaky, silent dogs lurking at the letterbox. I commend the bill to the Parliament.

I am delighted to open the final debate on the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill, which is the culmination of three years' sustained work. For that, I express my gratitude to the staff of the non-Executive bills unit—I wish that it had a catchier title—and the legal department for their dogged determination; that will be my only canine pun. I also thank my colleague Alex Neil, who set the bill in motion before his well-deserved elevation; Duncan McNeil, for most ably overseeing the Local Government and Communities Committee's consideration of the bill at stages 1 and 2; the committee clerks; all the witnesses and consultees, without whose input the bill could not have been developed; the cabinet secretary, for taking such a constructive approach; and Government officials, whose expertise was so useful. I also thank the many members of the public who have followed the progress of the bill and contacted me with their comments, and Patricia Ferguson, for her helpful amendments and interventions in discussions. It is clear that the problem of out-of-control and dangerous dogs is growing across the United Kingdom. Scotland now sees around 600 reported dog attacks each year, which is more than double the figure 10 years ago. In 2007-08 hospitals treated 363 people who had been bitten or struck by a dog. So what will the bill do? Its thrust is to promote responsible ownership of a dog. Local authorities will have the power to serve dog control notices on owners who do not keep their dogs under control. As pointed out in the stage 1 debate, many politicians have direct experience of out-of-control dogs while campaigning. I recall a canvassing expedition for some by-election or other, during which I discounted the snarls and growls of a canine occupant as it jumped up at a large picture window. Casually—a mite too casually, it turned out—on having no response to the bell ringing and door knocking I pushed a leaflet through the door, safe in the knowledge that the dog was elsewhere. It was not—the house, it appears, was open plan and the dog was open jawed by the letter box. The candidate's leaflet was shredded, but my fingers were not. Therefore, although we may not be able to protect ourselves in time for the United Kingdom election, with a positive vote today MSPs could be  voting for safer fingers for themselves in the campaign next year—by which time, if it is passed today, the bill will be in force. That is a reason to vote for it if ever there was one. Although the hazards of our profession are cyclical, postal workers experience daily harassment from dogs. People walking their dogs are intimidated by out-of-control dogs, and some parks are a no-go area because of a local delinquent dog. All those situations and a myriad of others can be addressed by the bill, which will help to improve in a small and practical way the ordinary lives of the ordinary people of Scotland—which is what we are here for. My bill also addresses another important issue regarding dangerously out-of-control dogs. It extends the offence of allowing a dog to be dangerously out of control as defined in the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991 to apply to all places. By amending the 1991 act, my bill ensures that dog owners can be held responsible at all times for their dog's behaviour, including in their own home. Indeed, the incidents behind horror reports of children and infants being savaged to death have more often than not occurred in a private dwelling where the dog was permitted to be—a relative's house for example. There is one outstanding issue that I would like to address—the bill's impact on working dogs that are legitimately carrying out their duties, such as pest control and flushing out or herding animals. I see Mr McLetchie in the chamber. At stage 2, he raised a concern that dog owners could be penalised because someone feared for the safety of a wild animal, such as a rodent, that is not otherwise protected in legislation—I did not know that he liked rats, but never mind. The bill offers protection to other animals, but I also give assurance to people with working dogs who felt, for example, that a Jack Russell that is out ratting, a juvenile sheep dog in training that is overenthusiastically herding sheep, or a springer spaniel that is flushing out game fowl could be subject by some novice city visitor to a dog control notice. I have lived in the countryside for 15 years, and I represent a rural constituency. When developing the bill, I had in my mind the interests of rural communities. Working dogs by their very nature are well trained and responsive to their handler's commands. In the cases that I referred to, the test of reasonableness would not be met because by their very nature such dogs are under control, which is the key test. If a dog is under control, it will not come within the ambit of the bill. I can offer further assurances to Mr McLetchie and those who work the land that the bill will not have unintended consequences on the owners of working dogs. The bill provides five important safeguards. First, section 1(3) refers to the  conditions that the proper person is not keeping the dog under control effectively and consistently and that the behaviour of the dog gives rise to alarm or apprehensiveness on the part of any person. Both parts must apply before the out-of-control test can be met. Secondly, at stage 2, I proposed an amendment to section 1(3) to meet the committee's concerns and to clarify that any alarm or apprehensiveness must not be unreasonable. The bill has been further amended and protection strengthened by the cabinet secretary's amendment 2 this afternoon. Thirdly, local authorities have a duty under section 1(7) to ensure that authorised officers have the appropriate level of skill to determine from an objective standpoint whether the dog is out of control and, importantly, to identify appropriate steps aimed at addressing its future behaviour. Government amendment 3, which will make it mandatory for ministers to issue guidance to local authorities on the function of the legislation, is a further protection that the law should be applied, so far as possible, uniformly Scotland-wide. Fourthly, section 2(8)(d) requires authorised officers to explain the reasons, including a description of the circumstances, that have led them to issue a dog control notice. Fifthly, a person can appeal against the notice under section 3. Indeed, the bill aims to ensure that domestic dog owners raise their dog's level of training nearer to that of a working dog. The bill will bring certain benefits. I hope that more responsible dog ownership will follow from it. Public safety will be improved through preventive measures that will help people who are out with children or with their dogs. Also, the welfare of dogs will be improved, because dogs that are not properly cared for, exercised or socialised will benefit from specific measures being imposed on their owners, such as their being required to attend training classes with their dogs. I hope that members agree that the bill is worth while. It gives local authorities and the police the legislative tools to deal with the growing problem of out-of-control dogs and attacks by dangerous dogs in private places. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill be passed.

During stage 1 consideration of the bill, I suggested to the cabinet secretary that it might be helpful to provide guidance to those who would have to implement the bill's provisions. It was my understanding that if the bill was successful in passing through Parliament, such guidance would be provided. As the cabinet secretary has stated, there is no legislative need to include a guidance provision, but I welcome the Scottish ministers' commitment to the provision of guidance and therefore support amendment 3.  Amendment 3 agreed to.

Amendment 2 seeks to address some outstanding concerns relating to the out-of-control test and, in particular, as the cabinet secretary said, a potential for lack of consistency in decisions by authorised officers. As I said during the stage 1 debate, I am relaxed about the use of the reasonableness test as it is used in many acts and is a widely recognised proposition. It applies to MSPs when we consider what interests to register, for example an overseas visit. In response to the committee's concerns, I amended the bill at stage 2 to clarify that the alarm or apprehensiveness of an individual must not be unreasonable. The cabinet secretary's amendment will still require authorised officers to ask themselves: would a fair-minded and impartial observer conclude that the behaviour or actions of the dog would cause alarm or apprehensiveness? The inclusion of the phrase "in all the circumstances" clarifies the proposition, meaning  that, irrespective of the individual's concern, a dog control notice can be issued only when the authorised officer is satisfied, having considered all the circumstances, that the alarm or apprehensiveness would be held by a reasonable person. The authorised officer will have to take a broad view of the incident in coming to his or her decision. I am content to support the amendment and will endeavour to cover the other safeguards in the bill during the debate to pass it.  Amendment 2 agreed to.

I thank Patricia Ferguson for lodging amendment 1. I have sympathy with the intention, although I think that the amendment is misguided in its terms. I support what the cabinet secretary has said. The provisions are framed in such a way that it is irrelevant what breed of dog is misbehaving. The bill concentrates on the deed and its effect on people. As the cabinet secretary said, that takes us back to the reasonableness test. The main aim is to address irresponsible ownership, regardless of breed. That is the whole ethos behind the bill. I have considered again the out-of-control test, and I remain confident that it is framed in such a way that it focuses on deed. Let me explain. A dog that is large and powerful and which might otherwise cause alarm or apprehensiveness, such as an Alsatian, but which is kept under control, cannot be the subject of a dog control notice. The same Alsatian, when walked by a person who, for whatever reason, is incapable of controlling the dog, because of its sheer size and power, could be considered to be out of control—but only if, for example, it was snapping at people or at other dogs. The deed is the actions of the dog, allied to  someone being in charge of a dog that they cannot control. Taking that argument a step further, a dog that might not be large or powerful, such as a Jack Russell, but which behaves in a manner that causes alarm or apprehensiveness and which is not controlled effectively and consistently, would be considered to be out of control. Amendment 1 would remove helpful legislative signposting for those who will have to implement the provisions of the bill, resulting in less clarity. The reference to size and power highlights that, in considering the circumstances of the incident, size and power may—I emphasise the word "may"—play a part. Including specific reference to size and power is a direct warning to owners of large and powerful dogs that, if they cannot control their dogs effectively, further measures will be imposed on them. Those words are therefore a powerful tool in promoting responsible purchasing and ownership of dogs. They are integral to the out-of-control test and to the ethos of the bill, which, as I have said, is deed not breed. I caution members that, if they are inclined towards supporting amendment 1, they might be missing the point of the provision and the additional protection that it provides. The arguments for the removal of the words "size and power" are narrowly focused. A clear example of breed not deed legislation is the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991, which, at section 1, bans particular breeds of dogs. That argument could not be levied at the bill, as no specific breed of dog is singled out. If we interpreted the words "size and power" to refer to large, powerful dogs, which might need extra measures to keep them under control—which I suggest is common sense—such as a harness or a larger fence round the back garden, we would be right. There are indeed additional responsibilities, which should rightly apply to owners, depending on the dog that they own. That is a matter of fact—not breed. Members should remember that the purpose of the bill is to provide effective tools to address the behaviour of all dogs before serious incidents occur. It is a matter of early intervention. Members should not miss the opportunity to send a clear message to owners that they must be capable of controlling their dog, whether it is a Labrador, an Alsatian, a Japanese Akita, a West Highland terrier or the ubiquitous Heinz 57. Big dog does not mean bad dog, and small dog does not mean good dog—it all depends on how good the owner is. I ask members not to support amendment 1.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, given the additional information that has come to light since Mr al-Megrahi's return to Libya—for example, information from former Central Intelligence Agency operatives in Iran and elsewhere—the case for an independent, thorough and complete public inquiry by the United Kingdom Government is now overwhelming? Will he give an assurance that the Scottish Government would co-operate fully with such an inquiry should the next UK Government, whatever its composition, establish one?

Is the First Minister aware that in evidence to the Health and Sport Committee yesterday, Gavin Hewitt of the Scotch Whisky Association claimed that if minimum pricing for alcohol became law, there would be substantial consequences for exports of whisky to markets such as South Korea? Does he agree?

My question is on the duty of privacy to constituents. Does the cabinet secretary agree that we should all be very careful that what is said in the chamber today does not undermine the relationship of trust that must exist between MSPs and their constituents? Furthermore, does she agree that all our constituents—and I mean all, particularly in light of Annabel Goldie's question—should feel able to approach their MSP? They must feel able to do that whether they are a member of our party or another party, whether or not they voted for us, and whether the case is simple or complicated.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I have found these proceedings uncomfortable, for a particular reason. I understand that a ministerial statement is made under rule 13.2 of standing orders. We would normally expect such statements to be on issues within the minister's portfolio. I understand that the cabinet secretary herself opted to use the procedure of a ministerial statement. For the avoidance of doubt, could you clarify that the accepted route for raising matters of complaint against an MSP in the delivery of their duty to constituents comes under our code of conduct? At paragraph 9.1.6(b), the code says: "Complaints made under Section 8: Engagement and liaison with constituents: these are to be referred to the Presiding Officer." In conflating the work of a minister with that of a constituency MSP, might our proceedings today have established an unfortunate precedent? Is it not the proper route to invoke the guidance in the code of conduct? I seek the Presiding Officer's guidance that the statement does not set any precedent for members in the difficult circumstances in which we all find ourselves from time to time in the execution of our casework. Furthermore, I seek the Presiding Officer's guidance on whether, if further such statements were to be demanded by anyone in the circumstances of members undertaking work for constituents, there could perhaps be unintended consequences—we came close today—in breaching constituent confidentiality, which undoubtedly impacts on people's willingness to bring sensitive matters, in particular, to the attention of MSPs. Your views would be most useful to us all, Presiding Officer.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I hope that you received a detailed letter from me on the point of order that I intended to raise before decision time. It follows on from yesterday's points of order regarding the Parliamentary Bureau's decision on setting up an ad hoc committee to consider Margo MacDonald's End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill. I refer you to the statement by Paul Martin at column 23701 of the Official Report of yesterday's meeting. He made it clear that there are cases for the Health and Sport Committee and the Justice Committee to be nominated as lead committee on the bill. He went on to say that, because of that, the bureau had opted for an ad hoc committee. Mike Rumbles gave a different explanation. He said that it was "because the bill clearly deals with serious moral and ethical issues and is not only a health matter." He went on to say that "Some business managers argued that the Justice Committee has a major role, too."— [ Official Report , 10 February 2010; c 23702.]  Presiding Officer, in my subsequent point of order, at column 23703 of yesterday's Official Report , I referred you to the guidance for Parliamentary Bureau members, which states: "Where there are any overlapping remits or doubts as to the most appropriate committee, committee conveners and clerks will"— I stress "will"— "prior to making recommendations, hold discussions with the clerks". Discussions were not held. The key word is "will": the provision is mandatory. With respect, Presiding Officer, I do not think that you responded to that point. It would be of assistance if you could do so tonight. I refer to rule 6.13.1 with regard to the appointment of an ad hoc committee. It is of course quite competent, under rule 6.1.3, for the bureau to propose the establishment of such a committee. However, in my view rule 6.1.3 must be read together with rule 6.2.1 and rule 6.13.1. I will take your guidance on that. Rule 6.2.1 says: "A committee shall examine such matters within its remit (referred to as 'competent matters')". I interpret "matters" to include bills, as well as inquiries, petitions and so on. I consider that that is relevant to our reading of rule 6.13.1, which says:  "Any question whether a matter is within the remit of a committee shall be determined by the Parliamentary Bureau." So far, so good. However, rule 6.13.1 continues: "The Parliamentary Bureau shall consult the Conveners Group on any such question." The bureau did not so consult. Again, the important word is "shall"—the provision is mandatory. Presiding Officer, I seek your guidance on whether in this instance the bureau breached its obligations under rule 6.13.1. [ Applause .]

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I refer you to rule 9.6.1 of standing orders, which states: "Once a Bill has been printed, the Parliamentary Bureau shall refer it to the committee within whose remit the subject matter of the Bill falls." That is mandatory, not discretionary. The rule continues: "That committee (referred to as 'the lead committee') shall consider and report on the general principles of the Bill." For completeness, I will continue. It states: "Where the subject matter of the Bill falls within the remit of more than one committee the Parliament may, on a motion of the Parliamentary Bureau, designate one of those committees as the lead committee." The next stage for the bureau is set out in paragraph 23 of the guidance for members of the bureau, which states: "The Bureau reaches decisions on the referral of Bills to committees informed by the recommendations of either the clerks in the Legislation Team or the Non-Executive Bills Unit, where appropriate. Where there are ... overlapping remits or doubts as to the most appropriate committee, committee conveners and clerks will, prior to making recommendations, hold discussions with the clerks".  Paragraph 3 of the paper to the bureau on the referral states: "It is considered that the Bill falls within the remit of the Health and Sport Committee: only certain terminally ill or physically incapacitated persons are eligible to make requests under the bill and registered medical practitioners have a central role in the bill in approving requests." It continues by arguing that, although many people will see "the provision of end of life assistance as a moral or ethical issue rather than purely a health one, such issues do not clearly fall within the remit of any other committee." That dismisses the Justice Committee and is purely a recommendation that the bill should go to the Health and Sport Committee. I return to the fact that standing orders state that the bureau "shall refer it to the committee within whose remit the subject matter of the Bill falls." There is no discretion there. Presiding Officer, I seek your guidance as to whether, on this occasion, the bureau has breached standing orders. Subsidiary to that is the fact that because the process is clouded in mystery, rumours are running wild. Mr Rumbles is quoted in the new publication, the Caledonian Mercury , as saying: "Ms Grahame is a signatory to Ms MacDonald's bill and, as such, supports it." That is not so. I have not signed any bill—I signed a proposal for debate. Apparently, that was put to members of the bureau. I have heard that one reason for referring the bill to an ad hoc committee is to park the referendum bill, and I have heard a lot of other reasons, but those are ancillary. The main argument is that, under standing orders, it is mandatory that the bureau shall refer the bill to the lead committee. The Health and Sport Committee was recommended. The Health and Sport Committee collectively wrote to the bureau to ask why the bill was not referred to it, but we have had no answer. Presiding Officer, I seek your guidance with regard to the breach of standing orders.

On a further point of order, Presiding Officer. In light of that, and given that we are not privy to that second paper—the one from which I quoted was somehow given to me—is it the position that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee should inquire into the activities of the bureau, which seems to be under no scrutiny whatsoever?

I thank the cabinet secretary and all members who have spoken for their speeches. I particularly welcome their critical comments because those are always important in testing legislation at stage 1. I will address some of the points that were mentioned, particularly on costs, as I was not in a position to do that in my opening speech. Local authorities will play an integral part in enforcing the bill, but they already carry out many dog-related duties under the Dog Fouling (Scotland) Act 2003, the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 and various pieces of animal health and welfare legislation. They have to be staffed appropriately to carry out those duties and obligations. In relation to Scottish Borders Council in particular, the community wardens already deal with dogs on the loose in parks and so on. I understand the remarks that were made about the financial memorandum, but it contains the best evidence that was available and I have been unable to secure any other—I will be delighted if the committee can obtain better evidence. However, we should acknowledge that the bill will lead to savings on two levels. First, by identifying and managing the behaviour of out-of-control dogs early on, it will ultimately reduce the workload for the police and, in turn, procurators fiscal and the Scottish Court Service. As a culture of greater owner responsibility develops, the workload of local authority staff will reduce. The second and evidently more important saving relates to trips to accident and emergency units and general practitioners—and, indeed, the saving of lives in general. I was interested in Elaine Murray's comment that the important issue was the deed, not the breed, and that Jack Russells have been the perpetrators of savage and often fatal attacks in the home. I think that the issue of stray dogs is a bit of a red herring. My bill does not disturb the present legislation's position on that issue. As a dog unaccompanied in a public place will continue to be treated as a stray under section 3 of the Dogs Act 1906 and sections 149 and 150 of the  Environmental Protection Act 1990, it can still, when discovered by the police or a local authority officer, be seized, sold or destroyed. In fact, my bill could directly assist by ensuring that the owners of abandoned dogs are identified. After all, if the dog has already been the subject of a dog control notice, it will have been microchipped. In that respect, with regard to Christopher Harvie's remarks about dog licences and in response to the suggestion that all dogs be microchipped, I point out that this is a member's bill and has to be simple and straight to the point. I have sympathy for such points of view, but I think that that debate is for another time. David McLetchie dealt with the issue of corroboration with his usual elegance, and he has conceded that although corroboration is not necessary in civil matters, it is when the matter becomes a criminal one. However, on the question whether the test of reasonableness has been properly applied with regard to a dog control notice, someone who has been served with such a notice can within 21 days appeal under the civil appeals procedure the appropriateness of the decision. In any case, when the decision to issue a notice is close to the wire and when there might be something of a grey area, the decisions made by sheriffs will set the bar and act as a guide. Such an approach is nothing new and is, in fact, consistent with other legislation. I think that I have covered most of the issues that have been raised—I do not think that I have missed anything. I certainly do not see anyone trying to intervene or draw to my attention the fact that I have not responded to their points. I am quite prepared to meet the concern expressed by the Subordinate Legislation Committee about an amendment to a particular section. It is a bit of a belt-and-braces matter, but I do not think that it will give me any difficulties. I thank everyone who has taken part in the debate and look forward to stage 2.

Will the member give way?

I ask the member to desist from calling me a poodle.

Yes.

With respect, does the member appreciate the distinction between civil and criminal law? There is no mandatory requirement for corroboration in a civil matter.

Does the member recognise that Dundee City Council agreed with the figures in the financial memorandum? Not all local authorities in Scotland took the same view.

It is with great pleasure that I open the debate on the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill. I thank the Local Government and Communities Committee for its scrutiny of the bill and for making me feel briefly like a minister under interrogation. I also thank all those who have worked so hard on the bill, including the self-effacing non-Executive bills unit staff who are present in the chamber today, and my colleague Alex Neil and his staff for all the work that they put into developing the policy before Alex Neil was elevated to the lofty heights of ministerial office and became a willing victim of promotion. Members who know Alex Neil will know that he does not get on well with dogs, but I am a dog lover. However, owning a dog is not a right but a privilege. Every dog owner, regardless of their personal circumstances, has a duty to ensure the welfare of their animal and to ensure that their dog is kept under control at all times, in the interests of public safety. If they cannot do that, their behaviour should be challenged, to be frank. The bill is not intended to penalise responsible dog owners. It should improve their experience by addressing irresponsible dog ownership and reducing the threat that out-of-control dogs pose. Sadly, while most dog owners are responsible, there is a growing problem with dog owners who do not look after their dogs properly, whether through a lack of knowledge that means that they do not provide appropriate training or socialisation, for example, or by deliberate action, such as the use of status dogs that are taught to act aggressively. We need only pick up the papers and read about recent dog attacks to know that the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991 has failed to improve public safety. That legislation was passed in haste and has been repented at leisure. In Scotland, about 600 attacks are reported each year, which is more than double the figure 10 years ago. By focusing on deed, not breed, my bill will reduce the number of attacks in two ways. The dog control notice regime will give authorities the power to require dog owners to keep their dogs under control or face a criminal conviction. If used properly, that power will reduce the number of  lower-level incidents—I stress that phrase—in which dog owners perhaps need guidance on how to keep their dog under control. It will also prevent many dogs from developing more dangerous behaviour that might lead to dog attacks. The bill requires owners to ensure that their dogs are kept under control at all times and in all places—I emphasise that. Currently, if a child is attacked in a dog's home, where it is permitted to be, the owner cannot be held legally responsible unless the dog is of a banned breed. That is clearly wrong. My bill extends to all places existing offences that relate to dogs that are dangerously out of control. I thank the Local Government and Communities Committee for supporting the bill's general principles. I will tackle the main issues that the committee raised, which were corroboration, the definition of "out of control" and implementation costs. On corroboration, I agree with the committee that the bill does not require authorised officers to work in pairs to serve dog control notices. I understand that the committee's concern is that the validity of a notice "may be used as a defence in a criminal prosecution." My clear view is that the offence of failure to comply with a notice, as provided for at section 5, is a separate matter that relates to a separate and subsequent incident. Corroboration is therefore required only for the incident that is the breach. As I explained to the committee, that is because we will move from a civil matter to a criminal matter—a breach—that requires corroboration. If members would like the rather lengthy technical answer, I can return to the issue in my closing speech. The definition of "out of control" gave rise to concern. The bill provides a two-part test to assist authorised officers in assessing whether a dog is out of control. The first part is that the dog "is not being kept under control effectively and consistently" and the second part is that the dog is causing "reasonable ... alarm, or ... apprehensiveness". The two parts must be taken together and provide the basis on which an authorised officer can determine whether a dog is out of control—the word "and" is crucial. Formulating an appropriate test is not easy. Providing a definitive list of behaviours or actions to cover out-of-control behaviour is neither practical nor beneficial. Each case must be assessed on individual circumstances. The committee heard concerns that "reasonable ... alarm, or ... apprehensiveness" is too imprecise and might lead to inconsistency in notices. Many  acts use a reasonableness test, which is a widely recognised proposition. It applies to MSPs when we consider what interests to register. The test for registration is whether a fair minded and impartial observer would reasonably consider that an overseas visit, for example, would prejudice the member's behaviour. Historically, that was known as the test of what the man on the Clapham omnibus would think. Under the bill, when considering whether a dog is out of control, authorised officers will have to act objectively and ask themselves whether a fair-minded and impartial observer would conclude that the dog was causing alarm or apprehensiveness.

The member has just illustrated why one would not try to pin down every circumstance. The facts and circumstances of every case determine what is reasonable. My observation on the case that the member cited is that it would not meet the reasonableness test: nobody would have been put in a state of alarm. The bill requires authorised officers to explain the reasons that led them to issue a notice. If someone does not like the reasons and objects to the serving of the notice, they can appeal. The measure will be tested. I believe that there are sufficient safeguards in the bill. The reasonableness test is a common one. I also believe that the bill's definition of "out of control" will work in practice. Given that I am short of time, Presiding Officer, I will deal quickly with the issue of size and power, which some committee members thought would undermine the theme of deed not breed. I do not share witnesses' concerns in that regard. The provision is framed in such a way that it focuses on deed. Let me explain. A dog that is large and powerful and which might otherwise cause alarm or apprehensiveness, such as a Rottweiler, but which is kept under control cannot be the subject of a notice. The same Rottweiler, if it were walked by an eight-year-old child who was incapable of controlling it because of its sheer size and power, could be considered to be out of control, but only if, for example, it snapped at people or other dogs. The deed is the actions of the dog allied to allowing a child to take charge of a dog that is simply too big for them to control.  Taking the argument one step further, a dog that is not large or powerful, such as a Yorkshire terrier, but which behaved in a manner that caused alarm or apprehensiveness and which was not controlled effectively and consistently would be considered to be out of control. That goes to the heart of the approach in the bill. The breed or size of dog that is misbehaving is irrelevant.

I have other points to make, Presiding Officer. I hope that I can address them in my summing up. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill.

To ask the First Minister what efforts the Scottish Government is making to reduce the levels of self-harming among children. (S3F-2176)

I thank the First Minister for his detailed answer and welcome that progress. I refer him to last year's Health and Sport Committee report "Inquiry into child and adolescent mental health and well-being". We recognised that some progress had been made towards the Government's commitment to halve the number of admissions of children and adolescents to adult hospital beds. Following that report, what progress is the Government making towards meeting that target, given that the Mental Welfare Commission says that the practice is usually inappropriate?

I understand that the minister cannot make any financial commitments today, but will he consider convening—as he may already have done—the other stakeholders that members on all sides of the chamber have mentioned in tonight's debate to co-ordinate the work on the issue? Not every solution will suit every area, but it seems that the lack of will and the lack of co-ordination of services are causing a logjam, when we could be resolving which services different sub-post offices provide.

Frame it.

I thank the members who signed the motion and those who are taking part in the debate. I welcome members of the National Federation of SubPostmasters who are in the gallery. I welcome the sub-postmasters from Jedburgh, Selkirk, Milnathort and Auchterarder in particular, but also those whom I have yet to meet. Some weeks ago, along with the National Federation of SubPostmasters and colleagues, I hosted a presentation on "Six Steps to a Sustainable Post Office Network", which led to this debate. Before addressing the specific matter of the diversification fund, by way of background I refer the chamber to my consultation on local post offices across the Scottish Borders, which was carried out at a time when the Department of Trade and Industry was consulting on post office reduction. In February 2007, 40,000 residents were consulted, with more than 13,000 responses. That is a 35 per cent response rate, which is somewhat higher than the turnout at some elections. Ninety-eight per cent of respondents considered the local post office to be an essential part of the community. I list, in no particular order, the key functions that were identified. The first was social inclusion and convenience. Those who did not have bank accounts had only the post office as a source of cash, bill paying, benefits access and advice and so on. It was important to the local economy; many small businesses, especially in the days of internet business, transact through the local post office. It was important to community survival; the survival of many other local shops and businesses was dependent on local people carrying out transactions at the local post office and spending their money in the local shops nearby. It was important to individual wellbeing. Local post office  staff often go beyond the job and help with form filling; they know their customers, for whom they may be the only contact that an individual makes during the day or, indeed, the week. As many of us will recognise, the local post office is also an important community information source—a sort of local Reuters, with both community and individual gossip, as well as an unofficial tourism, directions and information bureau. I have taken the time to repeat the consultation's findings because they tie in directly with the proposals in the report to which I referred earlier, which covers not only UK responsibilities but the Scottish Parliament and local government. Most of the recommendations relate to the key, often unofficial functions to which I have referred, many of which are unpaid. I support discussions between the Scottish Government, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and agencies such as the Department for Work and Pensions, the credit unions and VisitScotland—the list is not exhaustive—with a view to producing a co-ordinated plan to support, develop and finance our sub-post office network to meet the demands that I have outlined. With the demise and disgrace of the large banks, there is an opportunity to be grasped. As Consumer Focus Scotland states in its helpful briefing note: "The Post office is a universal brand which consumers recognise, value and support". We cannot say that about the banks and their billions bailout. In passing, I congratulate the Government on its small business rates relief scheme, which allows some businesses to save up to £3,100 a year. That is not to be sniffed at. I commend the Welsh Assembly Government and its aptly though quite cumbersomely named post office diversification fund, which developed from the Welsh post office development fund. Between 2002 and 2004 the post office development fund gave capital grants totalling £4.1 million to 99 post offices in some of the most remote and deprived areas in Wales. The diversification fund opened in December 2008, with £1.5 million per year for three years in capital and revenue grants, and is open to post offices throughout Wales—coverage has been extended. The first round closed on 30 April 2009, with 120 applications for grants totalling just over £2 million. Sixty-three were successful, with a payout of just over £1 million. That enabled those small businesses at the hub of the community—whether rural, remote or urban—to improve facilities both economically and socially, to install computers and so on. I commend the Welsh Assembly Government for putting its money where its mouth is.  I recognise the realities of a budget in constrained financial circumstances that have been and will, in the coming week, continue to be well aired in the Parliament. However, we have the model of the town centre regeneration fund. That had substantial funding—£60 million—but it was seed-corn funding that, according to Government estimates, supported 640 jobs across Scotland. Grant applications were assessed, and the funding was allocated. The minister will be relieved to know that we are not asking for £60 million. However, on a population basis, with 3 million people in Wales and 5 million in Scotland, we could be talking single millions to provide capital and revenue grants. That might allow post offices to borrow money on top of that to develop their premises or buy information technology equipment, or to carry out a refurbishment. Essentially, and importantly, that would be done in tandem with providing funded additional local services, as I outlined earlier. This is a golden opportunity. Unfortunately, I am not a minister—and probably never will be—and I have no formal part in the cross-party budget discussions and negotiations, but the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism can take this as my informal and very public bid from the back benches for the minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth to examine the proposal in the context of the current debates, with whomsoever, on the budget. I consider this proposal to be very worth while and proportionate. It is a small investment that will be excellent for communities, for employment and for social wellbeing. As has been proved elsewhere, it is highly successful. It has been tested. I look forward to hearing the minister's response. I hope that it is positive.

I support the Government's amendments and will speak to my amendments 33 to 35. In general, I welcome the requirement to have a register of tobacco retailers. I pursued the idea originally as a bill proposal for a licensing system. I also welcome the fact that tobacco is now almost, but not quite, being put in the same category as other dangerous products, such as alcohol. Under my amendments, the sign that would have to be displayed would act as an important reminder of the laws prohibiting the sale of tobacco to underage customers—that is, that it is illegal to sell tobacco products to anyone under  18. It would also remind customers that tobacco was available in that shop. Amendment 33 would place an additional requirement on any shop that is the subject of a banning order to display a sign stating that tobacco may not be sold in that shop as a result of enforcement action. The sign would contain details of the ban's duration and be displayed in a prominent position on the premises. The display of such a sign would serve three main purposes. First, it would allow customers and the local community to know that the retailer was banned from selling tobacco. Secondly, it would distinguish between shops that choose not to sell tobacco—for example, Lidl in Scotland has decided not to sell tobacco in its stores—and those that are prevented from doing so by a banning order. Thirdly, it would send a powerful message to both retailers and customers that continued breaking of tobacco sales laws, especially those concerning sales to underage customers, which result in fixed-penalty notices and lead to banning orders, might result in the loss of the right to sell tobacco. It is likely that that would have an additional deterrent effect on retailers who might be tempted to break the law. The subsequent amendments impose proper penalties if the notice is not displayed.

I ask the First Minister to have regard to the Health and Sport Committee's report, to be published in the coming weeks, following a cross-party fact-finding visit to Finland and France on minimum pricing and other measures to combat those countries' increasing concerns about alcohol consumption and the impact on the health and wellbeing of their nations.

I am rather taken aback to hear people and dogs being compared in terms of prescription charges, and I say that as an animal lover. I return to the first principle of the NHS, which was referred to by the cabinet secretary: that it should be free at the point of delivery. Of course, the service is not free; we have paid for it all through our tax, and the fact that we are taxed according to our income means that we have already dealt with the issue of ensuring that those who can afford to are paying more into the system. In a perfect world, dentistry might also be free at the point of use, but we are not in a perfect world. Let us go back at least to the world that we started with some 60 years ago—and let us also, of course, get more dentists first. If we accept the principle on which the NHS was founded, it follows that there should be no up-front charges for medical treatment in hospital in-patient, out-patient or accident and emergency departments. But what is different about medication, especially when we are moving towards a situation in which more people are treated in their homes? If people received that medication in hospital, they would not be charged. While I am on the matter, I add that we should not move towards a society in which we charge people for self-inflicted illnesses, which is a consideration that might be being put into the pot elsewhere. We might start from the basis of the principle that prescriptions should not be chargeable but, if a certain treatment is to be charged for—even with certain exemptions, which I will deal with later—on the basis either of ability to pay, age or type of condition, why not extend that to other treatments? I cannot understand why a distinction is being made between prescriptions that are to be taken at home and prescriptions that are to be taken elsewhere. It is simply a form of treatment.  The history of charges goes back to Atlee, who, in 1952—I was around even then—brought back in prescription charges, which caused the resignation of Harold Wilson and Aneurin Bevan, the great founder of the NHS. Labour was then defeated by the Conservatives, who continued what was, in essence, a Conservative policy. The policy was ditched by Harold Wilson in 1965 but reinstated in 1968. Today, in more humanitarian and social democratic times, we see that society in the UK is moving in another direction. As has been said, Wales has abolished prescription charges, Scotland is moving towards their abolition and Northern Ireland is seriously considering the matter. The argument with regard to long-term conditions, particularly cancer, is laudable, but it is extremely flawed. I refer to the BMA's response paper, "Prescription charges for those with long term conditions", which contains a plethora of quotations that illustrate why that is the case. We start from a position in which, as the paper states, "The current exemption categories are often illogical and unfair; extending these categories to include those with LTCs would simply add to the inequities in the system". The BMA cannot support such an extension, and it goes on to state: "Moves have been made to exempt patients with cancer from prescription charges, but already this looks set to create a new set of winners and losers depending on which side of an arbitrary line you fall. If the current system is to continue to exist, then we believe that consideration of more radical proposals is needed rather than a simple extension of the list of medical exemptions. For example, consideration could be given to restricting the wide-ranging nature of some of the existing exemptions. It is hard to understand why a patient with an underactive thyroid should receive treatment for a chest infection free, whilst a patient on treatment for their hypertension would have to pay for theirs." The BMA notes with regard to exemptions that "most professionals report that they have considered the issues very carefully and have been unable to find any fair system of exemption" charges. It goes on to state: "The question is whether this list, by being longer, would be any fairer. Ultimately we could end up with a situation where only a tiny percentage of prescriptions attracted a charge, and at that point, the retention of any charge seems nonsensical." I, like Nanette Milne, do not always agree with the BMA, but it presents a sound argument about drawing lines. The same argument applies to drawing lines in relation to the ability to pay. There is evidence to suggest that not only do patients select and filter the prescriptions that their GPs give them to decide which ones they can afford, but the GPs themselves—as they have said in discussions with the BMA—decide, sometimes with the patient, which prescriptions  the patient can afford. The decision about what to prescribe is based not on what the patient requires, but on what they can afford to pay, which is rather chilling. I move on to deal with health visitors. In fairness to Mary Scanlon, I have difficulties with the loss of the universal attendance—and the associated care and attention—of health visitors. I signed up willingly to the Health and Sport Committee's recent report on child and adolescent mental health and wellbeing, and I stand by it, as I suspect other members of the committee do. There are, as we know, extensive difficulties in the recruitment of much-valued allied professionals, which is a big issue. There are also huge difficulties in relation to demographic changes, and some areas such as the Scottish Borders may require extra district nurses to deal with an ageing population, although there are a smaller number of births. The minister knows—and I will continue to say—that I am concerned about vulnerable families. As the evidence that the Health and Sport Committee received makes clear, the problem is that we do not know where those vulnerable families are. Only when the health visitor is a welcome guest in the house of the carer or the parent may they see something amiss that even the parent does not see. The problem is that when health visitors attend vulnerable families, they begin to slip in the perception of the public—not of myself or other members of the Health and Sport Committee—because they are viewed as social workers. As we know, a social worker on the doorstep gets a very different reception from a health visitor. We are living in the real world, and I understand the difficulties. However, I continue to hope that the Government will address the issue of universal attendance from health visitors for a period of time to babies and young children.

Does that make it wrong?

Well, I hope so.

Thank you, Deputy Presiding Officer. Your rebuke is noted by me. I was en route and I apologise. First, I take this opportunity to thank all who gave oral and written evidence to the Health and Sport Committee, which is listed in annex B of the report. My colleagues on the committee unanimously took the view at the beginning of this parliamentary session that the committee should, as a priority, hold an inquiry into mental health. On behalf of the committee, I thank our clerking team and the Scottish Parliament information centre, who were very helpful. While being mindful that the scatter-gun approach would get us nowhere and that mental health is such a wide and diverse area, we narrowed the inquiry down to child and adolescent mental health. Members will note from the title of our report that we broadened the term mental health to include wellbeing, in order, we thought, to reflect more accurately the range that mental health encompasses, from diagnoses of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, for example, to people feeling depressed and low, having low self-esteem or being emotionally not well. I note that, in its briefing for the debate, Action for Children Scotland supports that broadening of the definition of mental health.  Very few committee reports set the heather alight, and this one will be no different. However, the inquiry and report should engage the attention of at least 25 per cent of the Scottish population, be they new mums, farmers, plumbers, teachers, politicians or the press—who are notably, but not unexpectedly, in absentia. Why should such people's attention be engaged? It is because one in four of us will, at one time or another, suffer from one or another form of mental illness, or our mental wellbeing will not be good, which will, of course, impact not only on ourselves but on our families, friends and colleagues and on our ability to work or even deal with day-to-day mundane matters. It costs society in terms of the loss of an individual's contribution in pounds, shillings and pence. It costs the national health service and the justice system, and it costs the individual in terms of enjoyment of his or her life. So, where were we to start? The committee split into groups and made informal visits to various and varied projects, which are listed on page 2 of our report. After those visits, the remit of the inquiry was defined with a set of key questions. One was about identification: how do we recognise children and adolescents who are potentially at risk of developing mental health problems, and how can those problems be prevented? Another question related to obstacles: what gets in the way of identification of children and adolescents who have mental health problems, and can those obstacles be overcome? Another question was about action: what is being done to aid early intervention when potential mental health problems are identified, and what else can be done? Another issue is access. Who can access the services and can on-going support be improved? Finally, with adolescents, are there particular problems around moving from child and adolescent mental health services to adult mental health services, and how can the process be improved? It is frequently said that child and adolescent mental health services are the Cinderella service of the national health service, so the question for the committee in our report, which we published in June 2009, was whether that is the case. Despite the devotion and efforts of individuals in the statutory sector and the voluntary sector—which plays a particular role in such services—and despite the policy commitment of present and past Governments, the committee's overall view is that there is still a need for more drive in implementing policies, especially from national health service boards and local authorities. That is the general point. I turn to specifics. Committee colleagues will no doubt highlight and develop the conclusions in our report, so I will refer to only a few of them, starting  with the implementation of the child and adolescent mental health framework. An important question is this: who is in charge and where does the buck stop? First, I stress that the framework appears to be the right way to go. At no point in our evidence taking was there any suggestion that the framework needs to be improved or otherwise revised. The outstanding issue is the timescale in which the framework is being implemented. The committee's report recognises that progress has been made, but we state our concerns about who is taking ownership of its delivery. On that point, paragraph 25 of our report states: "According to the Framework, 'responsibility for ensuring delivery of this Framework rests with both NHS and local authority Chief Executives'. There should, therefore, be no doubt about with whom the ownership and responsibility rests: these are the people who should be championing the Framework. Whilst it was evident that the Framework was a priority for the Scottish Government, as it had been for the previous administration, it appears that this sense of priority has not transferred more widely into the delivery of services and has not, therefore, translated into a momentum for effective implementation of the Framework. ... Whilst the Committee notes the Minister for Public Health and Sport's statement that 'there was nothing to suggest that any implementation activity was off-target', the Committee is concerned that 2015 is a very far-off target and that there may, therefore, be some complacency amongst those responsible for delivering the target. In the interim, NHS board annual reviews are unlikely to be an adequate monitoring mechanism for ensuring steady and consistent progress. The Committee recommends, therefore, that the Scottish Government establish further and more detailed interim targets"— just to keep people on the ball— "and milestones by which implementation may be actively measured." In the Scottish Government's response to the committee's report, the issue of interim targets and milestones is not picked up. Perhaps the Minister for Public Health and Sport can address that in her closing remarks. Given the apparently Cinderella status of CAMHS in the past, I am sure that the committee would welcome assurances that, in the difficult times that lie ahead, such services will not be deprioritised and become even more Cinderella-ish. The early years are also important—the importance of identifying mental health problems in the under-fives was a continuing theme in the inquiry. I quote from our report: "Dr Philip Wilson of the SNAP group"— the "SNAP" reference is to the Scottish needs assessment programme working group on child and adolescent mental health that was set up in 2000— "also talked about the importance of work with this age group, stating that it is the group that should receive the most thought and the most resources. He spoke of the 'enormous blossoming in the evidence base on ways of identifying early in life the children who are going to follow a  problematic and painful trajectory' and of a 'big increase in the evidence base on what works"— this puts the point in ordinary language— "to stop the bad things happening'." The evidence suggests that early neglect is the strongest predictor of later childhood mental ill health. Neglect can take many forms. The chief medical officer for Scotland examined attachment disorders and the effects of social and emotional deprivation in the context of his annual report, "Health in Scotland 2006", in which he highlighted the "huge influence" of pregnancy and the first years of life on the future mental health of the child and future adult. He wrote: "Adverse events during this time can lead to irreversible problems for future ability to cope with everyday life and increase the probability of future poor mental and physical health. Such problems can then run on across generations. It is essential that we recognise the need to invest in the health of infants, young people and children as action by effective Child and Mental Health Services and other agencies can reap substantial long-term rewards for our future child and adult populations." As I trailed earlier, the crux of whether statutory services can identify mental health problems in the very young is how those services are delivered. That key role was traditionally fulfilled by the health visiting profession, members of which would uncover such problems in the course of general unstigmatised interaction with families with young children. The key word is "unstigmatised". In evidence, strong views were offered on the current state of the health visiting profession and, in particular, on the impact of the Scottish Government guidance "Health for All Children 4", which sets out the core programme of screening, surveillance and health promotion checks that every child should receive. The principle of Hall 4 is to have a universal service involving contact with all children, followed by a focusing in on the children who most need additional attention. However, witnesses told the committee of their concerns about the fact that babies often no longer see a health visitor after the first eight weeks of life. Mary Scanlon, in particular, pursued that issue in questioning. In addition, there has been a drastic drop in the number of health visitors. Fears were also aired that vital mental health and wellbeing assessments and interventions are being missed. I have been told that because health visitors are no longer required to carry out universal checks on babies and toddlers, but instead target certain family groups, they sometimes encounter the hostile reaction that visiting social workers can encounter—most undeservedly—and may even be stopped on the doorstep. There remains a great deal of concern about the status of health visitors and, in particular, about the importance of  keeping their link with health practices, as opposed to linking them to social work departments. The suggestion that the role that health visitors perform in child mental health could be fulfilled by social workers instead could be counterproductive from a public perception point of view, as I have demonstrated. Although the committee recognises that it is difficult to achieve a balance between the targeted screening that is caused by inevitable limitations on resources and a universal approach, it considers that it is imperative to identify in the early years, through universal screening, mental health and wellbeing issues, in the child and the parents or carers that have not been recognised at the time of the child's birth, or in the first six to eight weeks of life. Furthermore, it is vital that standard health and developmental checks be carried out on every child at crucial stages of the early years. In its response, the Scottish Government said that the revised additional guidance on Hall 4 to NHS boards that would be published in autumn 2009 would make it clear that what is set down in the Hall 4 guidance was the minimum number of contacts that a child should receive. It would be useful if the minister would set out what the current position is vis-à-vis the community health nurse role that is being piloted in Borders, Highland and Tayside. I hope that our report demonstrates the commitment not just of the committee but of the Parliament to mental wellbeing, and our determination to put it on a par with physical wellbeing, given that they are two interacting sides of the human coin. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Health and Sport Committee's 7th Report, 2009 (Session 3): Report on the Inquiry into child and adolescent mental health and well-being (SP Paper 309).

To ask the First Minister, in light of its commitment to protect front-line public services, what the Scottish Government's position is regarding reports that some NHS boards are  considering cost-cutting exercises likely to impact on front-line services. (S3F-2099)

At present, Westminster takes £30 million a year from Scotland as a result of the British Government's refusal to return attendance allowance, which was saved as a result of the introduction of free personal care. In the seven years since that time, the accumulated loss to Scotland stands at £210 million, which could have paid for 1,600 nurses. Instead, to quote the former First Minister Henry McLeish, that money has been used for "increasing benefits to people in England." Does the First Minister agree with me, and with his predecessor Henry McLeish, who wrote to the Treasury in 2002 to say that the on-going situation was "impossible to explain" and "Politically ... doesn't look clever"?

In due course, I will come to the intervention that I was going to make, which was about interdicts and moving from civil to criminal procedures. As has already been said, violence can be physical, emotional and psychological—that is not an exhaustive list. Domestic violence can be incremental, it can happen over an extended period, it can be a combination of all the above forms and it can come out of the blue. Physical violence is sometimes easier to detect, but, quite often, the victim conceals it, because they are either ashamed of what has happened to them or fearful that the perpetrator will revisit them will further violence. Emotional and psychological violence can take the form—as some of us might have seen—of belittling the victim in private or even in public, reducing self-esteem and making the victim deferential or even obsequious towards the perpetrator. Alcohol consumption is not the cause of domestic violence, but it can be a contributing factor. A parliamentary answer from Shona Robison on 11 March stated: "Homicide (the most serious violent crime) statistics for 2007-08, published in December 2008, show that 45% of the 148 persons accused in homicide cases were reported to have been drunk or on drugs at the time of the incident. In relation to domestic abuse, the Scottish Government recognises that alcohol misuse can exacerbate the problem but is not an underlying cause ... The relationship between alcohol and domestic abuse is complex, but where domestic abuse exists, alcohol is often present. A 2003 Home Office study into domestic violence found that in 62% of cases alcohol was present, while almost half (48%) convicted for domestic violence were alcohol dependent. It concluded that alcohol may be a distinguishing factor in domestic violence offenders."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 24 March 2009; S3W-21759.]

I have certainly said that alcohol is not the cause but an exacerbating factor. There is no excuse for violence, but we must consider the facts as they are displayed in the analysis that I mentioned. One consequence of alcohol consumption is violence, which is quite often demonstrated in the safety and security of the home, against the least resistant person. My  point is that alcohol exacerbates violent tendencies in people. Domestic violence is controlling and manipulative and can cause serious emotional and physical harm, to the point of murder or culpable homicide. Statistics are available on that. Domestic abuse crosses all classes, all demographic groups and all cultures. Violence can be partner against partner, son against mother or granddaughter against grandfather. That list is not complete—Mary Scanlon and Mike Rumbles have referred to that point. When we talk about violence against women, it is important to remember that it can cross boundaries. I will give an example of violence crossing classes that I have cited to Parliament before. When I was in civil practice, a middle-class and rather composed professional woman came into my office. She was swathed from neck to wrists in a large Aran sweater. Only many minutes into her interview with me did she reveal—on my request—the clearly identifiable hand marks around her neck and the bruises to her wrists and back where her husband had pushed her to the floor and kneeled on her. She was reluctant to disclose that attack. She was adamant that it came out of the blue and that he was so ashamed of himself that he voluntarily removed himself from the matrimonial home. I never found out whether the attack was the culmination of other events and threats, but the example illustrates that we must not stereotype the people who are involved, the violent acts or how they come about. The issue is complex and requires a range of interventions. I need to read the consultation document on Rhoda Grant's proposed members' bill, but I am troubled by some of what she said, because she did not mention the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001. The then Justice 1 Committee introduced that important legislation to extend to interim interdicts and interdicts the power of arrest. Previously, that power attached only to matrimonial homes interdicts, which meant that the people involved had to be married, which excluded the increasing number of people who were in partnerships and a range of people in other relationships, who had no protection. The power of arrest can now be attached to a common-law interdict. The evidence issues that Rhoda Grant raised will always exist. The principles of evidence in civil law are completely different from those in criminal law. To be frank, we cannot treat one particular offence differently.

Breaching an interdict is already a criminal offence. The matter moves from civil law to criminal law if breach of the interdict is proved. I look forward to reading Rhoda Grant's consultation document, but we must be careful about the language that we use and the levels of proof that are required. Is it possible to change the burden of proof and the standard of proof for a particular offence? The principle in Scots law is that, in civil cases, the burden of proof rests with the pursuer and the standard of proof is the balance of probabilities.

In criminal cases, the burden of proof rests with the Crown and the standard is proof beyond reasonable doubt. Those principles are and should remain enshrined.

Will the member give way?

I do not want to dance on the head of a pin, and I hope that the member can answer my question. I am hearing the terms "domestic violence" and "domestic abuse" interchanged. Are they the same thing? The Conservative amendment refers to "domestic violence courts", and we seem to be mixing the two terms up.

Surely, in certain cases, the term "domestic abuse" is the wrong one to use. The offence is purely and simply a criminal assault, and should be dealt with in the courts—whether it is the sheriff court or the High Court—as just that: a criminal offence.

Will the minister take careful cognisance of the fact that there can be difficulties with refuge accommodation in rural areas such as the Scottish Borders? In such areas, the refuge may be 60 miles from where the mother and the children—it is usually mothers and children who are involved—live. That disrupts school life and so on. Specific logistical problems exist in rural areas.

The movement for women's suffrage began as early as 1897 with a lady called Millicent Fawcett, although she was very much a pacifist. In 1903, Emmeline Pankhurst and her daughters Christabel and Sylvia set up the Women's Social and Political Union, which started off as pacifist but, as it was getting nowhere in the face of men in politics, had to develop more direct action, about which many of us have read and know. As a result, there were disgraceful endeavours to force-feed women in prison. I will quote from someone who was force-fed in a Scottish jail less than 100 years ago. She said: "The tube filled up all my breathing space, I couldn't breathe. The young man began pouring in the liquid food. I heard the noises I was making of choking and suffocation—uncouth noises human beings are not intended to make and which might be made by a vivisected dog. Still he kept on pouring." Because there was such a reaction in the press in favour of the women who were going to such extraordinary lengths and suffering to such a degree, the Government introduced legislation that came to be known as the cat and mouse act—the colloquial name for the Prisoners (Temporary Discharge for Ill-Health) Act 1913. When a woman was getting to the stage of starving herself to death, to avoid a political fall-out from her dying in prison, she was discharged so that she could start eating and was then brought back in, just as a cat would play with a mouse. That gives us an idea of the culture in which those very brave women lived. As a consequence of those women's actions, and to a great extent because of the intervention of world war one, under the Representation of the People Act 1918 women of property of the age of 30 or above were given the right to vote. Without the intervention of the war, which led to the loss of so many men and the need for women to take over their roles, it would have taken even longer. Indeed, women in the United Kingdom did not achieve full equality of suffrage until 1928. Many people think that the suffragettes were located only in England, but Scotland played a huge role and was at the forefront of the movement. I found out that even Hawick, which I would not have thought was a revolutionary Borders town, was visited by the charismatic Emmeline Pankhurst herself. Indeed, at the climax of that visit, the people of Hawick sang to the strains of "Teribus"—their own little anthem—these words:  "Bravo, bravo lady suffragettes, We support you in your fight. For your cause is just and honest, And the vote is yours by right." That proves that the movement itself was extraordinarily dispersed. Today, we sit in a Parliament that, for the UK at least, has decent representation of women: there are 43 women to 86 men; one of the Deputy Presiding Officers is a woman; and we earn our place here. I certainly think that we have changed not only the tenor of Parliament but some of its priorities, and some of the work that it has done—in advance, I should add, of other Parliaments—has had a great deal to do with the presence of women. Just as important, we have worked very hard to make this place child friendly, not just for women but for the men who have to look after young children. Would I have been a suffragette? I think so. I have been very difficult since I was in my pram—indeed, "difficult" is how my late father would have described me. I have always thought myself at least the equal of any man, and I have never at any stage thought that women should be curtailed by anything other than their own abilities in any activity—and that includes the vote. Of course, we must think of women elsewhere who are not in our position. Women still cannot vote in Brunei; there is only partial suffrage in Lebanon; and there is no suffrage for women at all in Saudi Arabia or the United Arab Emirates. Where we are is where we would like our sisters across the world to be. I congratulate Shirley-Anne Somerville on securing this debate, but for many women the fight goes on.

Is the minister aware that some bus operators are cutting services in the Borders and Penicuik because of loss of revenue due to the Edinburgh tram works? Does he share my concern that Borders buses are excluded from Edinburgh bus station on the same basis, with the result that passengers and drivers are literally left out in the cold at Waterloo Place, where they lack security and facilities? Does he agree that that should not continue?

Is the minister going to say something about credit unions, which are so often overlooked? I would certainly like to hear what he has to say.

I congratulate Jackie Baillie on securing the debate and recognise her continued commitment to tackling poverty, social deprivation and debt since she entered Parliament. I should also declare an interest as a member of the board of Central Borders Citizens Advice Bureau and, although it is some years since I was in legal practice, I was on the duty roster for several years during that period as visiting solicitor at Portobello CAB. Therefore, I have a degree of coalface experience, although it is perhaps a little out of date. Debt problems—whether they arise through job loss, marital breakdown, poor wages, foolish spendthrift ways or ill health—have always been high on the list of client problems in the CABx, as is evidenced by the substantial report that Jackie Baillie mentioned. To state the obvious, the recession can only have made matters worse. Of course, the poorer somebody is, the less they can afford credit but the more they need it. Although I recognise the attractions of bankruptcy, it should not be entered into lightly, as there are repercussions for many years, even after discharge. I thank CAS for its helpful briefing pack and, in particular, for drawing attention to the following statistics. One that I did not expect is that older people have the highest levels of debt of all age groups, owing an average of £26,000. The levels of debt in that group have increased by 50 per cent in the past two years. We are talking, of course, about multiple debts. As Jackie Baillie said, creditors are becoming more forceful and taking less account of whether the debtor can afford to pay—not infrequently when the debtor has been seduced into accepting credit arrangements that were completely unaffordable from the start. I mention in passing, as I have before, the hazards of enticing advertisements for consolidating debts. As the old saw says, if it is too good to be true, it is too good to be true. Unfortunately, these days we start from the premise that debt is natural—it is okay. Gone are the days when my mum condemned anyone for  buying on tick. From cradle to grave, many of us are in debt to someone at some time—from the moment when the lone parent has to borrow to buy a buggy, perhaps even to the cost of cremation. The chill wind of recession is not only personal but national. Our banks are bust but we cannot let them, unlike ordinary debtors, go to the wall. Piled on to our own debt is the £16,700 that each of us has loaned to the banks. It is grim indeed. I understand that, if somebody on average earnings owed the same amount, it would take them 28.5 million years to pay it off. The lower somebody comes down the income pecking order, the less room they have for manoeuvre and the more their borrowing is not for the nice things but the necessary. What can we do within the Parliament's limited capacity? I say again that we need a far greater push to publicise credit unions. Just the other day, I had a constituent in my office who was up to his ears in money problems and borrowing at eye-watering interest rates. He had never heard of credit unions. I have now put him in touch with Capital Credit Union, but there is no branch in the Borders. It is unfortunate that there are few in Scotland. Some of the banks that are floating on our money should recycle any bonuses not to directors but to our schools and youth groups so that financial education is given the profile that it needs. Perhaps some of their directors should have attended such classes themselves. I congratulate citizens advice bureaux, whether in the central Borders or anywhere else, on the very important work that they do and on remaining dedicated and creative in accessing funding. Even in these straitened times—perhaps more so now—I hope that the minister will look at the funding issue in local authorities and elsewhere and keep a careful watch on it, because timeous, informed intervention for an individual can save them a great deal of cost in terms of grief in their life and, indeed, a great deal of subsequent cost to society.

Does the minister agree that it is far preferable that older people stay out of hospital wards for as long as possible? That is why I commend Newbyers village care home in Gorebridge, which provides sheltered accommodation for elderly people. Following on from Mary Scanlon's question, the care home makes innovative use of e-health and telehealth, which suggests that either the minister or the cabinet secretary may wish to visit the facility.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I direct the minister to the fact that I mentioned Abbotsford and Sir Walter Scott.

I understand that there is no VAT on improvements and so on to listed buildings. That is a great assistance to people who are looking to do remedial works.

In this consensual debate—is there a by-election tomorrow?—I, like other MSPs, will take the opportunity to produce a mini tourism guide to my part of Scotland. Nothing could be more pertinent to the built and historic environment than that war zone over the centuries—the Scottish Borders. Despite Scotland's boundaries having been almost firm since the 11 th century, which is most unusual among nations, there is the  exception of the town of Berwick, which has changed its national allegiance—not always with its consent—13 times. Currently, it is in England, but I have plans, as perhaps have others, to change that, given that in a recent referendum the Berwick people decided that they wanted to come back into Scotland. Who can blame them? In Berwick, we see the buildings and layout of any Scottish market town. Today, it still has the headquarters of the King's Own Scottish Borderers and the regimental museum. The wars between England and Scotland mean that the footprints of Wallace and Bruce are deeply imprinted in the Borders. In Selkirk, Wallace was pronounced guardian of Scotland at the kirk of the forest—as Michael Caine would say, not a lot of people know that. That goes back to the point that Rob Gibson made about information about places. Melrose abbey is thought to contain the burial casket of Bruce's heart. Selkirk and Melrose both link us to the romantic novelist Sir Walter Scott—a man who I think is being rehabilitated. The museum in Selkirk was formerly the court house, and it still has facsimiles of documents from when Sir Walter Scott was sheriff. It is a good example of a simple, interactive museum, which Rob Gibson mentioned. There is also Abbotsford house, the eclectic, mock-baronial home that Sir Walter Scott built, which must be seen to be believed and overlooks his much-loved River Tweed and the Eildon hills. I am pleased to say that, after some years in limbo following the death of the last family member—it was a family home until recently—it is now managed by a trust and has succeeded in being given £144,000 in development funding, which I hope will lead to a further £4.5 million to restore the building to its rightful state. Those buildings are all important for their own sake, as they link us directly to our formidable past, but they also make a substantial contribution to the Borders economy and, no doubt, they will make more of a contribution when the railway runs again to Tweedbank. That refers to a point that Karen Gillon made about historical tourist trails and the need for public transport.

I am coming to Jedburgh abbey—I should not worry about it.

I will campaign for anything if Karen Gillon can help me to get the  money, but at the moment my priority is the Waverley line. Let us get that built first, after nearly 50 years of it not running. Currently, nearly 10 per cent of employment in the Scottish Borders is tourism related. At the top of the attractions are Melrose abbey, Abbotsford house and Jedburgh abbey—I know that Karen Gillon will not thank me if I do not mention that. In 2008, UK tourists brought £77 million and overseas tourists brought £29 million into the Borders economy. That is not to be sneezed at in an area that was in recession and where mills closed long before Gordon Brown's recession—that is a little party-political point just to see whether members are awake. Not all our historic environment is suitable to be a tourist attraction and we should not wish it to be. The demise of the weaving and spinning mills and of the paper mills in Penicuik means that vast stone-built mills stand empty, sometimes for far too long. However, I am pleased to say that at the riverside at Selkirk, new enterprises are rising phoenix-like from the metaphoric ashes of Borders industries that are—regrettably—dying. I would like the minister to examine the use of compulsory purchase orders. Some of the long-deserted derelict buildings that are in commercial property developers' hands are a huge blight on towns. At the entrance to Gala from the A7 from Edinburgh stands a big mill that has been derelict for 10 to 15 years and which only now has a sign that says it is available for development. That is another issue that Karen Gillon raised, but we are not in cahoots. The matter needs to be addressed. I return to Penicuik and beyond. Newtongrange has a successful mining museum and will be linked with the Waverley line, which will stop there and link into a tourist trail. The line, which is still clear from the A7, is part of our built and historic environment, as is the viaduct at Newtongrange. We must not think that the historic environment is just buildings. Many historic houses and lands are in not just commercial but private ownership. I am really pleased that Traquair house near Innerleithen is still in the Maxwell Stuart family's hands. It is utterly charming and is very much a family home, as visits show. The property is one of the oldest inhabited houses in Scotland. I will raise another issue for the minister to consider, just to see whether he is listening. Sometimes, a community becomes aware too late of the value of an historic construction such as a building, a mill or a salt house for which a planning application has been lodged for demolition. I understand that, once a planning application has been lodged, the community and everybody else is barred from seeking to have the building listed,  albeit retrospectively, and cannot even halt proceedings. If a building is not listed, people have had it. I have chased that issue before. Will the minister advise me of the current position? Would his office consider examining the situation? Windows provide a metaphorical example of what we sometimes allow to happen to our built and historic environment. As shorthand, I will talk about sash and casement windows versus C R Smith—I mean no offence to C R Smith, but I know that it does not fit sash and casement windows. We are being sloppy as a society when we allow what appear to be minor alterations to buildings—sometimes just to one building in a row—to spoil an area's built landscape. Some councils are tight about that—the matter tends to be local—but I would like the issue to be addressed nationally.

To ask the First Minister how many  referrals the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration has received regarding children held at the Dungavel immigration removal centre in the last 12 months. (S3F-1991)

Will the First Minister clarify whether any discussions have taken place with the Home Office specifically to ensure that any child who will be or has been referred under the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003—broadly speaking, children at risk—will not be deported until investigations by the children's reporter have been concluded? Such children were deported under the previous Liberal-Labour coalition. Will he also convey the widespread revulsion of most Scots to the imprisonment of children in detention camps in Scotland—a practice that has no place in a modern, progressive, compassionate society?

I concur with some of Duncan McNeil's remarks, but I do not know if we should beat ourselves about the head too much as parliamentarians. In the 10 years of the Parliament, we have made some substantial achievements for the elderly in Scotland. The central heating programme has made a huge difference to people's lives. Free personal care—even with all the issues that have arisen from it, which were trailed when we considered the issue—has nevertheless been a major step forward on equity for our elderly people. Concessionary travel has been an extraordinary success and led to better health for our elderly people through giving them mobility, reducing their isolation and often putting fun back into their lives. I say that as I use my pass regularly. We are keeping the bus services running, and I assure members that the buses that run between Edinburgh and Glasgow are full of pensioners and students. The Parliament, across all political parties, has taken some excellent steps. All the aforementioned services have succeeded, and I applaud that because they are not means tested. It might be controversial to say this, but means testing elsewhere has proved to be administratively cumbersome, costly, ineffective and often unfair for individuals on the borderline. A prime example is the low uptake of pension credit, which pensioners who are on the borderline do not apply for or are just missed by. My preference is for taxation of those who have the money, but not to means test, and it is good news that means testing has been removed from services to older people. Unfortunately, I disagree with Duncan McNeil on other points because we cannot change the basic rate of the state pension. If we were to ask pensioners what their top priority would be, most pensioners would say a decent basic state pension. As I say, the pension credit has failed because many who were entitled to it simply did not apply. The application form is lengthy and difficult; one would need a PhD in applying for a pension credit. The minister referred to Scottish Borders Council, which recently conducted a review on transforming older peoples' services. I applaud the  council for that; it has been a step ahead of the game and it has come up with some important ideas. When someone is discharged from hospital to home, there is an intermediate care package to try to prevent the falls and readmissions that are, for the most part, avoidable. The council is turning its attention to day services and day hospitals, many of which are provided by the voluntary sector as referred to by Johann Lamont. We must cherish that sector and ensure that its funding is sustained where appropriate. I am thinking particularly of the social centres that were piloted in Innerleithen and West Linton with the Red Cross providing neighbourhood services to them. Many of those who work in the voluntary sector are pensioners themselves. We must remember that the pension age now runs from 60 to well over 90, which covers two generations and those who served in the second world war as well as those, like myself, who were born after it. That is a huge range of people and abilities. Ian McKee was quite right to say that everyone in that category is an individual with individual talents, abilities and needs. However, notwithstanding Ian McKee's attempt to shorten the lifespan of his robust mother-in-law, there is indeed a lack of appropriate assistance in various areas. That issue comes up in the cases that we get. We do not have enough sheltered housing. The warden system, which was terribly important in much sheltered housing, is being reduced or taken away entirely. That is ironic when there are places such as Heinsberg House in Penicuik, where people went in at 65 and now find, 20 years later when they are 85, that they have lost the warden service. They now have a token round their neck to press or a buzzer to call if they are in difficulty, and what actually happens is that the lady who has the flat next to the door opens it and lets people in. The warden did so much else, such as arrange Christmas and birthday parties, and was a bit of a social worker for the 30-odd residents, but they are now gone, which is a great loss. The warden system represents something that we cannot always measure in monetary terms but can measure in terms of residents' wellbeing. As we know, there is a shortfall in the provision of aids and adaptations. That may mean that, although somebody is assessed in hospital for discharge, while they wait for social work to kick in they have to be reassessed because they become worse or become institutionalised and lose some of their independence. None of that is rocket science, and we all know that funding it is not a bottomless pit. Parliament must address those issues.  I want to focus on medical care in care homes, which was referred to in the context of the documentary on it. However, I will refer to the "Remember, I'm still me" report of May 2009 by the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland and the care commission. If members have not read that report, they should do so, because what it shows is absolutely shocking—I do not use that word lightly. The report has a list of things that are wrong in care homes. For example, of the 67,000 people in Scotland who have dementia, 40 per cent are in care homes. They are the most vulnerable, but it was found that such individuals are rarely involved in any review of their care. It is as if they are an "it" and not a person. It was found that around half of people in care homes never leave them; it is as if the care home is a padded prison for them. It was also found that, although more than half of care homes have accessible gardens, there is little evidence that they are ever used. Those are not big problems to cure. It was also found that there is little creative use of a person's funds to support them. One problem is that our care workers are undervalued. Care work is a poorly paid job, and it is often young people who do it. It is not their fault, but they may not relate in the best way to a very elderly, frail person. There are great differences in the way that the generations behave towards each other, but it is often young people who work in care homes with very vulnerable people. Away back, we had talk about the pill in the sandwich, when people were given medication without their knowledge. That still happens, but all such problems are curable, and the Parliament should address them before the end of this session.

I recognise very much the picture that Karen Gillon painted and I might touch on many of the same points. When I first came to the Parliament 10 years ago, most constituent issues were about health care concerns and transport, and there were a few about housing—it was a general mix. Such concerns remain significant, but the balance has shifted distinctly to increasing problems about suitable housing, particularly rented housing. I concur with remarks that have been made in the chamber about the unintended consequences of the legislation on homelessness, well meaning though it was, which prevent many young people with children from getting housing. In fact, those people often give up the ghost years on when they are still on a waiting list and cannot get accommodation. The legislation also creates issues relating to the placement of people who have difficult behavioural problems, who have been placed in the wrong places and disturbed settled communities. We must have compassion and find homes for such people, but we need to revisit those issues, about which other members are aware. I note from statistics that in March 2008, nearly 3,500 people were on the housing waiting list in the Scottish Borders. The number hardly shifts through the years and is probably greater now. As others have mentioned, special problems exist in rural areas. When a house becomes available, it is not often practicable for someone to relocate to Hawick when they are employed 40 or 50 miles away in Peebles—there can be transport and family issues, with children at school and so on. I mention Peebles in particular because it is a hot spot. It is a good place to retire to and it is within easy commuting distance of Edinburgh, with  decent public transport and park-and-ride facilities this side of the Edinburgh bypass, which creates particular problems for local people in Peebles. Similar housing pressures exist just down the road in Penicuik, for much the same reasons. To add to that mix, the right to buy has a particular impact on picturesque rural villages and hamlets. Who can blame retirees for being enticed to return to places where they have had happy holidays and to settle down and downsize—and, in so doing, push up house prices in areas where local people cannot afford to buy and there is nothing to rent? The fact that house prices are high in rural areas causes particular difficulties, not just for the people who live there but for those who want to seek employment there. That affects the demographics of an area. Keeping a local primary school open depends on families staying there or moving in. There are also impacts on the delivery of health and social care services if we have an imbalance in the population. I am sure that many members from rural areas will recognise the same issues in their constituencies. The convener of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee said that when we look at housing in rural areas we have to look at balance, fairness and sustainability—which are key factors—and that we should build the right type of house in the right places. I will return to that point. I commend the Minister for Housing and Communities, who has been rehabilitated from the freedom of the back benches. He has been a colleague for many years, but he is now a stranger to my company. However, I thank him for the accelerated funding to three house-building programmes in the Borders area. Tweed Homes, a Peebles-based construction company, benefited from accelerated funding to build 29 new affordable homes in Galashiels, safeguarding 120 construction jobs, many of which are local. That did not just happen. Apart from working with the Government and me, the company worked with Eildon Housing Association and the local authority, which sped up the planning process. It can be done. M and J Ballantyne of Kelso also benefited from the accelerated programme; 22 houses are being built and it is protecting 100 jobs. In Penicuik, £720,000 went to Melville Housing Association and 10 new affordable homes are being built. That accelerated funding buys a lot for a little amount of bucks. It does not just provide rural social rented or affordable homes; it keeps rural jobs there, keeps spending money in the local economy and maintains the skills base locally, which, no doubt, would have dispersed to where the contracts were. We know that when people move, they stay away. In the Borders, some 1,000 people are employed locally in the construction  and building sector. The accelerated funding created a bit of a virtuous circle; it achieved a great deal for modest investment. In his speech, the minister made a plea for the reduction in VAT on house improvements from 17.5 to 5 per cent. That is an excellent idea, because a lot could be bought with the money saved. Many houses in the private sector and the public sector need upgrading, but many people just cannot take on the work. Such a reduction might also put an end to the black economy, where people try to get work done with paying VAT on it. I liked the minister's comments about the Scottish Law Commission examining the processes for compulsory purchase, to which other members have referred. Throughout the Borders and Penicuik, I frequently pass historical industrial eyesores—brownfield sites that have been land banked, not by local authorities or housing associations but by people waiting for better days, which Karen Gillon mentioned. Those sites stay empty for decades when there is a crying need to build on them. I do not know whether the Law Commission will come up with proposals on that. Compulsory purchase must be used appropriately, because it takes away people's rights, but we have to look at land banking. Perhaps the minister could put under his thinking hat the proposal that stamp duty, which is paid by buyers on heritable property over certain amounts, should be controlled, collected and kept by the Parliament and recycled or reallocated for housing and construction development. In the 60s, which I can remember, we had key workers houses, which local authorities built and retained specifically for key workers. Key workers were not defined; it was up to the local authority to decide whether they were doctors, teachers, engineers or whatever. That is what brought people in. When I married, I benefited from moving into a key workers house—many school teachers went into such houses—which gave me time to settle in the community and, within two years, I moved on to buy a smaller cottage. The system was excellent and it was a great enticement for young people who were starting families to move into rural areas. The Communities Committee dealt with planning, which I will touch on briefly. There are difficulties; I mentioned compulsory purchase, and more planners are required. The committee found out that most planners were going into the private sector because they got more money there, but perhaps the recession and the threat of losing their jobs will mean that they will move back to the public sector where they are needed. The recession also offers an opportunity to housing  associations and local authorities to exercise purchasing muscle in negotiating construction contracts, for example. If there is further accelerated funding, it will enhance that opportunity. As has been mentioned, there have also been other encouragements to build such as the steps that have been taken on stamp duty and VAT reduction. There is an opportunity to provide hard-pressed rural communities with appropriate housing that is, importantly, sensitive to the community's needs, the population and the environment in which it is built. Again, I return to Karen Gillon's speech. Sometimes in the Borders—I will get hate mail for saying this—luxury Legoland developments have been built, in which the houses have balustrades, columns, five bedrooms, three bathrooms and so on. Nobody local will ever be able to buy them and they do not suit the landscape; even if I had the money, I would not buy one. When we deal with the issue, I hope that we will build houses that are appropriate in size, and in style and design, to local communities.

I congratulate Rhona Brankin on bringing the debate to the chamber and I echo her fond recollections of my colleague Margaret Ewing. I do not wish to embarrass Rhona, but her own experience, in which she was so very dignified some years ago, gives her authority and a commitment to discussing the cause that I cannot begin to match. I note the improvement that Rhona Brankin mentioned, but I also note the continued incidence of breast cancer and the annual rate of deaths. Each individual case is a family tragedy, but high-profile cases, such as that of Gloria Hunniford's daughter Caron Keating, who died so young from breast cancer, bring that home to many people. Of course, her death also spurred on her mother to campaign so well and so vigorously on the search for a cure for the illness.  Not so long ago, a member of the Parliament's security staff told me that his wife had been for a breast scan and that a lump had been detected. I disclosed to him that I had not been for screening for many years because I am a coward and I like to bury my head in the sand. Members might not think that, but I did not want to go. However, the news from him made me realise that that is a stupid attitude to take, so I immediately took up an appointment and went for a screening. I am glad to say that his wife is doing well and that I was given the all-clear. I can tell members that I will not wait another seven years before I go back. I note that 4,000 cases are diagnosed each year, most of which are in women, although about 20 are in men. Sadly, 1,100 people die each year from breast cancer. As I said, their deaths are an individual tragedies and tragedies for their families and friends. Research is essential. I commend the Breast Cancer Campaign, which with £1.57 million funds 13 projects in Scotland. Many women think that the incidence of breast cancer is higher than it is, but that is not to say that they should avoid screening. As we all know, early detection is essential, so it is good to go for screening. However, I would like those who operate the system to speed up the letter that is issued after screening—it can be 10 days to two weeks before it arrives. Women who are to be recalled are waiting for the letter to be delivered, and during that time are in a great state of anxiety. Often, it turns out simply that the image was not clear. I do not know whether it would be possible technically, but it would be good if the person could be told whether they have the all-clear on the spot, when they go for screening. At present, people can become anxious during the period between the screening and the arrival of the letter, and if there is a further period before they are recalled, their anxiety can grow. Apart from that, I am glad that we are making progress. I urge women not to wait until somebody tells them to go for a screening but to take up the opportunity of regular screenings.

I rise to speak on behalf of the Health and Sport Committee, therefore my remarks will be somewhat constrained, but happily so—I can assure my deputy convener on that point. The Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill is difficult, in that it is a bill of two halves that are not exactly related to each other. That gave the committee some slight difficulties, so I will rely on our committee members who are medical experts—who are, if I may say so, much more informed about such matters—to deal with the technicalities of part 2. As the Minister for Public Health and Sport described, the purpose of part 1 is to legislate on the sale and display of tobacco and tobacco-related products. Part 2 will reform the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1978 in relation to GP practices. Many of the conclusions in the committee's report were agreed unanimously, but many were agreed by majority—I was in a minority of one once. However, when we have our disagreements on the committee, they are dealt with amicably. As the minister said, the bill will make it an offence to display tobacco and smoking-related products where they are offered for sale. Many committee members felt that such displays are the last vestiges of tobacco advertising. On the issue that Jeremy Purvis raised, I understand that specialist tobacconists and web displays will be exempt from the ban, but shops in which less than 50 per cent of sales are tobacco products are considered to be sub-specialists. My understanding is that the minister is looking into discussions with the few retailers who come into that category—we are all aware that businesses are under threat in the current climate. The committee's report recognises that the evidence base for banning displays is at an early stage and international evidence is inconclusive. We will submit a bid for some exotic travels to try to determine whether better evidence is available. I hope that other conveners on the Conveners Group will look on that bid with affection—we have not travelled anywhere so far. The committee accepts that the ban will result in a cost to business from reconfiguring space, but most committee members are not persuaded that the cost will be excessive. Indeed, the tobacco manufacturers might cover the cost. I understand that tobacco displays will need to be hidden by 2011 in large retail outlets and by 2013 in small outlets, so there will be a lead-in time. On balance, the majority of committee members considered that the display of cigarettes at the point of sale constitutes advertisement.  The bill restates the existing offence of selling tobacco products to under-18s, but it will give retailers a defence to the offence—this might be described as a reasonableness test—that they believed that the customer was over 18 and were shown acceptable proof of identification. It was argued in oral evidence that the creation of such a defence would be a retrograde step, and the majority of the committee were in favour of removing it from the bill. I am not—I will continue to pursue the inclusion of a reasonableness defence. I was substantially outvoted, not for the first time.

I accept that there are issues to address, which will be developed in the course of the debate. At this point, I am constrained in what I can say. Under the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, it is an offence for a person under the age of 18 to buy or attempt to buy alcohol for himself or herself. The committee believed that there needed to be a similar balance of responsibility between retailers and underage purchasers of tobacco, and called on the minister to consider whether the responsibility of minors with regard to the purchase of tobacco should be brought into line with the provisions on the purchase of alcohol. Another major aim of the bill is the prohibition on the use of vending machines to sell tobacco products. The bill will create a new offence of having a vending machine for the sale of such products. The person who commits the offence will be the person who manages or controls the premises on which a vending machine is available for use. The committee noted the argument that a ban on cigarette vending machines may have an economic impact on the licensed trade, as David McLetchie said, but recognised the opposing view that the impact may be marginal, which was among the minister's arguments. We know that she is holding discussions on the issue. The committee remained to be convinced that the radio-controlled system proposed by the industry, which would be based on age verification by bar staff in licensed premises, would work in practice.

The decision about whether to have a demonstration was a committee decision. We took the view that, at the time, sufficient evidence was not available. The committee was not convinced. That was a majority view, which I know was not supported by the Conservatives. The committee recognised that the proposals would inevitably have a cost for cigarette vending machine businesses, but noted the minister's assurances that she would hold discussions with the industry. The provisions on a register of tobacco retailers are of particular interest to me. The bill will establish a national register of all tobacco retailers. A retailer who is the subject of three or more tobacco enforcements against specified premises could face a ban on selling tobacco in those premises for up to 12 months. There are issues to do with the operation of such a system, which we have raised with the minister. The committee welcomed the proposal and the minister's agreement that she would reflect on our discussion about operators of multiple premises and report back to us. I will not discuss enforcement and fixed penalties so that I can move on to part 2, which seeks to amend legislation on the eligibility criteria for persons who contract or enter into arrangements with health boards for the provision of primary medical services. The bill intends to ensure that any person who contracts with a health board must, among other things, regularly perform or be "engaged in the day to day provision of, primary medical services". The current situation is that a commercial operator is eligible to bid for contracts to provide primary medical services. That will change to avoid a repeat of the situation that arose in 2007, when Serco bid for a vacant GP practice in Harthill that was tendered by NHS Lanarkshire. Under the bill, boards will be able to make such arrangements only with medical practitioners, health care professionals, qualifying partnerships, limited liability partnerships and companies. The majority of the written evidence that we received was in favour of the change. The sentiment of supporters of the bill is encapsulated by the view expressed by NHS Tayside, which said that the bill will "prevent the creation of 'corporate GP contracts' by commercial companies which would permit them to take over vacant GP Practice." There were sceptical voices. Community Pharmacy Scotland and the Confederation of British Industry were sceptical. Two members of the committee—Mary Scanlon and Helen Eadie— went to Canary Wharf and Tower Hamlets to see two practices that are run by commercial providers. I am sure that they will go into more detail about what they saw, but it is fair to say that they were impressed by the level of patient service. I think that it is fair to say that those ladies are not easily impressed. The committee also grappled with the extent to which GP practices, typically under the general medical services contract, can be differentiated from the commercial operations in some parts of England. The British Medical Association was keen to stress that doctors in Scotland were part of an "independent sector" and that that was preferable to a "commercial sector". [ Laughter. ] Mr McLetchie anticipates my point. The subtleties of that distinction were lost somewhat on some members of the committee. What did the committee think of part 2 of the bill? It is fair to say that there was a range of views. A majority of members were in favour of the general principles, albeit that they wanted to re-examine matters at stage 2. The bill is relatively unusual in that it is a comparatively small bill that covers two very different areas of health policy. The majority of committee members consider that there is merit, in principle, in both parts, although some committee members have concerns about various aspects of part 1 and some members—not always the same ones—have reservations about the rationale behind part 2. Those matters can be debated at stage 2. However, a majority of committee members agreed to recommend to the Parliament that the general principles of the bill be agreed to.

The minister mentioned in his statement the extension of sustainable news provision to the south of Scotland as well as to the current STV regions. Does he agree that my constituents in the south of Scotland, and the Scottish Borders in particular, have paid a very heavy price for ITV's change to basing its news coverage in Tyneside? Does he support my call for STV to extend its coverage to the Scottish Borders?

I congratulate Alasdair Morgan on securing the debate.  Aged 25 and newly married, I set out to teach at Whithorn school, a secondary school that was situated across a playground from Whithorn primary school. As Michael Caine might have said, "Not a lot of people know that." I came to the school direct from urban—if not urbane—Dunfermline, where I had taught in a comprehensive with a school roll in excess of 1,000. I moved to a school—at the time it was called Whithorn junior secondary school—that had a roll of under 100. Of course, on taking up residence in the school house, I became a resident of Whithorn. I well recognise the broad main street that Alasdair Morgan described. Whithorn was a disadvantaged town at that time, and it remains disadvantaged. It is located pretty well at the end of one of the Galloway peninsulas. Back in those days, Newton Stewart was a busy market town, but it is suffering a bit nowadays. As you and I know, Presiding Officer, the Isle of Whithorn is not an island but a town on an attractive harbour. People tend to pass through Whithorn en route to the Isle of Whithorn; they have to make a point of visiting. Indeed, once they have visited the area, their only choice is to turn round and head back up the peninsula to Newton Stewart. In many ways, the area is disconnected from central Scotland. It used to take me four hours to drive from Whithorn to Edinburgh; Concorde crossed the Atlantic faster than that. I found that many people did not know where Galloway was. They tended to be vague, asking, "Is it in Ayrshire?" "No," I used to say, "It is not." People had not a clue about the part of Galloway in which Whithorn is located, never mind a knowledge of the town. I am therefore pleased that the debate is taking place. I made my first contact with St Ninian's cave while teaching at the school. One lovely spring day, I took the class out of the school to visit the cave. We strolled through the beautiful Physgill glen, which leads down to the cave. The children, rightly, took for granted everything about the glen—they were used to being surrounded by such countryside—but, coming from an urban part of Scotland, I was astonished at its beauty. It was burgeoning with bluebells, wild irises, crocuses and primroses—I will get poetic—as the April sun streamed through a delicate canopy of birch leaves. I am sure members can picture it. I was enthralled. When one comes to the end of the glen, it opens up to reveal a seascape and one crosses a rough pebbled shore to reach the cave. For any monk to take up a place there must have meant a real hermit's life. The experience was extraordinary and magical, but few people knew about St Ninian's cave. Until the debate, I imagine that few people were aware of the role of St Ninian in bringing Christianity to  Scotland. I am sure that many associate that with St Columba and Iona. I say to Alasdair Morgan that there should be a bit of a scrap; it would raise the profile of St Ninian. I look to an initiative down in Galloway that succeeded and that provides a model for Whithorn. Ten or 15 years ago, Wigtown, which had been an important place and the heart of Wigtownshire, had fallen into desuetude; it looked a bit like tumbleweed town and had lost many of its industries and markets. It then became a book town. I thought that the initiative was just a slick public relations job that would never work, but it has: Wigtown has put itself on the map as a book town. The buildings that were crumbling and falling apart have been restored. The town is fresh, invigorated and busy and has an important local economy; I know that you are aware of that, Presiding Officer. I hope that, through this motion and by hooking on to the history and some of the legacy of St Ninian, Whithorn will have the kind of regeneration and renaissance that happened in Wigtown. I congratulate both you, Presiding Officer, who have unfortunately been silenced in the debate by your role, and Alasdair Morgan.

With respect to my colleague, we were not talking about taking part in sports but about basic skills of balance and catch. I am told that report cards are now so politically correct that teachers dare not put anything critical on them, but the point is to assist parents and children for whom something is lacking that should be there at the given stage of life, as we would with other skills.

I caution the member about referring to an item of apparel that I once confessed to wearing. She has referred to it enough in the past.

In fairness to the Government, although paragraph 86 says that "lamentable progress has been made since the introduction of the specific Government target in 2004", it goes on to say that that  "followed on from a similar target set ... back in 1999". In fairness, we must accept that it has been a long haul since 1999.

Will the minister take an intervention on that point?

First, I forewarn the chamber that I have 13 minutes—a rare privilege for me, as a back bencher. Secondly, I trust that I will not require those 13 long minutes. Finally, I am speaking in my capacity as convener of the Health and Sport Committee and am hence constrained—indeed, restrained—unaccustomed though I am to that position. I will, therefore, be somewhat subdued. On behalf of the committee, I thank all our witnesses, including those whom we may have roughed up a bit. There is a lesson there for those whom I will call professional witnesses, if I may: when giving evidence to the Health and Sport Committee, words such as "teaching", "granny" and "suck eggs" should be borne in mind. Members of the committee will understand what I am about to say, as it is a bit of an in-joke. We once heard one strategy too many, and I am quite serious about the word "scenario", which is verboten. Why did the committee undertake its inquiry? In 2007, sport moved into the ministerial health portfolio, from culture. That move is to be welcomed, because it removes sport from the exclusive, competitive, elite category in which it was, relates it to the wider population and underlines the crucial bond between an active life and a healthy life. Given that the days of playing footie or skipping in the fading light of winter, sometimes under the limited illumination of the streetlights, have gone, our children lead increasingly sedentary lives. They are driven to school more often than they cycle or walk—their digits do most of the walking on the ubiquitous keyboard. Their exercise is limited to raids on the fridge for convenience food while playing some virtual game. As a plus, they may well have a Wii exercise programme. Of course, that is overegging the pudding, but it goes some way towards describing current lifestyles. Incidentally, we are all eating too many puddings. The upshot is that childhood obesity is on the rise. That is bad in itself, with an increase in type 2 diabetes in children, which was almost unheard of two decades ago, when Fatty Arbuckle and Billy Bunter were confined to comic strips; I am  showing my age. However, a fat child can grow even bigger, into a fat adult, with increasing health problems. Being fat is not funny and it is not healthy for the individual or the public purse. For the first time, a parliamentary committee decided to inquire into the provision of sport in the widest possible terms, beginning with the physical literacy—a term that was new to many members of the committee—of our youngest children. Physical literacy is all about co-ordination and balance—things like skipping, catching a ball and hopping. It is about the three Rs of physical skills. The committee also looked at physical education, as delivered through the commitment by the current and previous Governments to provide two hours of PE in all our schools. The aim is to deliver not only a healthy physical future for individuals and society as a whole, but the mental wellbeing that accompanies an active lifestyle. We steered well away from the Commonwealth and Olympic games, with the specialised selection and training of the athletes involved, and focused on pre-school and primary education. The committee heard from some of Scotland's sporting greats, such as Liz McColgan and Rhona Martin, and their message to the committee was that the most important issue to address was the crucial role that school plays in teaching children the importance of being active, fit and healthy. It is therefore appropriate that both the Minister for Schools and Skills and the Minister for Public Health are attending the debate. On an ancillary issue, despite those athletes winning their medals, activity and facilities in their sports subsequently declined. It was not a case of their winning gold medals and more people taking up those sports. There are Government targets. Since 2003, when "Let's Make Scotland More Active: A strategy for physical activity" was published, there has been a target for 50 per cent of all adults and 80 per cent of all children to meet the minimum recommended levels of physical activity by 2022. Those minimum levels are that children should accumulate at least 60 minutes of physical activity of moderate intensity on a daily basis, and that adults should accumulate 30 minutes of physical activity of moderate intensity on most days of the week. Many of us here might recognise that we do not tick that box. The most recent figures show that two thirds of Scottish adults and one third of Scottish children do not do enough physical activity to gain the benefits. Two thirds of teenage girls—they are in a particular group—are also reported to be physically inactive. According to Audit Scotland, the number of adults who participate in sport on a weekly basis fell from 49 per cent in 2001 to 42 per cent in 2006. Most sport nowadays takes  place with the crisps, sitting on the sofa, watching the league. The ideal is for children to start on their pathway to physical literacy through structured play at nursery school, followed by learning the fundamentals. We were told by experts that, by the age of seven or eight, children should have the fundamentals of physical literacy in place. That should lead into "sport-specific education and participation" at upper primary and secondary levels. That is what is down on paper, although the reality is somewhat different. The view from one secondary school teacher at a school that we visited, Dumbarton academy, was that the physical literacy of secondary 1 pupils—I am talking about catching a ball, hopping, skipping and jumping, not anything fancy—was at the lowest level that staff could remember for 20 or 30 years, and the situation was continuing to deteriorate. What is the current position? The most up-to-date figures that the committee obtained, from 2008, suggested that, of 237 primary schools that had been inspected by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education—we roughed up HMIE a bit, as Mary Scanlon might relate—only "around a third were providing young people with two hours PE at each stage." We were told by HMIE: "in 2008, of the 50 secondary school inspections, two thirds of schools met the two hours physical education target at S1/S2 and a majority at S3/S4, although at S5 and S6 only one in seven schools met the target." The rate of meeting the target falls off, therefore. The impression that we got from the educational establishment, in the form of HMIE and the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland, was that good progress was being made towards meeting the targets. "Progress" is a bit of a weasel word, which committee members might wish to pick up on. There are several things that I wish to focus on. "The Committee was disturbed"— that is a moderate word for how we really felt— "by HMIE's approach to the inspection of PE," which was raised by my colleague Mary Scanlon. The committee piled in like a pack at that stage—it was great. That line in the committee's report continued: "in particular, its view that, if no reference is made to the provision of PE in a school inspection report"— this was sweet— "it should be assumed that the provision of PE is satisfactory."  Ross Finnie picked up on that point, and asked whether it also pertained to arithmetic, reading and writing. Of course it does not. We were very disappointed at HMIE. We further concluded: "This type of approach might possibly be appropriate and proportionate if the position across Scotland for the teaching of PE was strong as a whole. But the reality is that lamentable progress has been made since the introduction of the specific government target in 2004 (which followed on from a similar target set by sportscotland's predecessor body back in 1999)." I do not put that at the door of the present ministers; it is at the door of everybody who has been here over 10 years. We continued: "That can be the only conclusion to be drawn since, to give one example, HMIE's own unpublished records show that, of the schools that it inspected last year, only a third of primary schools were providing two hours of PE per week." That is not very good.

Yes. There are a variety of reasons. Sometimes the issue is facilities, but the biggest issue is the determination of the headteacher or director of education to treat PE on a par with reading, writing and arithmetic. We found that PE was always being treated as a Cinderella or tag-on activity—something that could be done or not done. What happens depends on the school's ethos. In East Renfrewshire Council, provision has been driven by the extremely impressive director of education, who freed up PE teachers to deliver the two-hour target, simply by aligning staffing arrangements. Two hours of PE should be the absolute minimum. I am not talking about walking to school; I am talking about additional, high-quality PE, which is not simply about ticking a box. The Government said in its response to the committee's report that if a school is delivering two 55-minute periods of PE we should not be nippy and say that the target is not being met, but we should remember that in a 55-minute period a child has to get to where the PE takes place, change into their gear, do their bit of exercise and then change and get back to class, so they certainly have not had an hour of physical activity, particularly if they had to commute to facilities. The committee looked at the nitty-gritty of PE, not just the box-ticking exercise, which no one wants. There are great difficulties, but East Renfrewshire Council has been able to overcome them. It is important to say that the situation is not universally bad—far from it. We know about schools throughout the country that are providing  excellent physical education, but such provision is not uniform in Scotland. I had a recent encounter with the primary 5 class from Broughton Central primary school, who visited the Parliament's education centre last week. They impressed me with the diversity of activities in which they take part. They do everything—all the hands were up. Most of them walk or cycle to school and one girl had even ridden her horse to school—I am not saying that that should be mandatory, but it was interesting to hear. There was not one fatty in the class; they were all as bright as buttons and as fit as fleas—if that is not mixing my metaphors.

Yes, indeed. Fleas will survive us all. The committee made a number of suggestions about how to improve the national picture. I mentioned East Renfrewshire Council and I mention Perth and Kinross Council and Clackmannanshire Council. The fundamental issue is the status of PE. For whatever reason, most councils have not felt obliged to meet the 2004 target to deliver two hours of PE. The target is in the curriculum for excellence and ministers say that encouraging progress is being made towards meeting it, but the Health and Sport Committee wants us all to toughen up on the issue. That is why the committee mentioned single outcome agreements in its report. We want PE to be something that councils have to provide. The committee had a lovely discussion this morning about the difference between discretionary and mandatory approaches. In this context, I say to Dr Simpson that a mandatory and not a discretionary approach is appropriate. The committee is very disappointed by the pace of change. We are not laying the blame at anyone's door in particular; we just want things to be achieved by the end of this parliamentary session. There are limitations in facilities and in staffing, but the biggest limitation is willpower. If a teacher is keen, PE happens; if a headteacher is keen, it happens; if a director of education is keen, that is even better, because it happens everywhere; and if the Government is keen, it will happen. We need more sticks than carrots from the Government.

I am sorry, I am in my final minute. I am sure that other members of the committee will elaborate on issues that I have touched on. I was pleased to hear a broadcaster refer to the committee collectively as "senior, influential  MSPs"—the broadcaster meant senior in professional terms, not in age. It would be more satisfying to hear the Minister for Public Health and Sport or the Minister for Schools and Skills reassure us that there is commitment and political will at Government and other levels, so that we prove to be influential, if not senior. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Health and Sport Committee's 5th Report, 2009 (Session 3): Pathways into Sport and Physical Activity (SP Paper 260).

I, too, extend my congratulations to Jeremy Purvis and welcome the girl guides and their representatives who are here. I am not an ambassador, but I am a former girl guide—meet the patrol leader of the bluebell patrol circa 1956. At that time, I was a quiet and uncertain little girl—well, uncertain, maybe. In the halcyon days of youth, on a Tuesday night in the church hall, I learned to tie knots and put them on a board. I learned to recognise wild birds, to build fires—that hardly ever worked—in the woods outside, to cook sausages on the fire and to eat them half-cooked. I learned to put up a bell tent and carry a kitbag, and I could consume Creamola Foam at midnight to wash down cold baked beans. I got badges for housewifery, for athletics—which will surprise many members—and for first aid. Those last two were not connected. I had lots of badges all over my arms, which I wore proudly. I also spent my first time away from home without parental control—there has not been any since—with my pack when we spent a rainy week in North Berwick. A year later, we spent a sunny week in Perth. I learned to sing "Ging gang goolie goolie goolie goolie watcha, Ging gang goo, ging gang goo". I do not know what it means, but I sang it enthusiastically. I also flirted with handsome scouts who came to help us take down those sodden wet bell tents in North Berwick—ah, where is Colin Campbell, the scout, now? Who knows? He must be 70. Life was good. Life was innocent. I look back fondly on those girlguiding days, which are now  unfortunately consigned to black-and-white pictures in the family album.

Ask a question.

The Parliament has a good track record in its legislative endeavours with regard to care of  the elderly and other vulnerable groups. However, as we know, legislation is not a panacea, and the debate is about what happens on the ground. We all appreciate that dementia is a dreadful degenerative disease that is distressing for the individual—who may well have insights, particularly in the early stages of the disease—and for their family and close friends. However, members have recounted instances—I think we have all heard of such instances—of people who are simply parked in a chair and left to sit there all day, imprisoned in their own home or in a care home. I note that 40 per cent of those with dementia are in care homes, which means that 60 per cent are being cared for at home, often by an elderly spouse who does not even know that they are a carer but just gets on with it. The minister was quite right to raise that issue. The onset of dementia can be delayed by appropriate therapies and medication, but I note that most of the funding is United Kingdom-reserved. However, I welcome the fact that the Government has put in substantial funding—I believe £1 million is to be spent on dementia expert groups. That is the approach we must take—we must not always be firefighting in the chamber; instead, we should seek things that will assist in defending against, and perhaps eventually eradicating, dementia. I wonder why only some 30,000 of the 66,000 people who are estimated to have dementia are on GPs' books, as the minister said. I suspect that in some cases the family are protecting the individual from being diagnosed, either knowingly or simply by covering up, in the gentlest of fashions, the results of increasing memory loss by helping them more than they used to. Such behaviour has a lot to do with stigma, which used to be attached to cancer, but mercifully no longer is. We have faced up to that darkness, but people still attach stigma to dementia or Alzheimer's. Once we get over that stigma, perhaps more people will begin to recognise that dementia is what an elderly parent or spouse is facing. I have looked at the Alzheimer Scotland's assessment of current provision. It is a fair assessment, as I know from looking at my own case book, that notes that councils have waiting lists for day care and that people with dementia are not always being assisted to carry out tasks so that they can maintain skills and a level of independence and self-respect—the warehousing to which Cathy Jamieson referred. There has been a tightening of thresholds in many councils in relation to the provision of funds and the number of hours that are provided per service. I say to Mary Scanlon—I will make the  only political point in the debate—that the UK Government spends millions of pounds each week on wars that it will never win, and I would rather that it took our troops out of Iraq and Afghanistan and used that money UK-wide to provide proper health care services for our vulnerable and elderly. That would be a far better use of our tax money. Members have referred to medication. We have been down that road before with the pill in the sandwich—covert medication—or medication that is not logged and never reviewed and which can leave people sitting unnecessarily inanimate and unable to partake in any events round about them. I support Mary Scanlon's proposition that GPs be allocated to care homes, so that people do not have that anonymity. As others have said, in looking at a strategy, we need to see the person. As one gets older—and I say this as a pensioner—one appears to become invisible. People look at you and say, "There goes a pensioner." Well, I will not be called a pensioner; I am Christine Grahame, I am me, I am very difficult, and I will stay like that. It is the same for everyone—we are all individuals and I hope that we are all difficult and stay like that. The trouble for someone who is identified as having dementia is that they are seen as a dementia sufferer: they lose all their character and their sense of who they are. However, there is no reason why people should treat them in that way. Things that do not cost money are terribly important—for example, our attitudes towards those who suffer from dementia. I agree with Ross Finnie: if we do it right for the individual, we do it right for the community.

Indeed. That is why I said that I agreed with Ross Finnie on the need to get it right for the individual. I am not turning into a Liberal Democrat, but—

He does not want me. I withdraw my application. Each person with dementia is unique. They should have a choice even in simple matters such as whether they want milk or sugar in their tea. Their carers should find that out, rather than making assumptions. Someone with dementia should not be called by their first name if they do not like that. Equally, they should not be touched if they do not like that, and people should not make assumptions about how they should dress. Little things matter a great deal.  I turn to cultural values. If a carer is dealing with someone from another culture and they are not sure what to do, they should find out. Carers should not do things in a way that would be an affront to someone. There is a simple rule in all of this: we should act with courtesy at all times. The person may not understand what is being done, but their family will take pleasure in such courtesy. The simple acts of saying "please" and "thank you" or asking, "What would you like?" are important. Many of us will not have experienced that sort of attitude in relation to the care of our family members. Indeed, many of us know that only when we put our foot down did things change. Once one person begins to work in a professional way, their attitude can become infectious, even to the point that it becomes good practice.

Scotland has not taken part in the national pandemic flu service, or the helpline, as it is called. However, the minister stated that she retained the option to join if necessary. Will she develop that point? For example, is she concerned that there is sufficient capacity for Scotland to join, given the overload that occurred at the UK launch?

Will the member take an intervention?

I add my support for the Cabinet Secretary for Justice in his decision to release Abdelbaset Ali al-Megrahi on compassionate grounds. As many have said, it was a tough decision and, as a former lawyer, the cabinet secretary is well aware that it will be scrutinised with subsequent applications for compassionate release. That is why it had to be scrupulous. In my view, it is one of the few scrupulous actions in the entire Lockerbie tragedy. I believe that the decision was made with integrity, in contrast to the murky international deals that go right back to the night of 21 December 1988 and which continue to this day. Megrahi was, and in my view remains, a geopolitical pawn. For me, compassionate release was the way forward not only because the criteria would be met but because it would have preserved that crucial appeal process. Mr Megrahi's priority was to be with his family, including his elderly mother, but he was also determined to clear his name not just for  himself and his family but for those victims' relatives who believed that they had seen justice done but who had been deceived all those years. The closure that they sought had been bought at the cost of truth. I say to Bill Aitken that I stand by my e-mails, but I note that Mr Megrahi himself has said that he was not pressurised. I can say no more. Remember that the appeal process had not been exhausted. With the abandonment of Mr Megrahi's appeal, the first-stage findings will not now be published—findings relating only to evidence previously led, not the evidence that was unheard and untested, nor the grounds by which the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission came to the view that there may have been a miscarriage of justice. The SCCRC report, which was produced two years ago, found that Megrahi was not in Malta at the time that the prosecution averred and he could not be connected to the purchase of the clothing that camouflaged the timer device. It found that the identification by Gauci the shopkeeper in a line-up was also challengeable, given that, just four days previously, he had seen a magazine photograph of Megrahi with a caption that linked him to the Lockerbie bombing. Neither of those two crucial facts was in the hands of the defence and, therefore, they had never been tested in court. The key evidence of identification, if led, would surely have cast more than a reasonable doubt on the conviction. Incidentally, why, on a recent edition of "Newsnight", did Lord Fraser—the Lord Advocate at the time—call Gauci the shopkeeper "an entirely reliable witness" when, in 2005, he described the same man as "not quite the full shilling"? What of the contents of the US intelligence cables dated September 1989, which were confirmed in recent statements by the Central Intelligence Agency's former case officer Robert Baer, which stated that the bombing of the Pan Am flight was conceived, authorised and financed by the former Iranian minister of the interior and that the execution of the operation was contracted to Ahmed Jibril of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command for a sum of $1 million? I understand Elaine Murray's angst. Some relatives of the 270 whose lives were ended so brutally—many but not all of them are in the USA—cannot live with Megrahi's release, which I understand. However, compassionate release is not predicated on innocence. Indeed, by its very nature, it must be predicated on guilt. However, it is my contention that with a full public inquiry, comprising, say, an international panel, the truth  would out. Perhaps then for grieving families the release of Megrahi would be more palatable. What questions would we put to such an international panel? If Megrahi was not the purchaser of the clothing and was wrongly identified as part of the plot, who were the real perpetrators? Why were there no criminal prosecutions following the shooting down of the Iranian Airbus by the USS Vincennes in 1988—five months before Pan Am flight 103 exploded over Lockerbie? Was there a contract issued by the Iranian authorities to the PFLP-GC to take revenge for the death of 290 Iranian pilgrims, 60 of whom were children, by bringing down an American plane bringing its pilgrims home for Christmas? Why have the US authorities not queried the true identity of Basel Bushnaq alias Abu Elias, a senior figure in the PFLP-GC at the time of the bombing and nephew of Ahmed Jibril, former head of that terrorist organisation? Basel Bushnaq currently resides in Washington DC and is in the employ of the schools division. Did the fragment of circuit board, which was crucial to the Libyan connection, leave Scotland in the temporary custody of US authorities? Lord Peter Fraser has said that he did not know about that. Why was the break-in at Heathrow next to the Pan Am luggage station on the morning of that flight never examined in court? It is my hope that some of those grieving, angry relatives, who are grieving for lost lives and futures and who are understandably bitter and angry at the compassionate release of a man they believe committed a heinous crime, will take those questions and pursue answers that so many have sought to conceal for so long.

Further to Patrick Harvie's question and the cabinet secretary's undertaking to publish other relevant material, will the cabinet secretary clarify that, in light of the aborted appeal proceedings, the untested findings of the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission, and the evidence to that commission that named a resident of Washington DC as the bomber, there may have been a miscarriage of justice? Will the relevant material include the publication of the full SCCRC report? If that is not in his power, will he support my call for full publication?

I congratulate John Lamont on securing the debate. I know that he has in-depth knowledge of the particular instance in Chirnside, and I note that Richard Simpson has been persistent in asking a series of questions about the matter. It would be easy to say that this is simply an example of a further turf war between pharmacists and GPs. To some extent, members of the Health and Sport Committee have witnessed that turf war  in evidence sessions. Whether or not we put things in such blunt financial terms as pharmacists' income versus GPs' income, at the heart of the matter is the professional delivery of the best of both worlds, particularly in rural communities. Therefore, it would be crass to say that there is simply a turf war. The problems to which John Lamont alluded are to do with the historical legacy and contractual changes, which have overlapped with previous practices. My understanding is that GPs have no statutory right to dispense, although they have been doing so—I think that there are 130 dispensing practices in Scotland. However, there is a requirement on the NHS board to have a GP dispense if there is no other dispensing service in a community. As John Lamont said, the introduction of the community pharmacy contract in 2006 extended the services that can be provided over and above what we used to see in the pharmacy. I offer the example of the Romanes pharmacy in Duns, which was mentioned in the context of the Chirnside situation, where there is a patient examination room and a super-duper dispensing machine—which is made in Germany, of course—rather than the traditional model that we used to see, where the combs and deodorants and so on were sold at the front of the shop and the dispensing was done at the back. Pharmacies have moved on, as have GP practices, with community health centres. There has been a bit of exchange and overlap. However, the procedures for processing applications have been unchanged since the regulations in 1995. Refereeing in such circumstances—if I may put it bluntly—is done by the NHS board, with the assistance of the pharmacy practice committee, but the community is not involved. That should not be the case when we are talking about delivery for the patients. As I understand it, the community can get involved only at the appeals process, when things appear to be done and dusted, which is far too late. There were examples of that in the Borders when the local cottage hospitals closed and the communities could not take part in the process until the stage where they were fighting a losing battle. There is obviously a bit of a democratic deficit, as well as a process guddle that ends up putting professionals at odds with each other, which is wrong. The public are left out in the cold; they have no part in the decision making until the appeals process, which is not good for anybody, including the boards. It is not often that I defend NHS boards, but it is not good for them either. Like John Lamont, I note that the Government has laid new regulations before the Parliament, part of which would provide for the introduction of  a duty on NHS boards to take reasonable steps to consult everybody involved and those who want to go on the pharmaceutical lists. That includes the public—and about time, too. I also understand that the control of entry arrangements for the pharmaceutical list might be under review—a consultation on that is under way. I realise that members from other areas are present, but the Chirnside example demonstrates that we have to play catch-up with the reality out there in the delivery of health services to rural communities. We must not end up with a fight-out between the pharmacists on one side and the GPs on the other, with the public in the middle and the NHS boards taking the blame. That is an unhappy situation. I am sure that we are capable of resolving it if we remember that there are particular solutions to rural problems. The NHS board should look at the whole picture in the area and say, "This is working here, so we won't tamper with it." That is an excellent idea.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I regret that the Presiding Officer has left, because the point of order would perhaps have been better directed at him. I seek your guidance. I am not often drawn in the ballot for themed question time, and I have neither complaint nor entitlement to complain about supplementaries, nor indeed substantive answers from ministers. However, two questions were withdrawn, and we have just reached question 14 on the list. How many of the questions that we have not reached have already been withdrawn, because there may be a connection? Is it possible for the Presiding Officer to give consideration to estimating how far we will get down the list of themed questions? As I said, we have just reached question 14; with two withdrawn, that is 12 questions. Eight other questions were on the ballot paper. Some  members with subsequent questions were not here, and I cannot blame them.

Further to that, can we be told how many questions, subsequent to the point that we reached, had already been withdrawn? It is a matter of concern.

He would never complain.

I have been called many things in my political lifetime, but I am certainly not a Tory acolyte. That said, I thank the Conservatives for holding a debate on a reserved matter, and I look forward to their lodging a motion on fiscal autonomy, which I know that many Conservatives support.

I have just started; please sit down. As for Labour's 30-year time warp to 1979, I remind Labour members that it was a Labour MP, George Cunningham, who introduced the 40 per cent rule, whereby the votes of the dead counted as a no vote, and prevented the establishment of  this Parliament for three decades. I need no lessons in history from Labour members. I suppose that we should not kick them when they are down, but I have to. Gordon Brown—the man who would have it all—has the classic fatal flaw of a Shakespearian character. After trawling the Shakespearian tragedies, I have settled for Hamlet, who prevaricated, wavered and finally brought about his own death. Yes, the Hamlet cap fits, for we are watching the slow political suicide not only of Gordon Brown but of Labour plc—and not a moment too soon. Gordon Brown's epitaph will refer to his announcement, in April 2007, of the abolition of the 10p tax rate; to Damian McBride and smeargate; to the YouTube video—oh!—to the Ghurkas, on which he had to do a U-turn; and to the issue of MPs' expenses, which has already been dealt with. There have been ministerial resignations by the boat load: Beverley Hughes, Jacqui Smith, Tom Watson, Hazel Blears, James Purnell, John Hutton, Geoff Hoon, Margaret Beckett, Caroline Flint and Ian Gibson have all resigned. What of the Cabinet at 10.32 and one second? The Presbyterian man of democracy has many lords a-leaping. At the top of the leaping pile is Lord Machiavelli, Lord Mandelson. He is joined by the right hon the Lord Adonis, the right hon the Baroness Ashton of Upholland and the right hon the Baroness Royall of Blaisdon, all of whom are unelected. On top of that, there are appointees by the bucket load: Sir Digby Jones, trade minister; Professor Sir Ara Darzi, health minister, patient care; Admiral Sir Alan West; Lord Malloch-Brown; Lord Stevens; and the Lib Dems Baroness Neuberger and Lord Lester. None of them has been elected by anyone—they are all outside appointments.

I am coming to him. The man who relies on those appointees has to keep Alistair Darling—that darling man—in the Cabinet. I wonder why. Maybe he knows where all the bodies are buried. Gordon Brown is so weakened and humiliated that he cannot even do a proper shuffle of a shuffle. He is trying desperately to be popular by clutching at celebrities. Sir Alan Sugar is to join the Lords and all the other appointees. Why does he not bring in some other famous faces? Let me think. He could bring in Susan Boyle for culture, Joanna Lumley for immigration and Andy Murray for sport, although that will depend on whether he wins Wimbledon. If he wins, he will be British; if he loses, he will be  Scottish. We must remember that Gordon has to wrap himself in the union flag. This is the man who says that he will reform and improve democracy. I have just given his track record, his curriculum vitae, his report card. Meanwhile, the people are losing jobs and homes as a direct consequence of a credit crisis that was set in train on his watch as chancellor. The economic tsunami will last for generations, as we pay to bail out banks that were allowed to run wild in handing out credit. I have one message for that Shakespearian tragic hero—it is time to quit the stage, Hamlet.

To ask the First Minister what measures have been taken to reduce the number of teenagers with alcohol addiction. (S3F-1754)

I thank the First Minister for his response, particularly regarding education. Is the First Minister aware of an ITV programme that was screened last night entitled "The Truth About Binge Drinking", in which pop singer Michelle Heaton was asked to binge drink for a period of four weeks? She had to abandon the experiment after three weeks, when the alcohol intake to which she was exposed brought her body to the brink of collapse. It was a shocking exposé of the dangers of binge drinking. Will the First Minister consider approaching the programme makers with a view to having the programme screened in schools, given the powerful message that it sends?

To ask the Scottish Government whether civil contingency plans will be revised in light of the recent disclosure that radioactive coolant from a nuclear submarine leaked at HM Naval Base Clyde. (S3O-7160)

Does the cabinet secretary agree with the assessment of retired general Sir Hugh Beach, the former deputy commander-in-chief of United Kingdom land forces, who said of the UK's Trident missile system: "It's no bloody use. Let's not waste money on it"? He continued: "Britain cannot claim to have derived any direct security benefit from the possession of nuclear weapons". Without using unparliamentary language, will the cabinet secretary support my point that the billions of pounds that are earmarked for Trident's replacement could be better invested in improving the health service and schools and in job creation throughout Scotland?

I thank the First Minister for that detailed answer. However, like all members, I have heard and read the concerns that leaders of unions and councils have expressed on the resourcing of education, including the curriculum for excellence. I understand that the partnership with councils means that they are responsible for delivering education on the ground, but part of any partnership is constructive discussion. Will the First Minister give an assurance that he or his ministers will meet council leaders, including those who have made such opinions public, to impress on them the importance of passing on appropriate funding to education?

If the FSA had been doing its job properly and light-touch Gordon Brown had been doing his job properly as Chancellor of the Exchequer, the banking sector would not have been left to self-regulate as it was and we would not have been left in such a deep mess. There would also have been no need for a public inquiry. I quite like raking over cold embers, as that is where we find interesting pieces of evidence in this case and others.

I have only four minutes. Neither Ireland nor Norway is in this mess, and Ireland is projected to come out of the recession more quickly. The idea that Scotland has been better off as part of the UK, enabling the bail-out of banks to go ahead, is nonsense. The UK is not in a good position to bail out the banks—it cannot afford that—and our children for generations to come will be paying through the teeth for the subsidising that has had to happen, so that is a false tale. We now own 70 per cent of the Royal Bank of Scotland and 65 per cent of Lloyds. The social housing portfolio of the Dunfermline Building Society is wholly owned by the Bank of England. Indeed, the House of Commons is undertaking an inquiry into the takeover of the Dunfermline Building Society, calling witnesses from the Treasury, the Bank of England, the FSA and, thereafter, representatives of the Dunfermline Building Society and the Nationwide Building Society.

I am. That is linked to our holding an inquiry here.

I am right at it, Presiding Officer. Looking at the timetable for the Lloyds TSB-HBOS merger is like watching a runaway train hurtling down the tracks. Reference has been made to the fact that Lord Mandelson gave clearance for the merger in October 2008. He did not refer the matter to the Competition Commission, despite the position of the OFT. That was Lord Mandelson—unelected, sacked twice—railroading against the wishes of the HBOS shareholders. Alternatives were rubbished: Sir Peter Burt and Sir George Mathewson, who had been senior members of the bank, were ridiculed, and there were even attempts to undermine their  reputations. The process was all rather sullied, rushed and undemocratic, bypassing any alternatives. I understand that there may be issues with having a public inquiry in Scotland; I hope that the minister will address them. It is my understanding that such an inquiry would proceed under the Inquiries Act 2005 and that there may be limitations when matters cross from devolved to reserved areas either in the scope of any inquiry or in the compellability of evidence, both documentary and from witnesses—some of our parliamentary committees have had difficulty with the compellability of witnesses during parliamentary inquiries. However, there can be joint inquiries between the two legislatures. I have not had the time today to check whether there have been any. If there have been, I would like to know about them; if not, would such a proposal have legs? Could there be some kind of joint inquiry because of the economic implications of the situation for Scotland? We can hold parliamentary inquiries, but they are limited in the compellability of witnesses and in their scope. Perhaps the Finance Committee and the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee could hold such an inquiry, but what would be its limitations, which would not apply to a public inquiry? It is an important issue, given the thousands of jobs in Scotland that are dependent on the financial sector. Scotland has been particularly vulnerable. We do not want to have just brass plates for headquarters; neither do we want Scotland's banking reputation to remain tarnished. That would be wholly undeserved. It may be possible to have a public inquiry, subject to the caveats that I have mentioned, but if the best that we can do is a parliamentary committee inquiry, that exposes the limitations of devolution and the substantial fault lines that continue to run through the uneasy devolution settlement. This is a particularly good example of that. I am uneasy that the merger was concluded hastily for political, not economic, reasons that we may not be able to explore.

Does the First Minister agree, further to all his answers, that the prisoner transfer agreement that Tony Blair conjured up in the desert has simply muddied the waters? Does he also agree that, in the interest of the victims' relatives—those who believe that Mr Al Megrahi is guilty and those who believe that he is innocent—due process through the Scottish courts is preferable, delivering justice that we all wish to see after 20 long years?

To ask the Scottish Government what representations it has made to the British Olympic  Association and the United Kingdom Government regarding the estimated £150 million shortfall that could impact on Scottish good causes and voluntary organisations as a result of lottery funds being diverted to the London 2012 Olympic games. (S3O-6850)

In light of the millions of pounds lost to Scottish good causes, will the minister or her colleagues consider a not-for-profit Scottish lottery so that money that is raised in Scotland is spent in Scotland?

I congratulate my colleague Mary Scanlon on securing the debate. Generally speaking, I am not a devotee of international days, but international midwives day is an exception that I am happy to support.  As members have said, midwives are crucial to the unborn child and maternal health before and after delivery of the child, and through the very vulnerable early years of a young child's life. Members have said that they are particularly crucial to children and mothers who give birth in sub-Saharan Africa. I will not go back over the statistics, as they have been well rehearsed. International agencies such as the WHO, the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Children's Fund and the World Bank have combined to provide increased support to countries with high child mortality rates. However, I have read that, worldwide, around 350,000 more midwives are needed to meet millennium development targets. The deaths of mothers, babies and young children are, of course, highly preventable. Midwives provide expertise through all stages of pregnancy to birth and beyond, vaccines, anti-malarial drugs and bed nets. They identify, counsel and treat pregnant women with HIV and AIDS, prevent mother and child transmission, and play a vital role where there is diarrhoea, measles, malaria—Angela Constance mentioned those—or malnutrition, which accounts for 70 per cent of deaths in developing countries. As Jack McConnell eloquently said, some countries, such as Malawi, have cut child deprivation in half, and life expectancy has improved in them, but life expectancy is still bad for mothers, babies and children in countries in which there is conflict and bad governance, such as Zimbabwe and Somalia. It was interesting that Jack McConnell talked about women in the Scottish Parliament and the status of women. Colleagues will recall that, during the G8 summit in 2005, we had an alternative summit—the W8, which involved eight women from Africa who were trying to enhance the role of women in society across the African continent. I believe that, deep at the core of neglectful or non-existent antenatal and postnatal care lies the status of women. In some countries, women are often ranked well below the men in the community and even young boys. We could even say that, sometimes, they are dispensable. Until women are seen as being as important as the men in those societies, there will be an issue. We must fight to change the culture in those areas. All is not well in this country, of course. We have evidence that, in Scotland, in deprived areas where there are inequalities, child care is less likely to be good and women are less likely to have healthy babies or to have a decent pregnancy. Therefore, there are issues here, too. Elaine Smith raised the issue of breastfeeding. A huge problem in some developing countries is that formula companies target women and encourage them away from breastfeeding and towards  formula, which can be mixed with water that is contaminated or dirty. As a result of mothers being put into a culture of using bottles, babies are taken away from breastfeeding and are dying because of contaminated water. We should address that issue. I am sure that, if there were more midwives out in the field, they would be able to stop that change that is taking place in some countries.

Thanking the member who has secured a members' business debate is often more a matter of protocol than anything else, but I genuinely congratulate Jeremy Purvis on bringing this matter before Parliament. Mr Purvis and I do not often congratulate each other, but I think that he made a very well-informed and researched speech that raised important issues not only for the Borders, but for Scotland in general. In the Borders, about 24,000 people or 30 per cent of the population are of pensionable age. Recently there have been some good moves. In the Peebles area, in particular, £22.2 million of Government funding has been made available to replace Dunwhinny Lodge, which I have to say is a rather grim place. That is not because of the staff; the building is simply old and not fit for purpose. The money will be used to build high-support accommodation and to do up Tweed Bridge Court, which is right in the middle of Peebles and just needs a little bit of work done to it. Such accommodation provides the kind of mix that elderly people want; if they cannot stay in their own home, they want to live in semi-sheltered or extremely supported accommodation. Jeremy Purvis is quite right: many such facilities are slap bang in the middle of great development opportunities. For example, the privately owned Cockenzie House, which is next door in the East Lothian constituency, was the subject of a campaign that turned out to be very distressing for family members, who wanted it to be retained. The building was in a prime location, and the battle was lost. The elderly people involved—and their families—were in great distress and faced a real crisis, because they had been told that they were going to be moved to various parts of Midlothian, Edinburgh and West Lothian, well away from their family, their friends, their community and the voices and accents that they knew and which kept them in good spirits. As we know, such things have consequences for the health, wellbeing and, indeed, longevity of elderly people. It was a privilege to be an MSP when the Parliament passed the legislation that introduced what we call free personal care for the elderly, but which I know is not totally free. I notice that that legislation is under review by Lord Sutherland. I know that it is not part of his usual remit, but I wonder whether the Minister for Housing and Communities—and if not him, Ms Robison—can come back and explain to us what will happen as a result of that review. After all, given the demographic projections for Scotland, we face major funding issues that will need to be addressed; in that respect, I credit Susan Deacon for raising that very matter at the time. The  legislation is right, but there are huge funding issues that need to be tackled. I have not done the research that Jeremy Purvis has undertaken, but it is my understanding that, although the care commission does not routinely examine the financial viability of care homes, it looks into the matter before a care home is registered. Perhaps the minister can clarify that issue and tell us whether the care commission will look into the continuing viability of a care home if, as a result, say, of MSPs and councillors receiving certain information, there is any sign that something is going amiss. What, if anything, can the Government do in the event of real crises such as that which arose at Cockenzie House? After all, by the time that local MSPs and councillors get involved, the matter has gone too far down the track for them to do very much and they find themselves simply firefighting. Is there a point at which provision can be made not only for elderly people, to ensure that they are not parcelled out all over the place, but for the staff, who are also distressed by what happens? Another aspect of the debate is the cutting of services in sheltered accommodation. For example, Heinsberg House in Penicuik has lost its in-house warden and now has someone on call. However, what is happening is that the elderly person in the nearest flat is answering the front door, sometimes late at night. That is wrong. The same thing is happening in Galashiels, where sheltered complexes—

You have been extremely good to me so far, Presiding Officer. I very much welcome this debate. After all, we measure a society by how it cares for its vulnerable and elderly, and sometimes we do not do that very well.

I welcome the non-alarmist tone of the question-and-answer session. Reflecting on Karen Whitefield's question about hospital staff, will there be any changes in hospital procedures and routines for patients who are in hospital and who might feel particularly vulnerable—we do not know whether they are—or for people who enter hospital in the future?

Does the First Minister agree that, notwithstanding the fact that the Government and the Scottish Ambulance Service has met, and indeed exceeded, its targets, even when first responders are removed from the figures—we have done that in any event—the rather spurious attack that has been launched by Labour denigrates the reputation of first responders, who play a crucial and additional role in urgent circumstances, particularly in rural areas?

Will the member give way?

It is not necessary for me to intervene now—I fear that I have been handed the black spot.

I was making the point that the clinical decision is made by the GP or the consultant, so the clock starts ticking when there is a referral or decision. A patient does not say, "I want to be treated within 18 weeks." If someone does not require treatment, there is no reason to refer them and offer an 18-week waiting time guarantee. Of course, as Dr McKee said, if circumstances change there might be a referral back to the GP: a patient's health might change and a proposed operation or surgical procedure might no longer be the right approach. The area is quite technical, so I will leave it to the Minister for Public Health to address it in more detail.

I am sure that all members acknowledge the value of all those who work in the NHS, particularly the front-line staff such as consultants, nurses and ancillary staff. It is not so often acknowledged that they are always under the direction of good and responsible management. We should also acknowledge the achievements of the previous Liberal-Labour Administration in the early days of the Parliament, when we were all feeling our way. The NHS is like an ocean-going  tanker that is seemingly set on a fixed route and carrying necessary life-saving cargo, but which, as we all know, is painfully slow to change direction or even set another course. I will not go over the history but, as Cathy Jamieson said, we have come a long way in 10 years. That is against the background that expectations of the NHS are rightly high, which is reflected in demand, while treatments and developments are becoming more complex and expensive. The environment in which the NHS works is very different from that in the early days after its establishment. As the Labour amendment does, I welcome the extension of the waiting time guarantee to child and adolescent mental health services. I will discuss the issue of adult mental health services later, but I assure members that the Health and Sport Committee, which is conducting an inquiry into child and adolescent mental health services, will monitor the situation carefully—that is our job. I turn to the Conservative amendment. The SNP is rightly set on reducing private activity in the NHS. In a perfect world, I would not have any such activity, as it would be redundant. However, it would be churlish not to recognise that good work can be done in the private sector. "Churlish" must be the word of the day, although I point out to Ross Finnie that I wrote it in my speech before he said it. The Conservative amendment acknowledges the good work that the Government is doing. Concerns about waiting times becoming the be-all and end-all are expressed in the Conservative amendment and are the meat of the Liberal Democrat amendment. I agree that we should caution against a mantra on waiting times, but the discretion that the Liberal Democrats would introduce on waiting times would put a major hole below the waterline in the SS NHS. That would dispose of certainty and, at the extreme, would make a waiting time obligation almost not worth the paper that it was written on. We all know that waiting times matter. They matter to those who are delivering, because they understand their obligations and the requirement to organise resources and apply them accordingly, but they matter most of all to the patient, once diagnosed, who wants direction and security in a troubling period of serious concern. The proposed patients' rights bill will add to security by giving a legally binding agreement on treatment within 12 weeks for in-patients and day care patients. The sooner treatment is instigated, the better for the physical, mental and emotional wellbeing of not only the patient, but the family and the wider community. We all accept that substantial progress has been made. In particular, I point out the progress that has been made on audiology services, which I  always felt were a bit of a Cinderella in our priorities. As I said, I have concerns about waiting times for adult mental health services, which are also a bit of a Cinderella. We should perhaps consider prioritising services for the elderly, although they are not easy to label. As my late mother said endlessly, Rome was not built in a day—I am full of metaphors today. That applies to the NHS. Even in 10 years, we cannot sort everything. It will take time, but we are moving the great tanker in the right direction. Ross Finnie raised concerns that the focus on waiting times will distort clinical priorities. Those concerns are understandable and I am sure that the cabinet secretary and the minister are well aware of them and that they will take them into account and monitor the situation. However, it is for GPs or consultants who have a patient before them to consider whether a referral for treatment or examination is necessary. That is where the referral starts and where the clinical prioritisation takes place. It is also when the clock starts ticking. I know that that is a burden on those professionals, but that is their job. Despite my comments about introducing waiting time guarantees for, inter alia, adult mental health services and, I hope, services for the elderly, I welcome the progress that the Government has made. Indeed, I welcome the progress that the Parliament has made, as we have learned to do our job. The improvements in delivery and accountability in the NHS are not only a result of the work of the staff, to whom we should pay tribute, but proof that devolution, which was long delayed in my lifetime as we should have had it in the 1970s, is doing its job. Just think what more we could do with independence.

Oh, go on.

I advise the First Minister that the Health and Sport Committee this week launched an inquiry into mental health services for children and adolescents. In our evidence, we found that 33,000 children had contacted ChildLine this year. I ask that his Government gives weighty consideration to our report when it is finally published, as I think that it is the first such inquiry on the subject by any committee during the lifetime of the Scottish Parliament.

On the question of basic skills and literacy, the minister will be aware that, in its inquiry on pathways into sport, the Health and Sport Committee has uncovered a lack of reporting on physical literacy and physical skills in school reports by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education and, indeed, a similar lack of reporting by schools in pupil report cards. Does the minister share the committee's concerns about that?

I congratulate Cathy Jamieson and Hugh Henry on their thoughtful speeches, which show Parliament at its best. However, Robert Brown's speech was rather glum. I tried to prise some substance from his speech, which was larded with metaphors, but he kept dancing on the head of a process pin. I think that he has misjudged the mood of the Parliament in this debate. I turn to Bill Aitken. Moving the debate to being about health has made it an entirely different debate, in which I hope there can be consensus. Mature members of the Health and Sport Committee, rich in life and parliamentary experience and for whom I have high regard, will take on the burden of hearing the evidence. One problem that we have not addressed is that some of our young Scots suffer from alcohol even though they have had no part in taking it. I am speaking of foetal alcohol syndrome, which was raised with the chief medical officer when he briefed the Health and Sport Committee. It is a great tragedy, not only for the mother but for the staff who deliver a baby who already has alcohol withdrawal symptoms. It is trite but true to say that the healthy mothers who have healthy and responsible pregnancies give children the best start, which continues throughout life. I welcome the survey on foetal alcohol syndrome that is proposed in the framework because it will be a wake-up call to society. Nobody can sit back and say that society should sustain a situation in which  babies are born with alcohol withdrawal symptoms. As members know, when we first discussed the ban on the sale of alcohol to those under 21 I did not agree with my Government, which was pursuing a national policy that I felt was unjust. I very much welcome localisation, whereby the remit is with the local police and licensing boards. I do not think that we will see a geographic purchasing shift from one area to another, but if that happens, the licensing board can adapt to the situation. I come to the buy-one-get-one-free offers and minimum pricing, which is a thorny issue. The subject was first raised by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice when he was a shadow minister and I was in my great days in the shadow cabinet. I did not agree with him at that time and thought that the policy would penalise those on lower incomes. However, after a great deal of thought I have come round to the view that we must go down the road of minimum pricing, because I do not accept that it is just the young who are purchasing alcohol. I have great concern for the hidden numbers behind the net curtains of Scotland, who are putting alcohol in their supermarket trolleys on buy-one-get-one-free promotions when they would not normally buy it; because alcohol is within easy reach, they are taking it in the way that they used to drink a cup of tea at night. There are concerns that we will never be able to investigate that situation, and perhaps only the supermarkets can tell us from their stock control the constituency of people who are buying alcohol. It is not just the young and that is where Bill Aitken's targeting argument loses its place; we must look at the whole of society and not just the young, who buy a different type of alcohol.

The cabinet secretary appears to disagree with Mike Rumbles's comment, so I will let him clarify the position in summing up. In Scotland, we could take the alternative approach of using taxation to deal with the problem, but we are not doing that. Taxation might be a way to tackle it, but pricing is the route that we must take.

I will conclude, if I may. We accept many things in life for the greater good—income tax, national insurance and council tax, which finance services that we might not need. In the case of alcohol, society should consider minimum price levels as a burden to bear for the greater physical and mental health of our community and for those babies, who we hope are born without foetal alcohol syndrome.

I corroborate that this is a complex and technical area. I was interested in the cabinet secretary's comment that the public had difficulty navigating it—I had difficulty navigating it, with two degrees and a clear head. I welcome the commissioning of health rights information Scotland to produce better and clearer information to the public. Can I ask that it tries the information out on me, so that I can understand the arrangements?

To ask the First Minister what consideration the Scottish Government has given to the Scottish Information Commissioner's call to extend the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 to cover a wider range of organisations. (S3F-1531)

Does the First Minister agree that the Scottish freedom of information  legislation has proved highly effective in making government open, accountable and transparent, in stark contrast to the clawing-back of FOI legislation by the increasingly secretive Labour Government in London? Once the consultation is finished and once we are through this economic crisis, I look forward to the Scottish FOI legislation being extended to housing associations and other relevant bodies. I hope that the First Minister does, too.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it will consider carrying out an economic impact assessment in relation to the support that it and other public bodies provide for football, in light of petition PE1233, submitted by former Scotland coach Craig Brown, regarding the creation of a Great Britain football team. (S3O-6240)

Does the Scottish Government share the concerns of the Scottish Football Association, the tartan army and former Scotland managers that the UK Government has indicated this week that, regardless of the consultation that FIFA has undertaken with the four home football associations, it will press ahead with fielding a GB team even if it is made up entirely of English players and regardless of the dangerous precedent that it will set and the threat that it poses to Scottish football? Does the cabinet secretary agree that such direct political interference, which originated from Gordon Brown and 10 Downing Street, is precisely the type of behaviour that will risk Scotland losing its independent footballing status?

I think that the First Minister agrees that legislation is not a cure-all, and that educating our young people plays an important part in the matter that we are discussing. In that context, I suggest that either he or his ministers should visit Peebles high school to meet the members of the up to you group, who go to the feeder primaries to talk about the consequences of alcohol consumption. That is a very successful project for the primary pupils and the secondary pupils.

To ask the Scottish Government how many responses it has received to the national conversation. (S3O-6143) [ Interruption. ]

Is the minister monitoring the submissions that have been made to the union-centric Calman commission? I draw his attention to the submission of Shetland Islands Council, the local authority for Tavish Scott's constituency, which makes the highly reasonable and welcome call for control of North Sea oil and gas to be devolved to the Scottish Parliament. What steps is the Government taking to connect with local representatives, who are clearly more open and positive about giving the people of Scotland a say in their future than are their representatives in the Scottish Parliament?

First, I thank Margaret Smith for reminding us that the Liberals were once in government somewhere. She has made me feel younger than I have ever felt before. I know that Opposition members need to do something with their debating time, but to set aside a whole morning's debate on our alleged failures, when we would need—and I am being kind—debate after debate after debate to examine their failures, is a waste of our time. I refer to the eight unimaginably dull years of Labour's marriage of convenience with the Liberal Democrats. We are having this debate against the background of 13 years of Labour mismanagement from  Westminster, where, as we all know, the real power lies—as the current depression demonstrates. We have had 13 years—unlucky for the Scottish people. Let us hope that Gordon "Blunder" Brown, who is clinging to hopes of redemption by shamelessly fawning at the feet of Barack Obama and coorying up to Congress, calls a general election soon. It is unfortunate that Johann Lamont is not here. In her heroic and desperate spin on Labour failure she tried to body-swerve the economic disaster of that financial guru and saviour of the financial world, hapless Gordon. Unfortunately for Gordon, he is at odds once again with Alistair Darling, who knows blame when he sees it, unlike Gordon or Harriet Harman, who, trapped like a rabbit in the media headlights, said blindly that Sir Fred Goodwin—who was knighted by Labour for services to banking—will not receive his pension because Gordon says so. That is okay then. I look forward to the Sir Fred Goodwin stripped of his pension retrospectively bill being introduced soon at Westminster. As Gordon Brown swans around the States desperate to look relevant, Scotland's economy and jobs crash. Without real financial powers in Scotland, we are fire fighting. As jobs are lost and marriages end under the burden of debt, this Government has to pick up the pieces for people who are made homeless and whose health, happiness and future crack under the strain. It is our health service that will pick up the pieces. What a bare-faced cheek to turn on this Government, which faces a further £500 million Westminster cut in its budget. That is completely the wrong way forward.

I will let in the rising star.

Mr Whitton should look at the crash of jobs that will take place week after week in Scotland. What he has just said is a prime example of his failure to recognise that the problems for Scotland start with London control. Just for the record, Andy Kerr told me that Mr Whitton was a rising star. The economy needs stimulating through infrastructure investment and there are strains and stresses in our rented sector, housing and the NHS.  When it was in power, Labour failed to get attendance allowance back when Scotland introduced free personal care—that is £40 million down the tubes. We would not even get our council tax benefit back if we introduced local income tax—another £450 million down the tubes. It is unfortunate that David McLetchie is not in the chamber. He moaned about housing, but £500 million went on the trams in Edinburgh, which are absolutely hated. It is as rare as hen's teeth to find somebody living in the capital city who wants the trams—and the cost is rising.

As members know, I am very friendly with Margo MacDonald, but I have not checked her teeth recently. People in the capital city who support the trams project know that it is turning into a fiasco. We must not forget the Borders railway. Mike Rumbles, who listed all the transport projects, would not let me intervene. For 30 years, David Steel—from boy to Lord Steel of Aikwood—did not deliver a railway in the Borders—that is the Liberal Democrat legacy. This Government put money into the structures that are being put in place. The Liberal Democrats have been exposed as anything but the party of democracy. John Farquhar Munro has been sent into exile—perhaps to bury the metaphorical cow, we shall never know—but he is not allowed here today to speak freely for the party of democracy. Even Tavish Scott said, of the constitutional future of Scotland, in The Scotsman on 27 August 2008: "I am not intuitively against making sure that people have a choice and an opportunity to cast a vote on these things." Where is Tavish Scott today? What do the Liberals believe in? We do not know. Another figure has been banished from the chamber. Where is Wendy Alexander now?

I beg her pardon. She has arrived. I am delighted to take an intervention from the not-forgotten Wendy Alexander, who said, "Bring it on." The Labour Party is not saying that anymore; it is supporting all the other unionists.

We are taking it. Wendy Alexander can vote with us tonight and reject her  party's motion. She should join us—we are on her side.

He will not be allowed in the chamber.

The cabinet secretary will be aware of a recent article in The Herald that suggested that the recovery of proceeds of crime is much better in the Republic of Ireland compared with our system. Does he agree? Even if he does not, will he consider that in his review?

Will the cabinet secretary give thought to the idea of transferring the responsibility for policing underage sales of alcohol from the police to trading standards officers, who currently have responsibility for detecting underage tobacco sales? I submit that that would be a more efficient arrangement and would release police for other duties.

I am wondering where you were for eight years, when you were in government. You did nothing about the dress code then.

First, I extend my condolences to the families and friends of those who have died at the Vale of Leven hospital and elsewhere as a result of C difficile infection and other hospital-acquired infections. One death in which hospital-acquired infection is the main cause is one death too many. In the period from May to August 2007, a link was established between the deaths at the Vale of Leven and C difficile. I, too, do not wish to politicise what should be a consensual debate. Families, especially those with elderly relatives in hospital, deserve better from the Parliament. It is undeniable, however, that between 2001 and 2006 the number of cases in which C difficile was mentioned as the underlying cause of death or as contributing to death rose from 170 to 417—a 145 per cent increase. That said, I commend Jackie  Baillie for rightfully and tenaciously pursuing the issue on behalf of her constituents so that we may all be confident and comforted that when we go into hospital we will, as Ross Finnie said, get better rather than worse through infection that can and should be avoided. I acknowledge Cathy Jamieson's important point that the quality of care and hygiene extends beyond our hospitals, into care homes, nursing homes and elsewhere. Historically, the Vale of Leven hospital has been under threat of closure, which must have contributed to the hospital's decline and to falling morale among its staff. The independent report disclosed that surveillance systems were inadequate and that, in clinical and patient toilet areas, there was a serious lack of dedicated hygiene practices and equipment. As is sometimes the case in our world, it took a particular tragedy—in this case concerning the failure of basic hygiene at the Vale of Leven—to shine a harsh light on an issue that many of us were already aware of anecdotally. I remember visiting my late mother when she was terminally ill in hospital some time ago. The walls were dirty. The family worked on a rota system to check that she was being properly cared for and kept clean when she was unable to move. It is a story that others have heard, too. The cabinet secretary spoke about the action that is being taken and the £54 million that is being spent over three years to tackle hospital-acquired infection. That is a 260 per cent increase in spending. I think that members throughout the chamber recognise that, whoever is in government, the issue has to be taken very seriously and funding has to be provided. I recognise the simple measures that the cabinet secretary is taking, which will assist with the situation. In particular, there is to be no more privatisation of cleaning. I know that it was not privatised at the Vale of Leven, but there is no doubt that when cleaners, porters, nurses and others feel that they are part of a team in a hospital, they work together and take pride in what they do. People who come through on contract work do not have the same engagement with the hospital.

I am content to acknowledge that. My point—and the member is perhaps agreeing with me—is that when all the staff in a hospital are part of a team, there is a different kind of morale and a certain kind of commitment.  Among the other measures that the cabinet secretary has announced today that I welcome are those concerning nurses' uniforms. It is not appropriate for nurses to take their uniforms home to be cleaned or to travel on buses while wearing them. Let us consider some of the new hospitals that have been built under public-private partnerships. The design of the royal infirmary of Edinburgh is appalling. There are carpets right up to the doors of the wards—that is a hobbyhorse of mine—and they are not even very clean carpets. Going into the RIE, we might think that we are entering an airport terminal. There are restaurants and cafes—food is being eaten all over the place. That cannot be appropriate for our hospitals. There are unlimited visiting hours on communal wards. Heaven help someone who is feeling very ill when there are lots of families bouncing about. Children bounce about on beds with their dirty little feet from the dirty little streets. Outdoor clothing carries unseen germs. We carry them around with us and we take them into the wards that house the ill and the vulnerable. How I remember the days—I am saying this because I am so old—when the hospital matron would allow two people in for only two yours. Heaven forfend if a visitor sat on the end of the bed rather than on one of the wipe-down chairs. Practices must change. I very much welcome the cabinet secretary's remarks. I say to the families concerned that their pain and loss will continue but, as with all bereavements, it will ease with time—it will not go, but it will ease. However, I know that their anger will be assuaged only when we get to the bottom of the matter and get the full facts, and when we make Scotland's hospital wards and care homes safe and clean places for the people we put into them.

Does the First Minister share my concern about carpeted areas, unlimited visiting hours, unlimited numbers of visitors, visitors sitting on beds and so on as possible sources of infection? Does he agree that other commonsense improvements, as well as simple, commonsense attention to hand cleanliness—[ Interruption. ]

I am not the offender, Presiding Officer. Does the First Minister agree that other commonsense improvements, as well as simple, commonsense attention to hand cleanliness, that could be made in our hospitals might limit the spread of infections?

To ask the Scottish Government whether reported comments by an official spokesperson for the First Minister in relation to the Act of Settlement 1701 reflect Scottish Government policy and, if so, what representations it has made to the United Kingdom Government. (S3O-5831)

In light of the minister's full response, I ask him to continue his endeavours to accelerate matters, as the issue has been debated for a very long time. I see the Minister for Environment, Mike Russell, in the chamber. He was the first to raise the issue in Parliament. Does the minister agree that there is dismay at the lack of progress on the matter at Westminster, despite kind words?

I congratulate Karen Whitefield not only on securing this timeous debate but on her continuing and long commitment to the cross-party group on diabetes, which survives despite competition from many other cross-party groups. I became involved with the group at a very early stage, partly because of family members who have diabetes. Almost every member will have someone in their close or extended family with some form of diabetes. I have a brother-in-law, brother, sister and niece with type 2 diabetes and a daughter-in-law and friend with type 1 diabetes—and that is not a full survey of the family. I do not think that we are more liable to diabetes than any other family, so the snapshot that I have provided gives some indication of the extent of the condition. Diabetes UK is greatly to be praised—I do not say that just because the organisation is represented here this evening—for both the briefing paper that it has produced for the debate and its unstinting efforts in the Parliament over the past nine years to keep diabetes, preventive measures and treatment high on the political agenda. It is tough to catch and sustain the attention of MSPs when there are many other lobby groups for different diseases and illnesses. I do not mean this frivolously, but I note that three of the criteria for being liable to diabetes are obesity, age and smoking. I tick two of those boxes, so I am not terribly happy, although I was all right when I last had a test. However, that is not good enough—we know that, for some of us, if we changed our diet, took more exercise and looked after ourselves, we would greatly reduce our chances of developing type 2 diabetes. The Health and Sport Committee's inquiry on pathways into sport is not considering elite sport in  particular; we are doing it because of the shocking evidence on the state of Scotland's health. A lot of that is self-inflicted: in evidence, we learned that 75 per cent of adult Scots are not physically active and that, if we do not do something about Scotland's children, we will have an obesity time bomb, which could lead to a great increase in type 2 diabetes, with all the concomitant illnesses and diseases. They are pretty scary and grim. Karen Whitefield mentioned retinopathy and problems with eyesight. Diabetes can also cause heart conditions and circulatory problems that can lead to impotence in men and amputation. Those are extremes, but they are real. People cannot fight and beat diabetes. I remember meeting a young man who had been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes when he was a teenager and in his rebellious stage. There is no good time to be diagnosed with diabetes, but that is a tough time. He decided to fight it but, of course, he could not. He did everything wrong—he did not control his diet and went out drinking—and very nearly killed himself. For children and adolescents, the issues are not only physical; they are the emotional and psychological challenges of dealing with something that will be with them all their lives. I know how grim it is for people who hate to inject themselves to have to do it six times a day, but they will not be stabilised if they do not. Diabetes UK estimates that almost 300,000 people in Scotland have diabetes, about 90,000 of whom are thought to have undiagnosed type 2 diabetes. As many members will know, when people start to show the symptoms, the damage has already been done. I therefore commend Diabetes UK, which often tests people in places such as supermarkets to find out whether they are okay. I commend Karen Whitefield for securing the debate. The Parliament will not ignore the issue and I know that the minister does not. I look forward to the rest of the debate.

It is my understanding, based on local information, that the matter was to go to a planning committee meeting, but that has been deferred, given the objections that have been received. The position has changed.

I hope so.

Ken Macintosh has—in gentlemanly fashion, I trust—invited me to intervene. One of the big issues, which overlaps with the Health and Sport Committee's inquiry, is lack of information. We have data from sportscotland, but the information by no means covers everything. We need the data if we are to protect what we have.

I am grateful for the opportunity to bring the motion to the chamber, not only because I want to publicise this particular issue, but because it will allow us to talk about the wider context of the failure of public engagement with the planning process—in this case, the responsibility for that failure can be laid at the door of Midlothian Council—and the appalling loss of playing space for Scotland's children at a time when childhood obesity is on the rise. It is predicted that, if trends continue, in a decade or so around 75 per cent of our children will be obese. The wider context also includes the fact that, as the Health and Sport Committee recently heard in evidence, two out of three adult Scots are "inactive". It is coincidental that I convene the Parliament's Health and Sport Committee, whose evidence-taking sessions on pathways into sport are well under way. Our inquiry is concentrating on the provision, in terms of time and facilities, of physical activity for our primary school children. We have been told that, so far, only one local authority has met the target—set five years ago—of two hours of physical activity a week in primary schools. Quite frequently, the barrier has been the lack of facilities or the amount of time that is taken up by travelling to facilities, so outdoor playing fields are much to be valued. However, I learned in evidence this week that there is no specific data on the number of playing fields. I also learned during this week's committee meeting that Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education does not consider that it is required to give an evaluation of a school's provision of physical education, although it provides an evaluation of a school's provision in relation to numeracy, literacy and so on. We were  told that silence on PE meant that all was well, which we found to be an extraordinary statement. Would no comment on numeracy mean that all was well? Of course not. What is happening at Penicuik? There is a worthy proposal to build a new school for the 200 or so pupils, and there is an equally worthy proposal to build social housing. However, there is also the less than worthy proposal to build the greater part of those developments on the outdoor playing field, which is the last primary school outdoor playing field in Penicuik. When did parents learn of this proposal? When neighbour notices were issued. How did they react? By launching a petition, which should come before the Parliament and which currently has 90 signatures, and by assembling parent meetings to resist the proposal. What does the community council think? It is opposed to building on the playing field. Due to the lodging of objections—there are currently 48 from the public alone—the decision on building on the playing field has been postponed. I believe that, belatedly, intimation was given to sportscotland and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, which both lodged objections. The rising tide of local and agency objections might cause Midlothian Council to have a rethink, but that will not happen without a great deal of anxiety being caused to the parents and the local community and great efforts being made on their part, late in the day. There are many questions for Midlothian Council—and, indeed, any other council that is bent on developing on school playing fields and other open spaces. What is appropriate consultation with a community on such developments? When should it take place? In the instance of open spaces, when should sportscotland be involved? What consideration was given to Scottish planning policy 11? What consideration has been given to the impact on the health and wellbeing of pupils, should the playing field be lost forever? Scottish planning policies "provide statements of the Scottish Government's policy on nationally important land use". The key objectives of SPP 11 are: "To protect and enhance open space ... To ensure a strategic approach to open space ... by requiring local authorities to undertake an open space audit and prepare an open space strategy for their area ... To protect and support opportunities for sport and recreation". Midlothian Council has failed on all counts. There are not even proposals for outdoor facilities for the new school that will be built adjacent to the  old school if the current proposals proceed. In that case, outdoor facilities will be reduced to virtually nil. Midlothian Council cannot possibly have us accept that the site is the only one that is available for social housing, worthy though that is. If that were so, no more social housing could be built in Penicuik, which I very much doubt. I started by talking about the state of our children's wellbeing and the future that lies ahead if we do not increase physical activity among children from the early years onwards. Gone are the days when children had the freedom and space of streets where no cars were parked and when they could run about from dawn to dusk. Nowadays, their fingers on a computer keyboard probably get more exercise than any other limbs. If we keep going in the same way, we shall have a nation of obese children who are vulnerable to diabetes and other ailments. Therefore, reversing the trend is an immediate and national necessity that will in many instances be delivered through local action. For the council: it should review the plans, for which it will earn the thanks of parents and community leaders. For the Government: it is perhaps time to beef up the import of SPP 11 and to give it statutory clout. For the Minister for Schools and Skills, who will sum up in the debate: I respectfully suggest that an appraisal of the provision and standards of physical activity in schools should be made mandatory in school reports as a matter of urgency.

In the cabinet secretary's discussions—amicable, I am sure—with the Scottish Borders Council, which has responsibility for bus companies, will he highlight the need for buses with low-rise platforms to enable the elderly, those with limited mobility and those with wheelchairs and pushchairs to access public transport, whether to use the Borders railway or otherwise? Those buses are in short supply in the Borders.

That constrains me—not a position in which I usually find myself, Presiding Officer. I thank Ross Finnie for his thoughtful speech and for his amendment, which has meant that my speaking time has been cut by four minutes. I do not find that an unhappy position to be in because I think that we will be in groundhog day to some extent during the debate.

I am delighted, in any case. I also thank, on behalf of the committee, all the witnesses who gave written evidence. Everyone knows that volume 2 of the report itemises and lists a substantial cross-section of the submissions. I thank those who were called and came to the committee to supplement their written evidence with oral evidence. Although I suspect that there is still a great deal of work for the committee to do at stage 2, I thank members for delivering a unanimous report—it is always commendable when committees achieve that—following thorough debate, which was mixed with the usual humour for which we are known. We are, indeed, a venerable and humorous committee. I also acknowledge Bill Butler, who is in the chamber and who did so much with his member's bill to progress the matter. The member's bill process is the way in which many issues come before Parliament, so I hope that more members' bills get a breath of fresh air in Parliament and that we move on to pass them as legislation. The committee recognises that we cannot stay where we are. As Ross Finnie and others have said, in relation to the closure of accident and emergency departments and the closure of community hospitals in areas that I represent, such as Jedburgh and Coldstream, it took people aback when anonymous figures—the public had no idea who they were—appeared at public meetings after alleged consultation, which is another issue, and told the meetings that various services were to close. It was obvious that we had hit on a democratic deficit. Perhaps a function of Parliament over the nine years of its existence has been to ensure not only that we are open to scrutiny but that when it comes to local authorities, housing associations and health boards people are much more engaged and more aware of their rights. That is as it should be. We all know that not every local community will get what it wants, even if we have directly elected health boards, but we want them to feel that they have had a fair crack of the whip and, as Ross  Finnie said, are engaged at all levels: not only at lower levels but at health board level. I now move on to some of the key issues that the committee raised—I had better talk more slowly. There have been responses on many of the issues. I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for responding with such alacrity in her letter of 12 January to the committee, but one or two issues still remain open. We will poke at those at stage 2 and I remind the committee that, if we wish, we can call witnesses back at that stage to discuss amendments. Paragraphs 22, 33 and 34 are key ones in the report. The recommendations in those paragraphs are about improving public consultation by health boards. We do not believe that public participation in, and the accountability of, many health boards has been adequate, although we know that the situation has improved. Evidence also suggests that efforts to promote diversity in health boards are failing. That point relates to evidence that we received about disabled people. There is also concern that if we have direct elections people who live in remote areas will have difficulty putting themselves forward for election—I am looking at Jamie Stone in respect of that point. If pilots go ahead, a rigorous evaluation of their impact on the diversity of health boards and on the equalities impacts of their policies should be made. The cabinet secretary has agreed to that recommendation. The committee was not convinced that elections are necessarily the most effective way of achieving better engagement and accountability, although it agreed that they have the potential to do so. It did not see elections as necessarily excluding other initiatives such as public participation forums. The cabinet secretary agreed to that in her letter. The bill will not change health boards' accountability to ministers; the committee considered that to be the correct approach. However, Malcolm Chisholm raised the concern that the public might not appreciate the subtle difference between elected members' local accountability on delivery and ministers' national accountability on policy, which could lead to disillusionment. We suggested that, if the elections proceed, there should be a public information campaign so that people understand that the board is accountable to the cabinet secretary for policy delivery but that accountability for practical delivery on the ground would rest with health boards. It is a neat distinction, but there are going to be some difficulties if expectations are not always met, particularly if several single-issue members are elected to health boards; there could be tensions there.  In paragraphs 97 and 98 of our report, the committee supports the ideas of parallel pilots alongside those that are set out in the bill, and of comparing health board elections with other initiatives to improve public engagement. I have put a tick next to that point as well—the cabinet secretary has agreed to it. The committee drew attention to uncertainty about the total costs of nationwide direct elections. The committee endorsed the Finance Committee's call for a reassessment of roll-out costs in the light of a proper assessment of the pilot costs. Those recommendations are in paragraphs 109 and 111 of our report—there is a tick next to them because the cabinet secretary has also addressed that point. The committee called for tighter parliamentary scrutiny of any decision to roll out health board elections or to abandon the pilots than is provided for in the bill. That involves a decision of principle. There is also a tick next to those paragraphs, and we are now going for the grand design and new plan with the super-affirmative procedure. We are all going to read the book on that—I hope that someone has produced one. Overall, the committee did not believe that there was an overwhelming case for health board elections, but there was broad support for piloting the proposal. The committee therefore supports the introduction of pilots but stresses that that should not be taken as a decision to support health board elections per se. Notwithstanding some issues around amending the long title, the cabinet secretary has addressed that, so I have ticked it. However, some of our recommendations do not have ticks. We said that personal identifiers should be required for all postal ballots and health board elections. The cabinet secretary is not planning to do that. In addition, the committee did not consider the proposal for a private young person's register to be a recognised part of the democratic process. I know that I said I would not talk for my full time, but I will read out what the committee report said. "The experience of the Scottish general elections in May 2007 shows that the robustness of any new elections introduced in Scotland will rightly come under serious scrutiny. Whilst the Committee recognises that there would be significant cost and logistical implications, the Committee recommend that the Scottish Government reconsider using personal identifiers for postal votes in health board elections. If the cost and logistical implications are too great to be overcome, the Scottish Government may also have to reconsider holding an all-postal ballot." That is a serious issue in the light of the public's recent experience, and the minister might hit a bit of a brick wall with that one.

I congratulate Jim Hume on securing the debate.  In 2007, I held a consultation across the Borders in which some 40,000 residents were contacted. More than 13,000 responses were received—the 35 per cent response rate is much higher than many people would expect. Some 98 per cent of respondents said that the post office was essential to their community and 84 per cent said that there would be difficulties in accessing post office facilities if the local post office closed, particularly for the elderly, the disabled and families with push-chairs. Jim Hume referred to that. Across the Borders, there is never a guarantee that low-floor buses will be available either to or from destinations. The loss of sub-post offices will remove social inclusion. Many Borders businesses are growing through their internet business, and they require to be able to send and receive parcels at times that suit them. The survival of communities is an issue. If the last shop in the village has an attached post office and that goes, the community will suffer. Individual wellbeing is also an issue. Post offices are great places to meet. Jim Hume referred to communication networks. Post offices are a great source of gossip about who is or is not well, who is divorcing, who is remarrying and who is pregnant, and even invented stories. They are a great well of information. To be more serious, the loss of a post office will contribute to global warming. People will have to get in their cars to travel to the nearest post office. The alternatives are mobile post offices, do-it-yourself or hosted post offices, or none at all. In Clovenfords, for instance, people cannot always be there to meet the post office van. The allocated hours may not suit local businesses. The interchange of local information and casual checks to see whether people have been out and about are lost, as nobody will hang about in the wind and the rain. The time allocated for the mobile post office's arrival at Clovenfords is fixed. It is supposed that it will take the same time in the winter and the summer for the van to get from one community to another. Anyone who knows about the weather in the Borders will know that there is absolutely no prospect of that happening. People will stand in the snow, sleet, wind and rain waiting for a van that may or may not turn up. The loss of the Crown post office in Galashiels compounds the loss of the post office in Clovenfords. The Crown post office was consigned, as many have been, to the back of WH Smith. People have had the privilege of negotiating all the cramped sales aisles to stand in a long and slow-moving queue, and they have been lucky if there have been two counter clerks.  What has happened was predictable following the deregulation of postal services in January 2006. That allowed a number of private companies to provide postal services throughout the United Kingdom. One cannot disentangle the demise of the Post Office from the demise of the Royal Mail, which are both—for the time being—fully owned subsidiaries of Royal Mail Group Ltd. Under section 4 of the Postal Services Act 2000, the Royal Mail is required to provide a universal postal service. TNT Post and UK Mail do not have that requirement and do not provide a universal service. They have substantial lucrative contracts with the likes of the Department for Work and Pensions that they offload to the Royal Mail, which performs the loss-making final door-to-door delivery. There is no level playing field. The solution that has been promoted by—members will not be happy about this—the unelected and discredited Lord Mandelson is to privatise that part of the business. Undertakings that no more than 33 per cent will go into private hands—probably to the likes of the Dutch firm TNT—compound Labour's mismanagement of the post offices and Crown post offices. It is to the shame of the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats that they support that part privatisation in principle. Such a move would destroy the Royal Mail rather than save it as a publicly owned organisation. We all know—because we have been told—that the closures and reductions in the Borders and elsewhere are not over; undoubtedly, more lie ahead. If the Westminster Government thinks that passing part ownership to Dutch competitors is the way forward, I, too, am a Dutchman. Why can it find £600 million and rising to bail out commercial companies such as banks and underwrite loans authorised by them, but baulk at a few hundred million pounds to help post offices survive and provide the means for them to thrive? I request answers on a postcard, which will probably be delivered by Royal Mail with the UK Mail logo on it.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I raise a point of order under rule 7.3.2 of standing orders. In this morning's debate on humanitarian aid to Gaza, Jackson Carlaw—summing up for the Conservatives—referred to a quotation that I cited from an article in yesterday's Independent newspaper, by the award-winning and respected middle east correspondent Robert Fisk, on previous Palestinian deaths in conflicts with the Israeli army. Jackson Carlaw referred to Mr Fisk—I noted the exact words—as "a highly partisan anti-Jewish correspondent", which is as close as it comes to calling him anti-Semitic and is highly defamatory. I have, of course, informed Mr Fisk of the comments and have no doubt that he will deal with them in his own way. However, I seek guidance on whether Mr Carlaw and Mr Brocklebank, who endorsed the remarks, have the protection of parliamentary privilege.

I will not join the many armchair experts on the complex situation in the middle east and, in particular, the Palestine-Israeli conflict. Instead, I turn to somebody who knows what he is talking about. Writing in The Independent yesterday following the massacre at the UN school of 40 civilians, including old women and children, Robert Fisk asked: "Have we forgotten the 17,500 dead—almost all civilians, most of them children and women—in Israel's 1982 invasion of Lebanon; the 1,700 Palestinian civilian dead in the Sabra-Chatila massacre; the 1996 Qana massacre of 106 Lebanese civilian refugees, more than half of them children, at a UN base; the massacre of the Marwahin refugees who were ordered from their homes by the Israelis in 2006 then slaughtered by an Israeli helicopter crew; the 1,000 dead of that same 2006 bombardment and Lebanese invasion, almost all of them civilians?" I say to Ted Brocklebank that Israel, to its Government's shame, has a bloody track record that stretches over decades. In Robert Fisk's words, what happened at the UN school "was not just shameful. It was a disgrace. Would war crime be too strong a description? For that is what we would call this atrocity if it had been committed by Hamas. So a war crime, I'm afraid, it was." I respect those words. What are the excuses that we hear again and again? Robert Fisk writes: "After Israeli artillery had fired shells into the UN base at Qana in 1996, the Israelis claimed that Hizbollah gunmen were also sheltering in the base. It was a lie ... Israel claimed the bodies of children killed in a second Qana massacre may have been taken from a graveyard. It was another lie." As he states, "we may well have the bodies-from-the-cemetery lie and we'll almost certainly have the Hamas-was-in-the-UN-school lie and we will very definitely have the anti-Semitism lie." That is the backcloth to what is continuing. I do not underestimate the fact or the number of the Israeli dead, but we have had 600 Palestinians dead in just over a week and thousands over the years since 1948. The size of the Gaza strip is just 360 km 2 , which is twice the size of Glasgow. With a population of 1.5 million, it is the sixth most densely populated country in the world. Its population density is 30 per cent greater than that of Glasgow, and some 40 per cent of the population are children. Wherever strong missiles  and shells are aimed by the Israelis, they are likely to hit a child. Let us not forget that, whatever we think of Hamas, it won the Palestine parliamentary elections by popular vote, and international representatives observed the elections to be fair and free. I say to Ted Brocklebank that, if the boot were on the other foot and what is happening in the Gaza strip were happening in Israel with the same power, force and deaths, there would be a huge international outcry and calls to put in more than international aid. There would be calls not only for an immediate cease-fire but for a free flow of goods, medicines and all the other things that a nation requires to sustain itself. The people have been under siege for decades. Teachers and policemen are not paid, and people have to drink contaminated water because the sewerage system is breaking down. Fishermen are shot if they go beyond the dirty waters to fish because—of course—the waters are also occupied by the Israelis. Ted Brocklebank should start reading Robert Fisk.

Will the minister give way?

I declare an interest as a loyal, long-standing reader—notwithstanding my geographical location—of The Herald and the Sunday Herald , both of which I value. Other members have dealt with employment rights. I, too, attended the NUJ briefing. I am absolutely astonished at what appears to be a rather large coach and horses being driven straight through employment legislation—in effect, people are being sacked. A coach and horses is also being driven through equality legislation, given the proposed changes in work shift patterns. I say to Patrick Harvie that if any of us did something similar in the Parliament, we would be before an industrial tribunal—and all over the newspapers—without our feet touching the ground. There are some laws for the newspaper proprietors and others for politicians. As John Park said, if the newspaper proprietors are not breaking the letter of the law—which I dispute—they are certainly breaking the spirit of the law. At a human level, we have to consider the abysmal treatment of employees, especially, but not exclusively, those who are long serving and who have probably worked beyond the call of duty. Like others, I would call a halt while unions and management discuss the position that lies before them. I appreciate what Ted Brocklebank said. We all know that these are hard times for newspapers—although they are not so hard for The Herald stable, given the money that it is making—but their owners should not be acting in this bludgeoning way. I say to David Whitton that if Mr Martin says that such behaviour is not bullying, I do not want to meet him on a darkened stairheid at night.  A broader issue is the loss of diversity in journalism, to which Patrick Harvie referred. Scotland has four broadsheets, which are geographically based: The Press and Journal , The Courier —I am obliged to Ted Brocklebank for reminding me of that— The Scotsman and The Herald . All have served and some currently serve their readerships in a good old-fashioned fashion and some of them are surviving. They reflect the Scottish geographical loyalty to newspapers and I do not want that to end. I mention in passing the absolute uselessness—at least previously—of the Competition Commission. I understand that the rules have now changed, so it can reopen and review the decision that was made in 2003, when Newsquest and Gannett gave undertakings from which they have walked away. There is no point in having a Competition Commission whose rules do not have to be paid attention to. Where is the management behaviour leading? The individual journalists experience injustice. The protection of employment rights is disregarded. Broadsheet news coverage in Scotland is eroded. There is further erosion of quality journalism—on which I agree with Patrick Harvie—such as specialist and informed reporting and investigative journalism, which sometimes takes time but can dig out nuggets of information. Democracy is diminished by the enfeebling of what is called—rightly—the fourth estate. That is the broader picture. It is said that the relationship between the politician and the journalist is like that between the dog and the lamp post—I forget which is which. I have far more regard for the political journalists whom we in the chamber know. They do not just do our bidding; they put us to the test. We need quality journalism to shine a keen light on the actions not only of the Parliament, but of Westminster and of the wider world. We need it to expose those who buy power and influence; to expose charlatans, whether large or small; and to bring to our comfortable breakfast table—reading a paper is different from surfing the internet—the harshest reports and comments on our man-made disasters, whether they are in Iraq or Gaza. The effect of the proposed demise of the staff and the papers in the stable goes beyond the readership, so I support Ted Brocklebank's proposal for a wider review of the service that newspapers do Scotland.

Does the member find attractive the proposal of the consultant surgeon at the Western general whom I mentioned? He proposes two lists—a list of those who opt in to organ donation and list of those who opt out, both of which would have persuasive status with the relatives and families.

By maintaining your position on your amendment, you are actually  making the situation worse. You are removing even the mandatory review at five years for which the report asks. There is still flexibility for an earlier review, but you are removing even that backstop.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am sure that the member will relate what he is talking about to the subject of the debate, but I would be obliged if he got to the point rather more quickly.

Will the member take an intervention?

I, like others, welcome the cabinet secretary's announcement of £5 million over three years for various measures to increase organ donation and intervention, and I welcome what she said about the processes and infrastructure arrangements. On the five-year review, I will wait to hear what the cabinet secretary has to say about the Labour amendment. I think that it is unnecessary, given what has already been said and given that it is always open to Parliament to review the process at any stage, such as by lodging a motion to do so. The five-year review was part of the conclusions of the independent report; that is why it has been included. I thank Richard Simpson for reminding us about those who die while they are on waiting lists. They are all individuals with families and friends who have lived in hope for far too long. I note what Richard Simpson said about slow progress and the work that was done earlier. However, I believe that momentum is growing, simply because the Parliament has been debating the issue more often. I took part in Lord Foulkes's members' business debate on the issue. It was important to await the independent report that we now have before us, so that we could have a dispassionate look at some of the issues. Everybody wants to have more people on the donor list and everybody wants people to be more  informed. I agree that the expression "presumed consent" is a complete contradiction. Consent is the very last thing on earth that we can presume at any time in any situation, as we all know. I found the conclusions of the report extremely interesting, particularly paragraph 15.2, which states: "the more the Taskforce examined the evidence, the less obvious the benefit, and the more multifaceted and multidimensional the issue of increasing donor numbers was revealed to be." I have always felt that that was the case. If there was a simple answer, it would have been delivered. The issue is complex. The British Medical Association's position on what it calls a "'soft' system of presumed consent"— I do not particularly like either of those terms—is that it "acts as a safeguard—families may be aware of an unregistered objection to donation. Secondly, it recognises doctors' duty of care towards relatives to relieve, and not add to, their distress in bereavement." The second point is terribly important. We are not talking about people who are neutral or objective; we are talking about a highly personal, emotional situation for families, who are vulnerable. They might have had a view previously, but when they face the death of a loved one, they are in turmoil. The situation must be dealt with terribly delicately, and I look forward to the publication of guidance on how to talk to relatives in the appropriate manner. I imagine that many of our professionals do not really need such guidance, but it will not do any harm. In the members' business debate, I quoted at length someone whose views should be listened to—Ian Grant, a consultant surgeon at the Western general hospital, in Edinburgh, who deals with situations in which he has to approach the families of people who are brain dead or on the point of dying. He said: "It is also unthinkable that a dead patient's organs would be taken without family agreement, and hence discussion with the deceased's family after brain-stem death will need to continue as before. It is vital that this discussion is informed by accurate knowledge of the patient's wishes expressed before death. This can only be guaranteed by a compulsory registration of patients' wishes, whether for or against donation" That is important, and picks up Mary Scanlon's point that organ donation is a gift. We should have a voluntary register—a compulsory register may be a step too far—to assist friends and relatives, who may not know what to do. Then they would have before them the deceased's wishes either for or against donation to help them to determine  what they ought to do—because, along with the professionals, they would have to decide. Ian Grant continued: "I write as a senior intensive care clinician with almost 30 years experience of dealing with brain-stem death and organ donation, and who strongly supports organ donation and transplantation."— [ Official Report , 24 January 2008; c 5558.]  Those are wise words. Having dealt with consent, I will develop the definition a little more. Not only must consent be clearly and freely given, as well as being informed, but the individual must have the capacity to know what they are consenting to. If we went down the route of consent being silence, we might discover only after the event that a person whose organs had been donated did not have the capacity to give their consent, which would be outrageous. I am in two minds about Richard Simpson's amendment. Frankly, I do not think that we need it, although I am hesitant about voting against it. I may have to abstain in the vote, although I do not like abstaining—it is not in my temperament. I do not think that it was helpful of Richard Simpson to lodge the amendment. I conclude on this point. In the debate, we must remember that while we talk about statistics and about increasing the rate of donations to 50 per cent from 30 per cent, really we are talking about the individuals on those interminable transplant waiting lists who would get the most precious gift of all—not just at Christmas but at any time—of having their life extended. Whatever we can do to assist that, keeping in mind the legalities surrounding consent and so on, will be to our credit.

There is no whip on this vote and I remain very open minded on this issue. However, I respectfully suggest to Richard Simpson that, given the cabinet secretary's comment that it will be for Parliament to decide whether to have an earlier review, he consider as the debate proceeds whether he should press his amendment. I hope that the Parliament will support the motion unanimously but, in light of the cabinet secretary's remarks, the amendment raises a number of difficulties.

The minister's visit was most welcome. I was there, as were other members of this Parliament, Westminster and local government, and I know that he has undertaken to visit again. Does the minister agree that a vital growth area in the Borders will be in the housing and building sector, despite the national and global pressures that the sector is under? Can he assure members that the Government will do all that it can to support, in a practical way, the growth of housing, building and associated employment in the Scottish Borders?

To ask the Scottish Government when a decision will be taken on whether the death of Irene Hogg, former headteacher of Glendinning Terrace primary in Galashiels, should be the subject of a fatal accident inquiry. (S3O-5216)

I am grateful that there is now a date. I have no doubt that the Solicitor General will share the concerns of Irene Hogg's elderly parents and her brother in Australia that the matter should be resolved as soon as practicable.

At this stage in the debate, it is inevitable that much has already been said. I might occasionally tread where others have been and repeat what they have said. Consent is the essence of any contract and marriage is, of itself, a contract—a very special one. A contract requires the consent of both parties. The parties must have the capacity to consent and consent must be informed and given freely without coercion—physical, emotional, psychological or otherwise. As others have said, a forced marriage is one where consent of one party, or indeed both parties, did not exist. I do not think that anybody has mentioned this yet, but 30 per cent of cases involve minors. The problem is complex indeed, as was demonstrated by the recent television programme, and cultural influences have a substantial impact on parents in the choice of a marriage partner for their children. The girl or boy who is party to a forced marriage often faces the worst of all dilemmas: by freeing themselves from the forced marriage, whether here or abroad, they are at the same time most likely in danger of alienating themselves from their immediate and extended family, even for life. We need education, prevention and, in some cases, repatriation, but do we need legislation? I am not persuaded. As other members have said, the matter of education requires to be handled delicately, because it crosses several generations and cultures. The majority of known forced marriages—there might be many more—concern Indian, Pakistani and Bangladeshi communities. It is a matter of educating not just parents but grandparents, aunts and uncles. I am pleased that the Asian community is taking the lead on the matter, which is very welcome. Prevention could flow from the education process in the widest sense, but prevention can, and sometimes must, require determination, and it can even be dramatic. In cases where the young girl or boy does not turn up for school, the  teachers and the headteacher should not presume that they have moved elsewhere, even if their carers or parents avow that that is the case. Discreet inquiries must be made. In the same television programme that I mentioned, one girl described how she had been kept prisoner in her own room, hoping that someone would come knocking on the door of the family home to rescue her. None came. I believe that her school had been told that she had gone on holiday to Pakistan. It was, of course, no holiday. Not only was she marrying someone for whom she had no affection and who beat her; she had moved from English suburbia to a remote mountain village with very basic facilities, surrounded by her husband's kinsfolk while hers were back in England. That was a terrifying and isolating experience. Repatriation is not an easy matter. A girl or boy might risk everything, sometimes even their lives, to free themselves from what is a slavish existence. There are safe havens, both abroad and here, but taking that step is a sign of not just courage but desperation on the part of the few who do so. I applaud those who assist them on that path. I turn to the issue of legislation. To criminalise forced marriages per se is bad—it would be counterproductive. Much has been said about that already. However, criminal acts could take place in a forced marriage. Kidnapping prior to the marriage is a criminal act, and so is rape. It is not that there are no criminal acts that might take place, but the criminal law should not apply to the service itself. I note the English legislation, the Forced Marriage (Civil Protection) Act 2007, to which John Lamont referred. However, it is pre-emptive, so I cannot see how it is much better than our law under the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001. That act, which came from a committee bill, allows for interdict and interdict ad interim, and a power of arrest is attached. Much of what has been done in the 2007 English legislation is encased in the Scottish 2001 act. I am pleased that the Minister for Community Safety, with his legal background, will be responding to the debate, because I have some further questions.

That is a very fair point, which I hope will be developed by the minister. Johann Lamont might have caught me on that point, but that is fine—it is what a debate is for.  I refer to the situation of a forced marriage that takes place in Scotland. John Lamont is quite right that such marriages could be set aside in Scots law. Section 5(4)(d) of the Marriage (Scotland) Act 1977 says: "there is a legal impediment to a marriage where ... one or both of the parties is or are incapable of understanding the nature of a marriage ceremony or of consenting to marriage". A difficulty arises with regard to forced marriages beyond Scotland's jurisdiction, for which this Parliament cannot legislate, of course—the Parliament cannot legislate beyond its own constitutional walls. There are procedures for the recognition or otherwise of marriages abroad. How would legislation in Scotland change that? That is perhaps the hardest thing to crack. I look forward to hearing the minister's comments when he sums up.

Will the minister take an intervention on that point?

It is strange that we have been accused of being party political during this debate about St Andrew's day. I shall reread Pauline McNeill's speech in the Official Report , but it seems to be making a lot of party political points. Perhaps it is acceptable to support the union but not to fight for independence.

I welcome the opportunity to take part in the debate, not just as an MSP in this reconvened Scottish Parliament but as a patriot in the best sense of the word, believing my nation to be no more worthy than any other but distinct in its history, culture, social policies and international perspective on the world—primus inter pares. I pay tribute to Dennis Canavan, in absentia. The Labour-Liberal Government initially opposed the St Andrew's Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Bill, which he introduced. However, the then Executive allowed the bill to be passed, on the basis of a mean compromise that St Andrew's day would not be an additional public holiday. It took the view that establishing a public holiday was not within the competence of the Parliament—what's new? I commend the Conservatives, who, along with the Scottish National Party, supported the bill all along. This, when Scotland has nine public holidays compared with 13 in Norway and Sweden and 15 in Finland. Among those northern neighbours, and indeed other European countries, we are one of the oldest nations in Europe—we stretch back to the ninth century. We have one of the oldest flags—that universal symbol of nationhood. Wherever and whenever the saltire is flown or carried, it identifies our national DNA not only to the 25 million people who claim Scottish descent but to people throughout the world. Despite 301 years of union with our larger and historically predatory neighbour, and despite decades of efforts—brutal and subtle—to assimilate us, we have remained clearly and distinctly a nation in our own right. Thankfully, gone are the days when the voice of the BBC was received-pronunciation English, and accents—Scots or otherwise—were considered a mark of the less educated. I speak from childhood experience: children I knew in my street were sent to elocution lessons to learn to speak properly. Since 1999, the Parliament has grown in maturity and skill—attributes that have even, on occasion, been displayed in debates. For some members, devolution is a process, not an end in itself.

I will let Lord Foulkes in in a minute. Four of the Parliament's parties and its independent member believe that we should have increased fiscal powers. Given the economic mess that has been dumped on us by the Blair/Brown years, which Darling is trying to shovel up, such  increased powers cannot come too soon. If you feel the Scots' pain so much, Iain Smith, you should vote for independence.

It is symbols of nationhood, such as our patron saint and the flag that is symbolic of his crucifixion, that have carried the heart and hopes of Scots in good and bad, from the confrontations on football pitches to those on battlefields. It is more than financially astute to celebrate St Andrew's day. I say to Ted Brocklebank that there is money to be made in tourism opportunities. To lead from St Andrew's day to a winter festival would be no bad thing—I would welcome it. However, far more important for me is the symbolic reminder that we are the Scottish people, whether or not we were born here—I was not. We are distinct in our values from our neighbours to the east, south and west. We are proud to be so and determined to remain so. Where is that symbol of our patron saint more distinct than in our flag, the saltire, which was inspired by the vision at Athelstaneford in 832AD, where King Angus—Angus is my oldest son's name; there is DNA for you—led the Scots in battle to defeat the Angles? The night before battle, St Andrew appeared before King Angus, assuring him of victory, and in the morning a white saltire against a blue sky appeared to both sides. Would that happen today? It is said that the Angles lost confidence and were defeated, and that image has been our flag ever since. Today, in commemoration of St Andrew's day, the saltire—symbol of St Andrew and Scotland—flies over many buildings. It flies above the Forth road bridge for the first time, although it does not yet have pole position on Edinburgh castle, over our capital city. I will let a unionist in.

I will give Lord Foulkes my speech to read later. He was not listening. I said "historically". I hope that he knows what that means. Today, in commemoration of St Andrew's day, his flag is flying over Edinburgh castle, but not in pole position. The British Government, on behalf of the Ministry of Defence, designated it as an  official flag-flying station. The union flag therefore takes precedence. Yet, by the Scotland Act 1998, and by agreement between the Crown Estate commissioners and the Scottish Office, ownership of Edinburgh castle and other historic buildings transferred from the Crown to the Secretary of State for Scotland, and thence to the Scottish ministers. The transfer of 26 properties took place in 1999. Fact. Law. They included, inter alia, Edinburgh castle. The Government, through its ministers, is the owner, and is therefore landlord to the MOD. The MOD is our tenant. It is time the landlords—the Scottish people—told the tenants to take the union flag down and fly the saltire in its place, not only because it symbolises our nation and its patron saint, but because if it is good enough for recruiting Scots to fight in Iraq and Afghanistan, it is good enough to fly all the year round.

Does the First Minister share the concerns that were expressed today by Alan Baird, the president of the Association of Directors of Social  Work in Scotland, that the vilification of social workers in some sections of the press, following the Baby P case in London, is undermining front-line social services staff? Does he acknowledge the need for not just social workers, but all professionals who work with children and families to focus on the welfare of the child at all times, notwithstanding the different approaches to child protection that are taken north and south of the border?

Does the minister share my concerns over Midlothian Council's plans to use playing fields at Cuiken primary school for development, which is completely contrary to Scottish planning policy 11? Does she agree that the proposal is another example of Labour councillors seeking to reduce facilities for schoolchildren that will have an adverse impact on health and wellbeing?

Will the member take an intervention?

So people will not have to produce the card.

It is a delight to follow a rant—I am glad that the member got very excited. I oppose compulsory ID cards in principle. Their purpose, apparently, is to allow Lord George Foulkes to prove who he is. Unfortunately, we know who he is. The scheme will lead to an infringement of free movement in Scotland of civilians who are not engaged in criminal activity but who are just going peaceably about their business. People could be asked to produce an ID card on demand and failure to do so would be a  criminal offence. I share the minister's concerns that certain ethnic groups would be more vulnerable to challenge than others, as would people with learning difficulties, who might not understand. Aside from the principle, the scheme would be socially disruptive. I wrote a little inventory of the information that the state already holds on me. It is a sad list: national insurance number, which was given at birth, tax code number, passport data, council tax code, road tax data, television licence, car licence, electoral database, census information and even my pensioner's pass. That is not a complete list. The state knows plenty about me already. I am delighted to tell members that, in all those matters, I have complied with the law. However, a database of compulsory ID cards is a step too far. When we talk about safeguards and security, one interesting point that no member has made yet is that the Government at Westminster proposes to spend £12 billion on a database to monitor and store the internet browsing habits and e-mail and telephone records of everyone in Britain. Government Communications Headquarters, the Government's eavesdropping centre, has already been given up to £1 billion to finance the first stage of the project. Hundreds of clandestine probes will be installed to provide monitoring in real time of customers on two of the country's biggest internet and mobile phone providers, which it is thought will be Vodaphone and BT, which already has 5 million internet customers. Last year, 57 billion text messages were sent in the United Kingdom. All such messages are to be collected and monitored and yet people do not know that. My goodness, has Big Brother not arrived and raised all that money—£12 billion—to do all that? It is quite a list.

No. I provide data voluntarily by way of my bank card, various credit cards, AA card—I hasten to say that that is my Automobile Association card—and organ donor card. Although all those data are on record somewhere, the input was made voluntarily. If all of that is put together with the data that are collected from my Sainsbury's, Tesco, Asda and other supermarket cards, somebody somewhere in the world knows what I eat and drink, what my cats eat and drink, the amount that I spend, when I do it and so on. In fact, some of those data are not secure. I am not sure whether members are aware that the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency regularly sells data on them to private security and car parking companies without their knowledge. People who have been served with huge charges by security companies wonder how those  companies come to have that personal information from the DVLA. Data collection has already gone a step too far—to distort and corrupt a well-known phrase: never has so much been known by so many about me. Let us turn to security breaches, a number of which the minister listed in his speech. What caused the loss of the data that were stored on those memory sticks and disks? The answer is not that someone hacked into the system—no clever technology clogs was involved—but human error. As Stewart James, a partner in law firm DLA Piper's technology, media and commercial group, said, "All of the data loss scandals have been caused by human error and not by the technology itself". Andrew Maloney, the internationally respected information security expert, underlined the seriousness of the situation when he said: "In the past we worried about the perimeter of our organization and securing that against criminals trying to hack in. In reality, the bigger threat for most organizations is good guys doing dumb things." It is people who are at fault and we cannot legislate against human error. I will conclude with some interesting words from a previous debate on ID cards in another place: "Those who support the introduction of such a card would reduce every man, woman and child in this country to a number to be programmed at will. The idea that every individual would have his or her life story on a little metal strip on a little plastic cars is objectionable. The universal personal indicator—that is what some people call such numbers—on a card could include an individual's medical history, work progress, financial status, what he did, where he did it, and where he was stopped. All that information could be revealed by passing a card through a computer terminal. That is a great step, and I should be reluctant to take it."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 10 February 1989; c 1310.] I endorse those words, which were spoken by Alistair Darling in a debate in the House of Commons some years ago. He should have kept to that.

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has made to United Kingdom import agencies with regard to the importation of animal skins from Africa used in the manufacture of drums, in light of deaths from anthrax in Scotland and England. (S3O-4822)

As the minister may know, the fatal accident inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the death of Borders man Pascal Norris is to commence next week. Does the minister share my concern that not enough lessons have been learned by UK import agencies in light of Mr Norris's death and the death in London? I do not want to pre-empt the FAI, but both deaths appear to have strong connections to contaminated and imported animal skins. What assessment has been made by the civil contingencies unit and Government health officials to prepare for—I hope that this does not happen—a possible outbreak of anthrax in Scotland?

The historic concordat!

The cabinet secretary will recall that, this morning, I raised the case of a young woman with mental health issues who was self-harming and the insensitive and frankly counterproductive attitude of the accident and emergency departments that have dealt with her. In her discussions with NHS boards, will the cabinet secretary raise the issue of training, of A and E staff in particular, in dealing with young people and others who have mental health issues and need medical treatment, for instance when they self-harm? The situation is not satisfactory.

To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Government has had with HM Treasury about ensuring that an estimated £46 million of local authority investment, along with charity deposits, are recovered from Icelandic banks. (S3F-1150)

Does the First Minister agree that it would be indefensible if HM Treasury, which has used our money to bail out banks—and we have heard what they have used that money for in some cases—is not prepared, in the event that the Secretary of State for Scotland's persuasive powers fail him during his trip to Iceland, to underwrite those potential losses to local authorities and charities? Does the First Minister agree that, together with hikes in energy bills, such losses will put unacceptable pressures not just on our local authorities but on household budgets? I am sure that he is hearing that concern on the doorsteps of Glenrothes.

And south.

I hear what the member says about the responsibilities that might be put on a patient, but I think that he will agree that those responsibilities would not be the same for each individual but would depend on their capacity to engage with such responsibilities.

Does the member agree that the introduction of a no-fault compensation scheme would considerably reduce the amount of money that is spent by the NHS on court actions, many of which are settled at the door of the court?

As a former lawyer, I thought that the speeches by Ross Finnie and Cathy Jamieson were very thoughtful, and there are issues to explore. If we are going to enshrine rights in statute, we must consider whether they are enforceable and not just of paper value. There is much that we will agree on: the announcement on waiting time guarantees; recognition of the diversity of our population; the issue of suitable transport raised by Jamie Stone, which is particularly important in rural and remote areas; and the significance of communication with people. Issues of communication are often at the beginning of problems that unravel in the health service. The no-fault compensation scheme will be complicated. I was listening to the comments on that, and with my background I can see that there may be issues with its interaction with common-law rights in negligence cases. No-fault compensation will not always be appropriate; some cases will require to be taken to court to test the liability and degree of negligence and perhaps to change what happens generally in our NHS.  In that regard, some of Mary Scanlon's points on infection were off the mark because the common law of negligence will still exist. If somebody goes into hospital and does not receive the professional care that they ought to, the test of the law will still be there. There will still be the common law, although people may have the option of going down the statutory route. We require to explore that, as was mentioned earlier.

As I understand it, patients will have statutory rights and options, but there will still be the common law. If someone went down the route of no-fault compensation, they might have to take the option of not proceeding to court—they could not do both. However, the issues are complex, which is why we must tease them out at this stage of the debate and at stage 1 of any bill that comes before, I presume, the Health and Sport Committee. Some rights might supplant others, and there will be a choice because some rights will be additional to common-law rights. I want to focus on complaints in the NHS, which is an issue that often crosses my desk and the desks of other members. I completely support Cathy Jamieson's point about complexity. This is about those people who are not articulate or determined. Professionals are all very articulate and can, I am sure, assert their rights in the NHS, but that is not true of the elderly lady who has Alzheimer's, the person who has a mental health problem, someone who has learning disabilities, or someone who is just shy. For a variety of reasons, all those people will not find it easy to complain. It is not just about the process and the system. People must think that they are entitled to make a complaint without fear of retribution from staff. There might not be retribution, but patients might feel that there could be some comeback, like them not getting a cup of tea brought to their bedside if they complain, so they lie there and say nothing. I have issues such as that. One bad case in a hospital is one bad case too many. Recently, the papers reported the case of an elderly lady with Alzheimer's who was left in a chair from which she fell and broke her hip; the press are saying that she came home in a much worse state. It is alleged that, because she has Alzheimer's and could not communicate with staff, she was not given proper treatment and, as a consequence, her whole life has been made miserable, as has that of her husband, who is in his late 80s. There was another recent case of a woman of 64 who was given a needless hysterectomy when  she had terminal cancer because there was a 15-day delay in her receiving a magnetic resonance imaging scan to determine whether an operation was necessary. That complaint was upheld by the Scottish public services ombudsman. The consultant gynaecological oncological surgeon who advised the ombudsman said that the case was "quite disgraceful". Those are unusual cases, but they should never have happened. When Richard Simpson and I recently went on a fact-finding mission for the Health and Sport Committee, we met a young woman who self-harms who told us that she does not go to accident and emergency because of the way she is treated. People there give her the impression that she is wasting their time because it is her own fault. That woman has all sorts of issues, but she will not refer herself to A and E. If that is happening, it is quite simply wrong. In the current year, NHS Scotland has received more than 7,000 complaints, which is much the same as the number in previous years. Of those, 66 per cent were about staffing and treatment, which is a huge percentage, and 60 per cent of them were upheld. We are looking at a figure of something like 4,000 complaints being upheld in whole or in part. Those are the complaints that completed the journey, and while they might not all involve cases as dramatic and horrendous as some of the examples that I gave, they are too many. I would welcome it if we could to get to the stage where anyone sitting in a hospital ward, for whatever reason, who cannot take the lid off their cup of tea because they do not have strength in their hands knows that someone will come and help them, or knows that, if they are not helped, they can say something about it without feeling that they are making themselves more vulnerable. That said, if patients have rights, they also have obligations, for example to keep their appointment or to tell the hospital if they cannot keep their appointment so that they do not waste time. Our society is under an obligation to treat our national health service staff with respect. I am talking not just about the consultant who comes round with his happy band of eager students and automatically gets respect; I am talking about everyone who might pass the end of the bed, including the cleaner, the porter and the lady who brings the jelly and ice cream for the patient's sore throat. They all deserve respect, and I hope that the NHS's culture will change in an atmosphere of mutual respect. That is the point I want to make most of all. In some respects, I agree with Ross Finnie: legislation can be a heavy tool and is not always necessary. More than anything, what the NHS needs is a culture change on both sides of what  should not be a divide, so that patients feel that they are being cared for as individuals, not just as an elderly person, a pregnant lady or someone with mental health problems, and the staff feel that they are there not just to earn their wage but because they have a vocation that society values in all kinds of ways that are not measured by a pay packet.

Will the member give way?

I, too, congratulate Jeremy Purvis on securing this very topical and important debate. Earlier this year, I submitted to the Scottish Broadcasting Commission a survey that covered not only the provision of channels, including Border TV, but digital provision. In that survey, which was sent to 20,000 households and to which I received 7,000 responses, 54 per cent said that they were well informed about the switchover, 37 per cent said that they were not and 9 per cent were undecided. However, I want to draw a distinction between being informed about and being ready for the switchover, particularly where elderly people are concerned. According to the latest figures, 52,000 households are covered by the Selkirk transmitter and its relays and, at the time of speaking, 10 per cent are still to convert to digital. Given that a high number of elderly people live in the area—indeed, the 2001 census revealed that 24,000 or 30 per cent of the population were pensioners—some very elderly, frail and vulnerable people are going to get lost in the process and will simply not know what is happening. As Jeremy Purvis has quite rightly pointed out, those people will lose their service when the switchover takes place. Not that many elderly people will go on to the internet, but when I had a look at the Digital UK site I found the following lines: "If you get a TV signal from a relay transmitter (Freeview) you need to toggle between analogue and digital." I have no idea what toggling might be. With all the talk on that site about having to change the aerial and so on, very many elderly people who rely on their TV for their main companionship will simply be confused. I am sure that John Lamont will also mention this issue, but I subscribe to the view that certain areas will receive no service whatever.  Being aware is not the same as being ready. Indeed, only two days ago, Consumer Focus Scotland, which is tracking the experiences of more than 100 people in the Scottish Borders, said that viewers are not ready for switchover and highlighted the confusion that still reigns about what exactly is going to happen. Why is this switchover happening? I am not going to be quite so benevolent towards the British Government, because this move is not purely about expanding choice. There is a clear vested financial interest in the Government's auctioning off of analogue channels in 2009. The money, which is estimated at between £5 billion and £10 billion, will go to the Treasury. Not only that, but the Treasury will also receive the VAT on the equipment that is needed to receive digital channels. Other countries are switching over to digital, but some, including Holland and France, are not because of the costs. It is simply a mixed blessing, and we must not look at the move as if it is happening out of the goodness of the British Treasury's heart. A lot of money is involved, and I want some of it to go back to the Borders. Why choose to roll out this switchover in an area that has a difficult topography, that has the lowest average wages in the country—according to last year's figures, the average weekly wage was £355 compared with the Scottish average of £436—and where 30 per cent of the population are elderly? The figures from Ofcom suggest that it will cost the average household in the Borders £132 to switch over two TV sets and a video. Many have not signed up to the help scheme—indeed, according to my figures, only 15 per cent have—and I do not know whether in these very straitened times of high energy bills and perhaps job losses people on very low incomes will be able to cover the cost. As I have said, the switchover is a mixed blessing, and the huge caveat about it is whether the elderly, the vulnerable, those with impaired sight and others have had the financial help to which they are entitled and practical assistance in dealing with it. I ask the Treasury to put some of the money that it is scooping in from auctioning off the analogue spectrum into providing the Borders with full access to Scottish channels, particularly Scottish Television.

I am very pleased to take part in the debate. I will first refer to a submission that I made to the Scottish Broadcasting Commission following a consultation of about 20,000 households in the Scottish Borders. I received the views of about 7,000 residents. I completely concur on some of the issues that Jeremy Purvis has raised. Other  members might not concur with this, but it was found that "Scottish Borders should have their ITV content supplied by STV with additional local input ... Responsibility for broadcasting should be transferred to the Scottish Government ... A 'Scottish 6' should be established on BBC"— although that has now been superseded through the digital spectrum—and "Scotland's qualifying football matches should be shown on a 'free to view' channel." In passing, I note that the issue of digital reception in the Borders was covered in the consultation. If I am correct, that is a UK issue, and it must be addressed. There are some parts of the Borders where there is no reception apart from satellite services. Many people are disfranchised through living in rurality. That applies not just in the Borders, obviously. The role of Border TV was shown to be contentious. We had a members' business debate on the matter some time ago. Speaking about whether to retain Border TV, I said: "the status quo is probably not an option".— [ Official Report , 19 December 2007; c 4622.]  The desire to retain Border TV might have been heroic and worthy, and I know that many people supported the "Lookaround" news programme to some extent, but it was the servant of three maisters—it was trying to serve the Scottish Borders, the Isle of Man and the north of England. However, the solution that has now been advanced, which has seemingly been endorsed by Ofcom, is certainly not acceptable, with just six and a half minutes of news for the whole of the south of Scotland. That is not just for the Borders, if I may differentiate between the Borders and Dumfries and Galloway. I asked Borderers whether they were "well served by television broadcasting at the moment?" The response was: yes 23 per cent, no 70 per cent and undecided 7 per cent. That clearly indicates what they thought about what they were getting. There are solutions in this for Borderers. Paragraph A1.21 of "Ofcom's Second Public Service Broadcasting Review Phase 2" says: "In the deliberative research conducted in the Border ITV region, there was considerable resistance to a merger with Tyne Tees." It is therefore disappointing that, in effect, the Borders has been entrapped into having to support that move. The point has been made that UK broadcasting does not always reflect UK priorities. I was told not to mention the cricket, but I will do so, because there is a huge home counties distortion in that  regard. On 12 September 2005, the BBC devoted 10 minutes at the top of its major bulletins to England winning the Ashes. On the same day, the 95 th soldier to be killed in Iraq was named. I am not making a cheap point when I say that if I had been a parent or relative of that young man, I would have been extremely angry that the bulletins ran 10 minutes on the cricket. There is no problem with reporting cricket, but it should not be top of the news bulletins. Quite often, the distortion is in favour of the home counties and even the north of England is neglected. Domestic issues in parts of the UK are still referred to as if they were UK-wide issues, particularly on breakfast television. It is clear that presenters have been trained to say that something is happening in England or in England and Wales, but they do that only once, so a viewer who switches on in the middle of an item will not know whether the item refers to Scotland, England, Wales or Northern Ireland. That ill has not been entirely cured and I suspect that, as I think that Ted Brocklebank said, there is a London-centric issue in that regard, because people in broadcasting are unaware of the situation. It is ridiculous that that should be the case nine years into devolution. I agree with what members said about where programmes are commissioned. There is a huge issue to do with how money follows commissioning and production. Only 3.5 per cent of network production comes from Scotland, whereas 66.6 per cent comes from London, and the situation is getting worse every year. Scotland is losing out. That is relevant to the debate about funding a Scottish digital network channel, which is probably the mid-term solution for the Borders. I understand that the contracts with STV and ITV are not renewable until 2014, so the area could not come under the STV franchise until then. That is an option for the longer term. There is no either/or situation, because people can have access to many channels. It would be good for the Borders to be part of the STV framework and to have a Scottish digital channel. Such a channel might show some parliamentary business—perhaps it would not be worth doing that, but we remember the good old days of the first session of the Parliament, when people noticed us. Wales's channel gets £95 million and I understand that a Scottish broadcasting channel would need £70 million to £75 million gross. When we consider the income, businesses and jobs that such investment would generate in Scotland and the skills and creativity that would be developed here, it is clear that the Scottish balance sheet might show a profit. In any event, funding should  be additional to the current funding for the Scottish Government. If the merger of Border TV and Tyne Tees Television news proceeds so that Tyne Tees Television becomes the centre and only six and a half minutes of news are provided for the whole of the south of Scotland, I ask Ofcom to monitor the situation, to ascertain how representative programmes are and to gather the reactions of people Borders-wide and in Dumfries and Galloway.

The member has lodged an all-or-nothing motion. Does he accept that, if we voted for it, we would prejudice—in fact, we might criminalise—supermarkets and local authorities that already exercise voluntary policies in which 21 is the age at which alcohol can be purchased? The motion would rule out local variation.

Will the member take an intervention?

I think that I can speak as convener of the Health and Sport Committee. Does the member accept that the committee's intention was not to prevent that from happening, but to be realistic and to say, in effect, "This is terribly hard, so make your targets something that you can achieve and do not let people down."

I shall bear that in mind, Presiding Officer. Those rebukes always seem to happen just before I get to my feet. I congratulate Margo MacDonald and I acknowledge the validity of her case studies. I will not be pessimistic, but I want to be realistic. I applaud all those who secured medals and competed at the Olympic games, which is indicative of their sacrifice, energy and talent. In particular, I applaud the Paralympians, who to an extent still have the Olympic spirit. However, I share Ian McKee's concerns about the motive behind holding substantial sporting events. The Parliament should note that the air of caution in the debate has come from members of the Health and Sport Committee—Ross Finnie,  Ian McKee and me. That is not because we want to rain on a sunny parade, but because we heard the hard evidence—not anecdotal evidence, worthy though it is—about the impact of the legacy of international sporting events. The Parliament has committees because they have time to consider the detail. I commend to the chamber the letter of 23 April 2008 that the committee sent to the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing in response to the consultation. Members will find it on the committee pages of the Parliament website. The contents of the letter bring a hearty dose of realism to the debate. In saying that, I am not saying that any committee member wants to prevent all these good things from happening; we are simply saying that, if the bar is set too high and the aims are unrealistic, the whole thing will fail, and we do not want that to happen. As Ross Finnie rightly said, we know the structural advantages of holding such events. The committee is simply concerned about the health and wellbeing of Glasgow people and those in the nation at large. That is what we are focused on in our inquiry. I say to Margo MacDonald that there is no hard evidence that interest in the sport follows on from Olympic success. Rhona Martin told the committee that fewer people are taking up curling and we have fewer curling rinks than was the case in the years before she and her team won their gold medal. Liz McColgan told us that fewer people attend her athletics club than was the case in the years before she won her gold medal. I do not like telling the chamber these things, but that is what people on the front line told us. I accept that issues also arise in relation to facilities and transport, particularly in rural areas where populations tend to be more scattered. Those issues are part of the problem, but the committee is where it is on the subject. I share Ian McKee's concerns about the selection and training of our potential Olympic gold medallists. On television earlier this morning, a young girl of 12 was being interviewed about her quest for sponsorship to become a gold medallist at the next Olympic games. How will that quest for gold distort her life? The girl is only 12. Is she going to commit herself to full-time training, special diets, psychiatric support and counselling—everything that we know it takes? We know that it takes all that to make an elite athlete because we have been told that that is what it takes; we have not invented it. In the debate, we must distinguish between elite sports, sporting activity, physical recreation and physical activity. The committee's focus was on physical activity, and I am afraid that, when international events are held, people just buy in  the Pringles crisps and cans of lager and sit with their feet up on the pouf watching our athletes and other sportsmen and women on television and applauding them. People say, "That was just great. I stayed up till 2 o'clock in the morning to watch it." However, doing that does not mean that they will go on to take part in physical activity.

I will continue, if I may. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and the minister should note that the committee was unanimous on the matter. There is nothing party political in all of this. What happens elsewhere in the world? Ian McKee referred to what happens in Australia. The evidence that we heard from Australia told us that, if a country overemphasises its focus on elite sport, it can disfranchise people by "creating an environment in which only the best can participate and in which other forms of intervention are given a much lower priority." In other words, a country puts its money into people who might get a gold medal and not into those who simply want to participate in physical activity. That is wrong. It is a distortion of not only the Olympic tradition but the legacy to which we refer. The committee also found that Australia was not a fitter nation as a result of hosting the Olympics; Australians are just as fat and as prone to sit and watch sport on television with their Pringles crisps and cans of lager as people in Scotland are. The Olympics did not make Australia a fitter nation. As I said, I want to bring a dose of realism to the debate. Cabinet secretaries and ministers may not like that, but the committee takes a cautious view of what must be done. We want our elite athletes to succeed, but we also want to reach the target of making Scots more physically fit and active. That is particularly the case for women in the west of Scotland. Perhaps, for that group, a simple target should be set. We should say, "We know that women in the west of Scotland are the least fit and active. Let's see how we can improve their health standards." We should not be overly ambitious. That could serve only to make the Parliament—not the Government, but the Parliament—fail. I ask the chamber to look at what the committee has to say on the subject. Jackie Baillie and other Labour members may smile, but the committee has looked rigorously into the matter. I will not sprinkle my speech with fluffy, happy talk when the facts and the evidence do not support my doing so.

I thank Mr McAveety for giving way. I will refer to this matter later, but the Health and Sport Committee wrote to the cabinet secretary on 24 April about volunteering. Part of our concern about volunteering is that volunteers tend to be drawn from already active sporting participants. Does the member agree that we do not want that repeated at the 2014 games? We want people taken up as volunteers who are not, as it were, the usual suspects.

And the rest of us!

I commend my colleague Michael Matheson for lodging the motion, but I also take him to task, because this is not a new debate for the chamber. A very similar motion that was lodged by Elaine Smith and which expressed many of the concerns that we are debating today was debated in February 2005. Perhaps recognising that change is very slow is the penalty of being in Parliament for nine years. We all know about the financial implications for cancer sufferers and their families. The onset of cancer can be immediate and severe, and the financial implications are the second-biggest worry after the worry that is caused by the disease itself. That speaks for itself. A person's partner and their family may feel guilty about even thinking about the financial implications, let alone doing something about them. It is interesting that I attended a conference back in November 2004—that is how far back the issue goes—in which evidence was produced from a report entitled "Benefits Access for People Affected by Cancer in Northern Ireland". It was a nine-month study that involved secondment of a member of staff from Northern Ireland's Social Security Agency—social security is devolved there, which is a key point. The report addressed all the issues that we are exploring and identified problems such as the definition of the term "terminally ill". People go into respite, but the cancer could be cyclical. Should their benefits be taken away? For how long? Those are huge questions, but interpretation is not the same nationally. Northern Ireland made progress on the matter, so I commend that report to members. On the benefits to which people are entitled, how much further on are we, four years later? The website of the Macmillan benefits helpline states that there are 11 possible benefits, but a person would need a degree in benefits to work their way through them all. They go from disability living allowance to something that I would never have considered, which is road tax exemption. Frankly, given all the emotional problems that occur and the fears about cancer, we should not ask people to deal without assistance with the 11 benefits to which they may be entitled, the interactions between those benefits, and the issues of whether their cancer is cyclical, they are terminally ill or otherwise. In that earlier debate, we talked about the important co-operation between citizens advice bureaux and Macmillan, and between Macmillan  and local authorities. I took Scottish Borders Council and Borders NHS Board to task and urged them to provide advice, either on the doorstep of the Borders general hospital or through the local authority. However, despite the sympathetic words about it being a good idea, the information that Macmillan has provided shows that, four years down the road, the Scottish Borders Council's project is "In development". That is disgraceful, so I will take up the issue with the council again. The council in Alasdair Morgan's constituency has done a lot better. Dumfries and Galloway Council established a project in 2004. As a result of its advice, people accessed £1.096 million in 2007, and so far this year the figure is £867,000. So what are people in the Scottish Borders being deprived of? We will find out, because I will make sure that next time I speak in a debate on the issue, the Scottish Borders Council is on the list. The situation is absolutely disgraceful. On a day when banks are having a hard time, not because of us, but because of shoddy speculators, Richard Simpson commended HBOS. I want to commend the Royal Bank of Scotland, which provides substantial support—in the millions of pounds—to Macmillan Cancer Support to help people through their debt problems. However, my job for tonight and tomorrow is to take Scottish Borders Council to task.

I refer the cabinet secretary to the final paragraph on page 36 of Professor Donnelly's report, which states: "There is, at present, no routine validation of data provided in performance reports before they are received by the ... Government" and calls for effective external validation to "enhance public confidence in the performance reported by the Scottish Ambulance Service and, more broadly, the quality of the service that it provides for patients." Does the cabinet secretary agree with that, and will validation be brought forward?

I endorse much of what Robert Brown  said. I was a family lawyer for 12 years. I acknowledge his professional expertise and that of the Cabinet Secretary for Justice. This is a difficult area of the law and we have to tread carefully because there are no simple answers in the hard cases, as my legal colleagues will know. We are dealing with heightened human emotions: people are irrational and are sometimes not open to discussion or to advice that is sincerely given to calm things down. Most relationship break-ups are not a two-way street; one party decides that the relationship is at an end and, although they might feel guilty, they feel liberated. They might be moving on to someone else, which certainly exacerbates the break-up. The other party feels betrayed, angry, hurt, rejected, bitter, revengeful and tearful and might do things they have never done in their life before, like throwing flowerpots around the garden, breaking down doors or screaming in the street. Such difficult cases are about people on the edge, and the children are in the middle of it all. In such circumstances, contact orders can often be a battleground and there can be a vendetta. Sometimes, grandparents can be the only anchor of certainty in children's lives. However, in my experience, some grandparents can compound the situation and stoke the fire by saying things like, "You should never have gone with him in the first place, dear." Then there is the barroom lawyer, who has read something in the Sunday Mail and gives off-kilter advice about what people should say to their lawyers. This can all happen to a person who is in great personal difficulty. The uncertainty of people's lives can be compounded by the fact that their house might have to be sold, or their job might be gone, and their support is gone. People are under a great deal of emotional pressure, so there is the law. However, because of human nature, it can be hard to help people in such circumstances. To be blunt, if a party wants to make it difficult for the other party to have contact with the child, they can—I even had a case in which there was a false accusation of sexual abuse by a father. Once that is put into the pot, it can almost never be unravelled. All kinds of things happen. The parent does not get near the child during the inquiries, months and months pass and, if the child is young, they begin to lose contact with that parent as a matter of course. It is devilishly difficult to deal with. As Robert Brown quite rightly said, if a court order is not obtempered, what sheriff or judge wants to bring the parent to court and to fuel the fire by threatening imprisonment? Believe me—I have seen sheriffs trying everything under the sun,  from the carrot to the stick and everything else, to make court orders operate. We try to tell parties that the relationship will move on, the children will move on and things will change. The child might have half-siblings. Although there is no such thing as mediation if it is not consensual, if it is possible, mediation should be tried as soon as it is possible. However, with some parties, it will have to continue for a very long time. The only thing that every good family lawyer has ever said is, "You can fight about the property but, for goodness' sake, don't fight about the children." There is no winner when that happens, and the people who lose are the children of the relationship. Had I time, I would have touched on contact centres, which in my experience are pretty grim places. The most-used contact centres that I know of are the McDonald's restaurants where dads used to take their children on wet afternoons. That has to change.

I acknowledge, as other members have done, the distressing circumstances that have brought us to this debate, which will never be a party-political one. I thank Jackie Baillie for her speech and acknowledge her powerful representation of her constituents in this tragic matter. The statistics are damning in themselves, but we all acknowledge that each of those statistics represents an individual person and leaves an enduring trail of tragedy for family members and friends. This must also be a difficult period for staff at the hospital. There will be very good staff in the Vale of Leven hospital—some of them will be very good indeed—and they must feel stigmatised by the cloud that has hung over the hospital. I will not go back over the review report, to which other members have referred. I will move on from the specific tragedy at the Vale of Leven hospital to consider the general issue of hygiene and cleanliness, with which, as many of us knew anecdotally, there are serious problems in hospitals throughout Scotland. Hygiene and cleanliness used to be taken for granted in my younger days, never mind my mother's day. The present problems can be attributed partially to the  break-up of the esprit de corps that used to exist in our hospitals, whereby the cleaner and the janitor were part of the same team as the much-lauded consultant. Quite often, it was the cleaner or the janitor who had the time to speak to patients and to ensure that they were comfortable. Now we use agency nurses. I am not blaming them, but their connection to hospitals is transitory. They are rewarded through their salaries, but they do not feel part of the hospital family. That feeling, which money cannot buy, has been lost. We should also consider the more relaxed approach to visiting hospitals that has been adopted, and which I have been guilty of. Sometimes six or seven people surround a bed that is close to another bed, and visiting hours in many hospitals are no longer restricted. It goes without saying that that must cause simple hygiene problems. The issue is largely practical. As someone important once said, there is nothing to beat soap and water for your hands. Simple measures must be taken, such as cleaning the walls and floors of hospitals and ensuring that the bed linen is clean and that wards are not crowded. I want to challenge what Jackie Baillie said about the holding of a fatal accident inquiry. She said that such inquiries are adversarial, but they are not—they are inquiries. I have called for two fatal accident inquiries in my part of the country—one on the death of Pascal Norris from anthrax and the other on the death of Irene Hogg following an inspection by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education. It was not mandatory to hold a fatal accident inquiry in those cases, in which due process was followed. Both cases went first to the procurator fiscal to consider whether there should be criminal proceedings, because such proceedings, in which the standard of proof is "beyond reasonable doubt", take precedence. The process then moved on to consider the question whether it was appropriate to hold an FAI. What is important about FAIs is that they are extremely flexible. At any point in an FAI—which is an inquiry—the sheriff or the senator in charge can decide that criminal proceedings are appropriate and that the inquiry must be stopped. It might even be decided that a public inquiry should be held. Rather than a decision, an FAI produces recommendations and determinations. That is why the standard of proof is different.

With respect, I think that I mentioned that when I discussed the general problem of hygiene in our hospitals. The broader  issues might emerge in a fatal accident inquiry. Such an inquiry might not even be held, if the procurator fiscal decides that there is sufficient evidence to pursue a criminal prosecution. I understand the call for a public inquiry—that would be the first thing that I would call for, were I a member of an affected family. However, we must keep a cool head and think about how to get to the root of the problem. The best way of examining forensically what took place would be to find out first what the procurator fiscal has to say about criminal culpability. If there is no criminal culpability, the holding of a fatal accident inquiry will allow the sheriff or judge in charge to make determinations about the way forward. An FAI will not prevent us from considering all the issues; it will give us an opportunity to examine all the evidence coolly and to take a range of views on how to deal with the problem. It is in the interests of all patients in Scotland, especially our older patients, that we get to the bottom of what has been happening for a long time in Scotland's hospitals.

To ask the Scottish Government what additional training has been offered to Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education inspectors following the death of headteacher Irene Hogg in the Scottish Borders. (S3O-4018)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her answer. Is she aware of the additional training that is being undertaken by HMIE inspectors, reportedly at a spa in Pitlochry, which is designed to train them to reduce stress on teachers, following the tragic death of the headteacher in the Borders? Does she agree that that is bound to add weight to the calls for a fatal accident inquiry into the headteacher's death, which followed widespread concerns about the methods that are used by HMIE inspectors, which have been relayed to me by teachers across Scotland subsequently?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank Brian Adam for making that clear. I have sat through the entire debate and have not done so merely to pass the time. I have listened to the debate closely—it has been pretty unedifying. I am not prepared to vote against a committee report or to impugn people in the heat of the chamber. However, I make it clear that I am not content that the motion is not in two parts. Wendy Alexander has suffered enough personally and politically, so I make it plain to Parliament that I will abstain.

Will Ken Macintosh give way?

I, too, welcome Margaret Curran back. Her speech was much more engaging and interesting than those of some other members, which is unfortunate for the contenders for the Labour leadership. I also welcome the tone of her speech, although I would not cast aspersions at Alex Salmond for any alleged remarks about Margaret Thatcher. We should remember that Tony Blair declared himself an arch admirer, and that Gordon Brown had her round for tea and scones. I want to discuss the health programme. All members will welcome the vaccination to protect young women from cervical cancer. I also welcome the progress towards the abolition of prescription charges and the abolition of the horrors and nastiness of car park charges in all hospitals apart from those with private finance initiative contracts. Those charges are punitive. In addition, I welcome the move towards the democratisation of health boards. Progress has to be made on the details of the bill, but the policy is very much within the Scottish social democratic ethos, as is the policy of keeping general practitioners' practices within the compass of public services, to which Margaret Curran referred. After nine years of the Parliament, we have all matured. I am pleased to note that the Government's programme suggests—and this will be reflected in the work of committees—that we will be moving on from fire-fighting in the health service. Fire-fighting will always exist, but we will try to shift the balance in favour of preventive measures in public health. As the cabinet secretary has said, we will address the health inequalities of which we are all aware. We will save lives and promote quality of life, which will lead to long-term, substantial savings to the public purse in health care and—because of the bills that are to be introduced—in criminal and civil justice. However, saving money is not the sole purpose: the main purpose is to have a healthier and happier Scottish public. I want to consider the forthcoming health bill. In particular, I want to consider tobacco sales and the enforcement of the laws on sales to underage people. I have raised and will continue to raise issues to do with trading standards covering alcohol sales and tobacco sales to underage  people. Such sales often are prevalent in the poorer areas of Scotland. Each year in Scotland, 15,000 young people start smoking. Almost half of 13-year-old smokers and more than 80 per cent of 15-year-old smokers buy their own cigarettes. Generally, they buy them from newsagents and sweet shops. When subjected to test purchasing, between a quarter and a third of shopkeepers were found to be selling tobacco to underage customers, which raises the spectre of how successful or otherwise enforcement has been. We know that if people start smoking young, their chances of developing cancer and various other terminal illnesses are substantially increased. Quality of life is also affected. In addition, such young people might lead other young people into smoking. We must address the issue seriously. I welcome what the Minister for Public Health has said so far about the registration programme, but she knows from correspondence with me that I will continue to press for positive licensing until I hear the answers to certain questions that I will put on the record, although I am not expecting all the answers today. If we are to pursue registration, what will require to be registered? Will vending machines in airports and railway stations be encompassed? Who will be the responsible party for registration, and will there be full cost recovery? What are the projected costs? When will registration be required? What system of penalties will be put in place for breaches? Will there be an appeal process? At what level will that process be, bearing in mind the European convention on human rights? As I have said, across the political spectrum we are now much more mature as legislators, and it will be in the interests of good legislation for us to address issues in such a way that we do not end up with flawed legislation that might come back to haunt us all. My concerns about raising to 21 the age for purchasing alcohol in off-sales are already in the public domain, so there will be no shocks here. I do not think that a blanket approach is appropriate, and I am free to say that as a back bencher. It will be for the cabinet secretaries to consider whether to deal with measures in primary or secondary legislation. I am delighted that the Minister for Public Health is holding discussions with the new youth commission. I commend the success of the pilots in Armadale, Stenhousemuir and Cupar, but that is what they were—pilots. Street crime was dramatically reduced, but I suggest to the First Minister, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and the Minister for Public Health that we should build in local flexibility. There may be a role for local authorities in deciding whether to bring in such measures, perhaps only for a short period. That could be done by consensus and with the good  will of the public, the young people and the trades. If that happened, legislation might not be required. Some measures might be suitable for urban areas but totally unsuitable for the Yarrow, Ettrick and Tweed valleys. On all fronts, but particularly in relation to public health, the Government programme marks a watershed in the maturation of this Parliament. Its agenda is radical and sometimes controversial—even for me. Parliamentary committees will have a duty to test the legislation objectively and independently, so that we bring forward legislation that this Government and this Parliament deserves. That will be in the interests of all the political parties in this chamber.

I refer the First Minister to the announcements on public health initiatives on underage tobacco and alcohol sales. Effective enforcement is the test of robust legislation.  Currently, trading standards officers are the enforcers of the law on tobacco sales, but police officers are the enforcers of the law on underage alcohol sales. I ask the First Minister and his Cabinet to consider making both matters the responsibility of trading standards officers, which seems eminently pragmatic and would free up police officers for other duties.

To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with HM Inspectorate of Education. (S3O-3961)

Following concerns about the HMIE inspections process that have been raised with me and echoed by the Educational Institute of Scotland, will the minister instigate a  review of the entire school inspection process? It appears in some instances to have a damaging effect on headteachers, staff and pupils, which is in no one's interests.

Would Bill Aitken support the proposal that trading standards officers should police the sale of alcohol as they do the sale of tobacco? Would that introduce a measure of greater enforcement?

The debate is important. We are aware of the shocking statistics which, as we all appreciate, severely underestimate the reality of the problem. I am pleased that the debate is open, so that free individual contributions are allowed. I have not been whipped, so members will know that the views that I express are my own. The proposals are bold—indeed, they are controversial—but we must robustly test proposals for legislation. Many measures in the consultation paper are worthy of consideration. We all appreciate that no single simple solution exists. There is no road map, or we would use it, and we cannot simply transplant from other cultures and  countries a single solution. Scotland has different problems, of which we are aware. Measures such as reducing consumption through tackling loss-leading prices and introducing a minimum retail price are certainly worthy of consideration. I support what Ross Finnie said: if people go home with crates of beer or many bottles of wine, many of them—but not all—will be more likely to reach for the corkscrew and take that extra drink because it happens to be to hand. I welcome the survey of the incidence of foetal alcohol syndrome. The chief medical officer has made it plain that we must start with the state of our children in the womb. I also welcome support for some third-sector organisations. The Up2U project in Peebles is worthy of a ministerial visit. It involves fourth, fifth and sixth-year pupils at Peebles high school going into primary schools to talk about matters such as sensible drinking of alcohol and sexual activity. That project is successful. Members will all know about such initiatives in their patches. It is high time we considered the role of trading standards officers, which I have pursued. It is illogical that it is trading standards officers who look for underage tobacco sales, but it is the police who look for underage alcohol sales. The shops are generally the same shops, so combining those activities would be a worthy use of trading standards officers' time and would release police for other duties. So far, so good. However, I am not persuaded that we should raise to 21 the minimum age for purchasing alcohol. I ask what principle is in operation, because law should be based on principle. We propose a voting age of 16—I heard the minister's response about that—and the age for marriage is 16, which is a historic point. People must be 16 to join the armed forces, but 18 to serve in combat. We have just raised to 18 the age at which cigarettes can be purchased, and a proposal has been made to raise the age at which alcohol can be purchased to 21, but what principle is in operation? What is the age of civic responsibility? I would like members to think more widely in this debate—which should be open—than about alcohol misuse only, and to consider the age of civic responsibility. I think that I am correct in saying that, in criminal law, there is a presumption that a person can be criminally responsible at the age of eight. We have accepted that presumption, so perhaps we should consider an age of civic responsibility. People may say that the end of reducing underage drinking justifies the means—I expect that response—but that is not happening now. Half of all 15-year-olds who have been drinking in the  past week have deliberately tried to get drunk, as has already been mentioned. I can merely suspect, so I may be wrong, that raising the age at which alcohol can be purchased will not change the attitudes of 15 and 16-year-olds. There is something else going on out there in this complex issue. There are practical issues. If there is only one sales point, I presume that some people could not be employed to serve there because one must be over 21 to serve alcohol in a supermarket. I agree with Pauline McNeill that there might have to be three tills in some places. I have not been won over by the broad-bush approach that has been taken. There are rural areas in my constituency that have only one shop attached to a post office, 20 or 30 miles away from a supermarket. Such shops sell cat meat, wee bottles of wine and so on. A couple aged 20 with children would not be able to buy a bottle of wine from such shops to sit down with after their kids have at last gone to bed and the last whimper has been heard from upstairs. They would not be able to share in a glass of wine. Such issues exist in rural areas. Evidence exists, but it is in bits. The West Lothian experiment was grand, but short lived. One thing that the Health and Sport Committee has learned from various witnesses is the need for extensive and robust research before social legislation is proposed. Anyone who tries to engineer social change should do their research first. I hope that other members will be as open in their speeches as I have been, as I suspect that there is a diversity of views across the parties in the chamber. The issue is not party political and deserves robust consideration.

I welcome the interaction between cabinet secretary portfolios. I advise the minister that during the summer recess, in the light of the report and other evidence, the Health Committee will determine the remit for its inquiry into health inequalities. I note that the implementation plan will be available at the end of 2008. That information will be useful to us in timetabling. I refer to page 19 of the report, and particularly to the point about antenatal care. I recall that the chief medical officer advised the Health Committee that we should start tackling health inequalities in the womb. What initiatives is the minister considering for the identified test sites—in additional to those that encourage good nutrition, which she has already mentioned—to improve the wellbeing of the mother and unborn child?

The minister will be aware that Bridget Prentice, a minister in the UK Ministry of Justice, has allocated the extra MEP to the West Midlands. She will also know that Luxembourg, with six MEPs, has the same voting power as Scotland will have. Does she agree that it is indefensible that landlocked Luxembourg, with a population the size of Edinburgh, can vote on fishing and the common fisheries policy while Scotland cannot?

He cannot start with a "but".

As my colleague on the Health and Sport Committee Ross Finnie said, the Public Health etc (Scotland) Bill is a substantial piece of legislation that will replace legislation that is well past its use-by date. Schedule 3 will repeal acts that go back to the 19 th century and 1907. The previous Administration commendably set the bill in train—I say to Mrs Curran that I, too, can be consensual. The bill reflects how much the world has changed since the 19 th century, from a world of tuberculosis, measles and whooping cough epidemics to a world of tsars, bird flu, MRSA and indeed, anthrax, which has made a recent revisit. The world has metaphorically shrunk in size with the relatively free and fast movement of people and animals. I am speaking as a back bencher, but I want to put on record as convener of the Health and Sport Committee my thanks to members of that committee for—as someone else has said—their interesting and perceptive engagement with what turned out to be interesting legislation. We appointed an expert, but—this is no reflection on the calibre of that expert—consideration of the bill was well within our capacity. That can be seen from the quantity and quality of the amendments that we stimulated at stage 2 through robust engagement with the ministerial team. I congratulate the minister on responding so positively to that engagement. Indeed, I think that we arrived at a much more consensual position at stage 3 because the committee did its work. The recent anthrax outbreak in the Scottish Borders tested the existing legislative levers and administration processes, and they did not always pass their tests. I have said before that under the existing legislation, only one possible infected premises could be legally isolated and entered. In the Pascal Norris case in the Borders, that meant that his home could be isolated and entered. However, the real place of contamination was the village hall in Smailholm, and the only way in which that could have been isolated and entered was if the owner gave their consent—which, of course, they gave. That shows why we had to move on. The situation has now been remedied under section 22(1). One extremely important debate was on ensuring that we struck the difficult balance between the rights of the individual and the rights of society to protection from virulent disease. Many of the amendments at stage 2—and, indeed, at stage 3—redressed a balance that the committee felt was not being sufficiently maintained. I refer in particular to section 57B(4)(d)—the information is all at your fingertips—which provides for an appeal after there has been a medical examination without consent. The ministerial team asked what point there would be in lodging an appeal when the medical examination had already been done. The point would be to establish whether the appropriate criteria in those circumstances had been properly applied and then to set a bar—involving principles and criteria—that could be a guide to sheriffs elsewhere. Collectively, we won substantial debates across the whole bill, and I agree with my colleagues that those included debates on substantial issues involving civil court procedures that were a novelty to me after 12 years in practice. Finally, I come to Ken Macintosh. I want to take time to congratulate you. I am jealous: I am trying to bring forward a bill on licensing, which I hope that the minister will embrace with the same commendably positive attitude with which she embraced your proposed member’s bill. The whole of part 8 is virtually your bill. You have had great success and have shown that a back bencher with stoicism and determination who pursues an issue with ministers down the years can get results. In particular, I commend section 90C, on unsupervised coin-operated sunbeds. It is appropriate that it includes the caveat "without reasonable excuse", as someone could deceitfully use a coin-operated sunbed without the owner’s knowledge. I was intrigued by part 9, on statutory nuisances, which introduces into the Environmental Protection Act 1990 a provision on artificial light that is deemed to be "prejudicial to health". I warn the Scottish public at large that, although the provision may not pertain to outdoor garden lights in the summer, it may apply to domestic households that are becoming prone to blazing with competing Santas, sledges, reindeer and icicles. That is just a thought on this sunny June afternoon.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I congratulate Jim Hume on his motion and, possibly, the record for the longest motion lodged for a members' business debate. There is a certain irony in that when we are talking about excess packaging. The motion allows me to have a mini rant against packaging, wrapping and boxes, as I have done before. When I spoke in a similar debate several years ago, my ire fell on the ubiquitous tray of baking potatoes: four potatoes in a box, on blue card, sealed to resist nuclear attack. They still exist, and tens of thousands will be lying just beneath the earth's surface as I speak, although I am pleased to record that loose baking potatoes can now be purchased at most supermarkets. Packaging, which is wasteful of materials in production and wasteful of the planet in disposal, is a marketing tool. It is easy to lift and, like the BOGOF—buy-one-get-one-free—offers, means  that the purchaser buys more than they require. To put it another way, by the time the purchaser reaches the last vine tomato it is withering, or by the time they reach the last strawberry it is mouldy. It is that or eat the lot quickly for the sake of it, which is certainly wasteful. Then there is portion size. Many people live in single households now, but members should try to find raspberries that are not prepackaged in such a way that a single person is condemned to eat them for breakfast, dinner and tea. Not only does packaging challenge our intelligence with problems such as how to open a box of cat biscuits without spilling the contents on the floor or on top of some rather surprised cats—opening a tin of sardines with a key was a doddle by comparison—it challenges our strength. When I recently tried to open the packaging of a garden furniture set, I would have looked to a casual onlooker as if I were trialling for the Commonwealth games. When brains and brawn fail, there is always desperation and the wild wielding of knives and serious scissors. All in all, unless it is around a peripatetic museum Ming vase, crystal chandeliers or eggs—but not of the Easter variety—packaging gets in the way and is wasteful. I am for recycling bins—ugly though they are—at the street's end or in the supermarket car park, if only to remind us of how much we throw away as we empty newspapers, card, clothes and cardboard into their cavernous depths. However, they also make it too easy for us to give up on the fight to get rid of excess packaging in the first place or, worse, to think that we are seriously into the green game. The next time that we buy carrots, cauliflowers, apples and bananas, we should try keeping them loose. We will watch them rattle down the conveyor belt and, if the person at the checkout can resist putting them into those wee white bags before we place them in the canvas bags that we have religiously taken with us, we will—believe me—feel like pioneers.

The cabinet secretary might be aware of the recent abhorrent incident in the Scottish Borders in which two badgers were horribly garrotted by snares and dumped by the roadside to give the appearance of being road-kill. Given that the Minister for Environment is pursuing the licensing of snares, is the cabinet secretary in a position to say when training of additional specialist wildlife crime officers will commence? If he is not able to do so today, will he advise me shortly in writing?

I welcome the temperate and considered speech that my colleague on the Health and Sport Committee, Ross Finnie, has just made. The foreword to "Delivering for Remote and Rural Healthcare" mentions the objectives of delivering  "a strategy for sustainable healthcare in remote and rural Scotland" and "workforce planning arrangements to support the remote and rural agenda." The report contains a diagram that shows the relationships between district general hospitals, community hospitals and extended community care teams. I want to explore those with reference to an area that I know well—the Scottish Borders—against the area's background of an ageing population and the demands of that, a lack of public transport, long distances and the often historic existing facilities. Areas elsewhere in rural Scotland have a similar background. We should all welcome a strategy that is not a straitjacket. We know that the cabinet secretary's approach must have built-in flexibility to reflect the topographical differences between, say, the island communities, the Highland mainland, the Scottish Borders and other parts of the south of Scotland. There are remote places and isolated farmhouses in the valleys of the Borders, but the Borders also contain many historic communities, such as Jedburgh, Selkirk and Peebles, which have a culture of proud autonomy. It is to be regretted that, in the face of fierce local opposition, the previous Labour-Liberal Administration supported the closure of the community hospitals in Jedburgh and Coldstream, but effective, efficient and modernised community hospitals, such as Hawick community hospital and Hay Lodge hospital in Peebles, remain. Hay Lodge hospital is currently at war with the health board over a proposed reduction in the number of long-term beds—I will address that matter shortly. I have met the cabinet secretary, the board and the GP practice at Hay Lodge hospital, and it seems to me that, although on paper there is excess bed provision seasonally across the Borders as a whole and the board may be able to make staff savings—particularly agency savings; all members know that agencies are costly—by not servicing beds, there is no spare capacity at Hay Lodge hospital. I understand the logic behind the board's thinking that there will be economic savings through discharging an elderly Peebles patient to, say, Hawick community hospital, but the patient's family, the community and I do not think that doing so would be in that person's medical, psychological or social interest when they could be placed locally, within reach of their family and friends in Peebles, and not have to use public transport, which is, as I have said, poor in the area. NHS Borders is, of course, responsible for making 2 per cent savings across its budget and balancing its books—indeed, I think that it did so for the first time in the previous financial year—but I ask the cabinet secretary to  keep a watching brief on the problem, which may be replicated elsewhere. I know that she will do so. Page 18 of the report contains commitments. It states: "CHPs should review their Community Hospitals to determine which, if any, should be enhanced". The responsibilities at bullet points 5, 6 and 7 would be affected if long-term stay beds at Hay Lodge hospital closed. Palliative care, out-patient treatment and so on would be affected. On NRAC, it has been said that the previous Administration established the independent committee, but that does not mean that members of that Administration or anyone else must follow it slavishly. That is the key point. Obviously, concern exists that rural boards may be losing out. The cabinet secretary has given an assurance that no board will lose out and that measures will be phased in, and in attending to the Liberal Democrat amendment she agreed to keep things under review and to set up a standing committee. That is the way forward. If we fight such wars in the local press, we may stir up more problems—[ Interruption. ] I am trying to be straight. If we fight such wars in the local press, we may stir up more problems than may or may not exist. The way forward is through cool heads considering the matter. Indeed, the report says that the report itself should be considered against the background of the NRAC review, which predated it. We have sets of information that need to be assessed together.

I want to move on. I have only six minutes in total. On staff issues, we should consider the delays in implementing the agenda for change. That is not a Scottish Parliament issue, but it has huge ramifications for personnel in NHS boards. I think that Mary Scanlon referred to the matter. Many personnel simply do not yet know what their job description is or what they will be paid. Differentials appear to exist in NHS board areas, and many people who have been reassessed are waiting for their pay in arrears. That is destabilising. Against that background, a reassessment is having be made of allied health professionals and what they deliver. NHS Borders nominated itself to take part in a pilot on that. The cabinet secretary met me and health professionals to discuss the matter. The health professionals were concerned that things were moving too rapidly. They wanted more consultation, as district nurses, health visitors and school nurses do different jobs. Difficulties are involved, but members must face up to the fact that there is a huge lack of recruits in  those areas and there are ageing medical professionals. We cannot simply put our finger in the dyke and say, "We'll try to stop this happening." We must look for consensual solutions. I look forward to the rest of the debate and commend Ross Finnie for his temperate amendment, which is, of course, out of kilter with what Jeremy Purvis thinks, although Jeremy Purvis is out of kilter most of the time.

In 1948, I was four years old in post-war Scotland. The four of us had just moved out of a house that we shared with my grandparents and into the first of the prefabs. People grew vegetables in their gardens and ate seasonally. Mothers stayed at home and shopped every day. No one had heard of Tesco and no one had a television. Cars were a rarity and, as a child, I went into town to the co-op only twice a year, for school clothes and the divvy. Teacher gave us slates to write on and we shared reading books. I am that old. That was the world into which the NHS was born, where children—including me—contracted a range of childhood diseases that spread from street to street—and the streets were our playground. Chickenpox, measles, German measles, whooping cough, scarlatina and  pleurisy—I have had the lot, but so had my friends. One girl contracted polio and became wheelchair bound. I thought that I would get polio if I played out late, as that was my mother's brutal encouragement to me to come in. However, obese children were a rarity. When I was about seven years old, my best friend's young mother was carried out ashen faced on a stretcher and died days later from some infection or other. People were old at 40, and life expectancy for men was mid-60s and, for women, a few years older. Smoking had been positively encouraged in the wartime years and was considered a sign of glamour and maturity. Sexual activity before marriage was sinful, certainly for women, and a likely punishment was pregnancy, which would lead to the woman being shunned by the community. The pregnancy would be hidden and aborted, or the child would be adopted. How the world of the NHS has changed. How starkly the social changes accompanying those 60 intervening years contrast with the world of 1948. Those changes have transformed the pressures on, and expectations of, the NHS. My childhood illnesses are of historical interest and curiosity value, but childhood obesity is on an accelerating trajectory with concomitant threats of type 2 diabetes. Microwaved processed food may be the only meals that some children see. Sexual liberation has led to what might be termed an epidemic in chlamydia and other sexually transmitted diseases, which impacts not only on wellbeing but on fertility. I am pleased to say that old people are getting older, and they are no longer draped in shawls and wearing slippers as they sit by the coal fire. Well-charted demographic changes are shaping the direction of demand on all NHS services. Despite all that, despite the dynamic and dramatic progress in medicine, treatments and equipment—now, babies not much heavier than a bag of sugar can not only survive but thrive—and despite all the stresses and strains on its systems and personnel, the NHS, in both the primary care and acute sectors remains now as it was 60 years ago: free at the point of need. With our own Parliament, we shall continue to diverge in our policies and priorities from those in the other component parts of the UK. Free personal and nursing care, despite its ups and downs, is a credit to this young Parliament. With the eradication of prescription charges, to which Jamie Hepburn referred, we have come round full circle to the early days of the NHS. Challenges in the evolution of the NHS come with the territory. The Scottish public and politicians will continue to criticise and cherish the NHS, sometimes in equal measure. That  emphasises how significant the NHS is in all our lives, from cradle to grave and all the bits in between.

I congratulate Alasdair Allan on securing the debate and colleagues who have contributed to the debate. Petrol and diesel prices from Gala to Eyemouth and Jedburgh to Earlston are coming in at 116p and 131.9p per litre respectively. One needs only to compare that with the price of diesel in Edinburgh, which is 112.9p. The figures speak for themselves. The impact across the domestic, business and public sectors is grave indeed. As members know, for those who live in rural areas, owning a car is not a luxury. Anyone who tries to make a regular, return bus journey from Ettrick village to Galashiels, let alone Selkirk, will find it impossible to do that. As John Lamont said, Munro's of Jedburgh has given Scottish Borders Council three months' notice of its decision to terminate its contract with the council to deliver services, including the service from Galashiels to Berwick. In doing that, the company cited rising fuel costs. The irony is  that we are telling people to move away from private transport and on to public transport. Today, Borders taxi drivers won an appeal against Scottish Borders Council's limitation on tariffs. In making that decision, the commissioner cited increased fuel costs. The fact is that taxi drivers have to take account of what they call dead mileage. If a taxi driver is taking somebody 10 miles, they cannot charge for the 10 miles back again. In rural areas, taxi drivers have varied jobs and they perform many services that are performed by the public sector elsewhere. The situation varies very much from that in urban communities. Members have mentioned fishing. I am advised that it costs £4,500 to £5,000 to fill a typical Eyemouth vessel, and they are not large vessels. The fishermen have to pay that whether or not they land catch. We all know what has happened to the Eyemouth fishing fleet over the years, for reasons that do not have to be reprised. One issue that has not been addressed is the public sector. Scottish Borders Council and NHS Borders must pay the costs of the fuel that they use in their facilities. NHS Borders has said that energy costs are one of its biggest burdens in trying to manage its budget. It is as plain as a pikestaff that if a health board, in heating buildings and running hospital equipment, including life-saving equipment, is coping with 40 per cent increases in fuel bills, which must be paid, the money has to be found somewhere. The same must be true of councils, which run social and other services. Today, I have asked both those organisations to provide me with details of their increasing costs in the past three years. We have perhaps failed to note that. Gavin Brown mentioned the 2001 report by the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. That was one of those great reports that, I am afraid, gathers dust like many others in the Parliament. Gavin Brown went through many of the issues that were raised in it. One of the recommendations, with which I concur, was to consider basing vehicle excise duty on postcodes. We already have variations in vehicle excise duty, based on the size of our cars and their emissions, so it is possible for duty to be varied. The duty could be based on where the registered owner lives, which might be better than a scheme under which fuel was cheaper in Benbecula than in Glasgow, as people might make long journeys to access the cheaper fuel. We can deal with the issue in a range of ways, but it is time that it was addressed. We cannot tell committees what to do—heaven forfend—but the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee might want to consider the matter. However, I would like the Government to have a debate in the Parliament on the impact of rising  fuel costs, so that we could have a vote and find out whether members would put their money where their mouth is to help rural communities.

I declare an interest as convener of the cross-party group on animal welfare, although I am speaking in a personal capacity. Post-devolution legislation, such as the Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Act 2006 and the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004, has added to the portfolio of legislation in Scotland that gives us some of the most powerful animal welfare legislation in the world. I welcome the extension of that, particularly through the employment of specialist prosecutors and, I hope, more specialist police. Nevertheless, there was a 95 per cent increase in reported wildlife crime between 2002-03 and 2006-07, and that might be the tip of the iceberg, given that there is better reporting. We all appreciate the difficulties, to which the Solicitor General for Scotland referred, that are caused by the fact that wildlife crime happens in remote places and, sometimes, in close, small communities in which there might be tacit and sometimes even overt support for such crime. Nine of the 12 persons convicted for persecuting birds of prey between 2001 and 2006 described themselves—I emphasise "described themselves"—as gamekeepers. Add to that the lack of current full-time wildlife crime officers and ordinary officers who have received specialist training—the most recent parliamentary answer said that there were four and 90 respectively—and we can see that catching offenders is like finding the proverbial needle in the haystack, especially in remote areas such as the Yarrow, Ettrick and Tweed valleys. After his recent statement to the Parliament on snaring I asked the minister about the  enforcement of legislation. There is not much good passing worthy legislation if we cannot enforce it. Enforcement brings the perpetrators to punishment and acts as a deterrent. In 2006-07, 5,000 mountain hares—a protected species—were illegally snared. Since the minister made his statement, 13 badgers have been snared in Scotland, including two in the Borders. The incident in the Borders was particularly horrific. The two dead animals—one female and one male—were found dumped at the side of the road. Both had suffered broken necks and the strength of the wire traps had nearly beheaded one of them. The animals had put up a tremendous fight—when they are caught in a snare, they do so. They dig, fight and sometimes hang themselves on the fences. We knew that the badgers had been snared, because they make specific marks on the ground as they struggle for survival. Of course, it is unlikely that the perpetrators of that crime will be discovered. I listened carefully to what the minister had to say about snaring and the licensing of it. I know that he is considering a review of and research into it—there is no existing research. However, I cannot see that the compulsory fitting of identification tags will be policed. On a wild day in the Ettrick valley, I came across, by chance, the hounds from three hunts on a Borders hillside. The outrider motorcyclists were on the brow of the hill when some creature came to its end among the hounds, which were far away from the motorcyclists. I watched the lights blaze and descend on the hill as the bits of some animal were gathered up. No-one was policing that kill. I want to know what will change—notwithstanding the changes that are proposed in the Tomkins report, to which the Solicitor General referred. Reference was made to funding and training. We need to ensure that wildlife crime—and it will take place in the most difficult places—is properly covered so that no-one can continue to carry out those barbaric acts in the face of, and with blatant disregard for, any legislation that we have.

What plans does the Government have to encourage and expand fair trade initiatives such as that in Peebles, which is proactively supported by 35 different companies and organisations?

My question will be brief because Ross Finnie has asked part of it. I turn to the comments on the proposed legislative scheme. Minister, now that you have said that—

Minister, can you tell me—

I beg your pardon—I must learn. I will start again. First, can the minister tell me the difference between registration and licensing? I feel so inhibited now. Secondly, I believe that the scheme is to be mandatory. Will you confirm that and, if it is to be mandatory, what would be the penalties? [ Laughter. ] Have I done it again?

This is taking ages. Will the minister keep an open mind in relation to my proposals? I intend to publish the responses to the consultation on my proposed member's bill next week. Of the respondents, 58 per cent are in favour of positive licensing and an additional 7 per cent are in favour of any form of licensing, so that makes 65 per cent in favour.

My proposals are much more radical and would deal with vending machines. Will the minister give due consideration to the responses to my consultation?

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek your guidance. In the summing-up speeches, several members have been named who contributed to the debate but are not now present in the chamber. It may be that they have sought leave not to be here, but I ask you to look into that. I have always understood that those who contribute to a debate should be present for the summing-up speeches.

I congratulate Ross Finnie on his thorough and logical analysis of the issue and support the Liberal Democrat amendment. As those who recall my question to the cabinet secretary when she made her statement will not be surprised to learn, I am also very sympathetic to the Conservative amendment, especially given that one of the eight offending councils—Scottish Borders Council—is in my own patch. However, I do not wish to make a party-political issue out of this, because the council administrations that are still charging for food preparation are of various political hues. As soon as the cabinet secretary made her statement on receipt of Lord Sutherland's report, I gave Scottish Borders Council the opportunity to remedy the situation and to stop charging for food preparation. I have tried to contact the council again on the matter; unless its silence is an indication that the situation has changed, it remains one of the offending eight councils. That said, I am concerned that if repayments for all moneys so levied were to be recouped immediately, councils would raid other coffers, given that their funding settlement has already been set. The fact is that, if 24 councils are not charging for food preparation, someone must be in the wrong. In 2006, when the previous Health Committee was conducting its free personal care inquiry, half of the councils in Scotland were levying this charge. Since the committee's report, that number has fallen and we are now left with the penny-pinching and recalcitrant councils that I have mentioned. Those councils are dancing on the head of a pin and are not acting in the spirit of the legislation. The explanation that was put forward to the Health Committee was that "There is a difference between the preparation of food and assistance with eating food. If we aggregate the preparation, it becomes a volume of work that has cost implications."—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 7 February 2006; c 2553.] It was always about trying to cut costs. However, the guidance at that time, before the review, referred to  "Assistance with eating and assistance with special diets. Assistance to manage different types of meal services. Assistance with preparation of food." That was all to come under free personal and nursing care. It is as plain as a pikestaff. As for back-payments, it might be useful for those who are affected in the Borders and elsewhere to consider taking legal action through, say, a man or woman of straw. If that is successful, reimbursement might be payable through the councils' insurance cover, thus protecting public funds. That is just a thought. I point out to Ms Curran that the level of payment for free personal care was not raised until this Government came to power. On the Labour Party's amendment, I object to Margaret Curran saying that the Scottish National Party's tone is wrong—I read in the papers that she accuses us of "narrow-minded disputes". I find Labour's turnaround to be depressing but predictable. I feel sorry for the Labour Party in Scotland because it is not free; every time it tries to break free, it is pulled back. Margaret Curran stated in The Courier on 28 April that the Sutherland report "raises vital issues for the future of free personal and nursing care for the elderly in Scotland. Labour fully accepts the conclusions of the report and its recommendations." Her statement that "Labour fully accepts the conclusions of the report and its recommendations" was repeated in The Herald on 29 April. So what was one of the recommendations? Recommendation 7 states: "The UK Government should not have withdrawn the Attendance Allowance funding in respect of self-funding clients in care homes, currently amounting to £30 million a year. That funding should be reinstated in the short-term while longer-term work to re-assess funding streams takes place." The cabinet secretary referred to that. Forgive me but, to me, that is plain English and in any court of law it would be case proved.

rose—

I am sorry, but I can only repeat the words that Ms Curran said Labour endorses: "That funding should be reinstated in the short-term while longer-term work to re-assess funding streams takes place." I am no spin doctor. That is what the words say. Labour has had to come back from that position for a whole load of reasons, which we could waste time discussing, but the people to whom this matters are elderly people in Scotland. Until Margaret Curran came out with her recent comments in the papers, everyone in the chamber thought that we had agreed on the issue. It is important because the funding amounts to £30 million and there is a £40 million shortfall. Scotland's old people want that £30 million now to help to fill that shortfall. We have had problems throughout the debate on free personal care with the Labour position in the chamber—although not with the whole of the Labour Party, because the back benchers had difficulties with the position. In the debate in 2000, Iain Gray talked about targeting. I remember him saying that we must target payments "since seven in 10 of those in long term care are already fully funded".— [ Official Report , 28 September 2000; c 743.]  He left three out of 10 to pay for themselves. We had a long way to go and it was the Liberal Democrats—give them credit—who pushed free personal care through while they were in coalition with the Labour Party. That is the truth. I was here and I know that it is the truth. Malcolm Chisholm who, unfortunately, is no longer in the chamber, made heroic efforts to claw back attendance allowance.

I would like to finish my point, as I took an intervention. As has been reported and stated in the chamber, in a written answer in July 2003 Tom McCabe said: "the Scottish Executive explored the issue of eligibility for attendance allowance thoroughly with the UK Government. As a result the Scottish Executive set free personal care payments for those in care homes at a level which allowed for the withdrawal of attendance allowance".— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 17 July 2003; S2W-1187.]  It was built in that we would never get attendance allowance.

rose—

I thank Jim Hume for the name he has given me, but I do not know whether I agree with it. The issue is not just about what Jim Hume has talked about. On restricting choice, whether for varieties of vegetables or livestock, does he agree that the supermarkets now determine the range that we have, and that we are losing seed stock in the process?

I thank my colleague for introducing the debate; his speech was—as always—interesting, erudite and stimulating. I will say a little bit about the hypocrisy that surrounds the supermarket sweep before I move on to other things. I shop in  supermarkets and I hold my surgeries in Tesco in Galashiels and Penicuik. That is where the people are, and I am at the end of the conveyor belt where they come past. We must deal with the fact that, although we know the ills of supermarkets, we are—even as we say such things—in them buying our stuff. I tell Willie Coffey that there are great malt whiskies in Tesco, and it did not pay me to say that. I hope that it gets Johnnie Walker in. I am considering Galashiels as opposed to Melrose—I agree with what was said about Melrose. It is also true to some extent of Peebles. In Galashiels, we have Asda WalMart, Tesco, and Marks and Spencer Food to Go with Per Una. That combination is very useful, and the people like it, but it is devastating for local businesses in Galashiels. Already, a fashion shop has closed and the fishmonger has gone. The greengrocer saw the writing on the wall and moved to Innerleithen. The butcher manages to survive because he fills a niche in the market by presenting meat in a special way and by selling a variety that it is not possible to find in the supermarket. Having dealt with the hypocrisy, we must address the fact that there has to be a balance. I agree that planners, in considering such issues, should be looking at what is happening on main streets. We know that charity shops are taking over. They have taken over in Galashiels and in Peebles. Even more serious is the lack of choice and the wastage to which Christopher Harvie referred. Buy-one-get-one-free offers are terrible. Who wants two cauliflowers—especially if people live alone or there are only two people in the house? We know that we will throw one out. I object to prices being lifted under such schemes. The suggestion is that customers get something for nothing, but they do not—they pay for everything. Lack of choice even extends to what is grown. Years ago, I went to see tomato growers in a co-operative in Clydesdale and asked them about the tomato plants that they grow. They do not get to choose the plants that they grow—they grow the plants that the supermarkets say look pretty; that is, if the tomatoes on the vine are all red and are the right shape at the right time. That, however, is not how tomatoes grow: the ones at the end of the vine should be ripe and the rest green. It is about appearance rather than taste, so Christopher Harvie was right to say that quality is giving way to appearance. A generation of children are growing up who do not know what a ripe plum tastes like. While I am on the subject, can we have ripe, in-season plums in the Parliament for a change? The ones that we have are as hard as nuts because it is the wrong time of the year. The caterers could start doing it in Parliament: let us have seasonal  fruit. That is a serious issue, because it has driven people out of business. I compliment the Scottish National party—why should I not? About 20 years ago, we ran a campaign to bring local produce into the supermarkets. I know that because I embarrassed my sons by standing outside Asda with a placard that said, "Buy Scottish produce". My sons said, "Mum, can't we lead a quiet life?" I said, "Not when I'm around." We should move things in that direction. If we are talking about healthy eating, healthy children and healthy grown-ups, let us have local, in-season produce. Who on Earth wants to eat strawberries in December when we all know that Scottish strawberries are best and that they are best eaten in June and July?

On the issue of reconnecting with the people, with particular reference to the health service, I am mindful of Coldstream and Jedburgh cottage hospitals, which, in the face of fierce local opposition, were closed by a board full of anonymous people. Against that background, when does the First Minister intend to press ahead with the local health care bill that is set to democratise health boards and make them more responsive and responsible to their constituents?

I welcome the commitment to clarification on cross-border payments, which is an issue that is obviously of concern to people in the Scottish Borders. Scottish Borders Council is one of the eight local authorities that continues to charge for food preparation. Does the cabinet secretary agree that, while we await the legislation that will clarify the situation, those who are currently being charged may well have a legal remedy to recoup those payments? Does she also agree that, at the very least, until the new legislation is in place,  Scottish Borders Council and the other seven councils that currently charge for food preparation should act according to the spirit, if not the letter, of the current law?

A constituent of mine has drawn to my attention the substantial difficulty for Borderers in accessing routine ambulance transport when they require to attend essential radiotherapy at the Western general hospital in Edinburgh because such treatment is not available at the Borders general hospital. In her meetings with the Scottish Ambulance Service and NHS boards, will the minister make general inquiries about that situation, which exacerbates the stress to families  and patients who are already dealing with cancer and the treatment that ensues?

I pay tribute to Andy Gunn who stood out in all weathers in the first session of Parliament, to Philip Dolan and to my constituent, Robert Mackie, who all campaigned tirelessly for this inquiry. It is my understanding that those who had been told they were infected with hepatitis C were not made aware for a considerable period that they might also have been exposed to HIV. It would be a welcome extension of the inquiry into HIV if two issues might be examined by Lady Cosgrove, who I accept is mistress of the proceedings. Can she examine how soon it was communicated to those who were infected with hepatitis C that they might also have contracted HIV, and also whether partners—past and present—of those who were affected can give evidence on the possibility that they themselves might have contracted HIV through having been exposed to it?

It is fine to start from the point that, if someone poses a substantial threat to public health, their rights might be taken away, to some extent. However, the problem lies in establishing that they pose such a threat—their rights must be protected during that process.

I am sure that Margaret Curran is aware that the committee can decide to take evidence on that at stage 2 once we have  seen the relevant amendments; there is nothing to prohibit that.

I indeed speak with my convener's hat on. I know that I have nine minutes in which to speak in this worthy—but perhaps not the most exciting—debate. I promise not to speak for those nine minutes just because I have been given them. We can tell that the subject is worthy because of the level of press interest. I thank the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change for taking up a bit of this afternoon's time with his earlier statement, which has made things a lot easier for some of us. I thank the witnesses, who were focused and helpful in uncovering quite a few holes in the bill as introduced, and colleagues on the committee, who are—listen carefully—a pleasure to work with, so far. Our scrutiny of the bill was truly a collective effort, with expertise coming not only from witnesses, but sometimes from committee members—they know who they are—who gave us evidence while sitting beside us. We always know when the medical comments that are made by our witnesses are endorsed, thanks to those members and their joint nodding of heads and smiles. Not least, I thank our clerks. While I am in thanking mode, I also thank the minister for her helpful and detailed letter to the committee of 14 April, in which she responded to many of our concerns. I will touch on only a few of them—that will give other committee members something to talk about. As the minister said, the bill restates and updates the law on public health protection. It was drafted with the help of extensive consultation and participatory events that were held by the previous Executive. The result is truly a joint parliamentary effort. The minister made passing reference to some strange statutes that I did not know existed, despite my legal background, such as the Infectious Disease (Notification) Act 1889 and the Public Health (Scotland) Act 1897. Shall we be sorry to see them go? I did not know that we were still operating under the rules in that legislation. I also note the revocation of, for example, the Public  Health (Aircraft) (Scotland) Regulations 1971 and the comparable regulations for ships. We live and learn. We are seeing those pieces of legislation go not because some things are old and therefore worthless—I am living proof of that—but because lifestyles have changed over the decades at an ever accelerating pace, particularly in relation to people's mobility, be they at war, work or play. That mobility has brought with it a substantial increase in our collective exposure to disease, contamination and, notably, mutating viruses. Perhaps I should leave that area to the medical men on the committee. As we were told, a simple epidemic of measles could have serious implications for resources and health. We cannot move fast enough to identify and contain serious health threats. However, the legislative and operational tools are simply not in place at present to do so. Let me give as an example the anthrax case in the Scottish Borders, to which the minister referred and which claimed the life of Pascal Norris and is now the subject of a fatal accident inquiry. That case exposed great flaws in the legislation that we have to hand. The authorities quarantined Mr Norris's house—a relatively isolated cottage in a hamlet—but the identification of anthrax in the case took about six weeks. Officers wearing the full panoply of protective clothing were quite a daunting sight on a sunny, leafy summer's afternoon in the Borders—it was like something out of "Doctor Who". The press were there, with all their cables, as were the barricades, the police and so on. However, they were in the wrong place, because it was not at his house but at Smailholm hall that the unfortunate Mr Norris contracted anthrax. In the intervening weeks, rumours were rife that Mr Norris had inhaled the spores from skins that he had imported to make his own drums, that the stream at the bottom of his garden was poisoned and that a badger skin was the source. None of that was true. He had gone to drumming lessons at Smailholm hall with a group of other people. While drumming on drums that had been imported from Africa and which were made from wild goat skins—which are used because of the timbre of the sound that they produce—he inhaled the anthrax spores that the skins carried, and because he had leukaemia, he was particularly vulnerable. For six weeks, there were rumours and the wrong place was isolated. Not only was the wrong place isolated; the authorities—we will come to who was in charge—could isolate only one place, so they chose the house. They had to obtain a voluntary agreement for the isolation of the hall. That position will change under the bill. During stage 1, Dr Richard  Simpson highlighted the fact that it might be important to isolate places where people work. If and when such incidents occur, a clear command route must be established. Ross Finnie, who has a firmer grasp of the issue that I do—it gave me headaches—might comment on the distinction between a designated person and a competent person, on which I began to get lost. It is clear from the incident in the Borders that we must have clear lines of command. I have dealt with premises, but there are other issues. The bill engages in a balancing act involving the protection of the public and the rights of the individual. The minister is aware of our concerns, and they are not just about a potential breach of the ECHR, which enshrines the rights to family life, to enjoyment of one's property and to a fair hearing. Another issue that we raised concerned medical examination without consent. I do not agree with the argument that there is no point in going to court to appeal against a medical examination that has already taken place. Such legal action would reveal the standards that were applied. There is a want of consistency in the procedures that are outlined in the bill. In some cases, people will have to go to court but, in others, they will not. In some cases, they will have a right of appeal but, in others, they will not. That issue must be examined. I return to the anthrax case in the Borders. The disease was eventually identified by the Government's laboratory at Porton Down in Wiltshire, which, as we all know, does not lie within the Scottish Parliament's jurisdiction. That is why I raised the issue with the Minister for Public Health during her evidence to the committee and why it is dealt with in paragraph 60 of the committee's report. How could a 10-day period for the notification of a disease by a laboratory outwith Scotland be enforced? We cannot enforce measures the scope of which goes beyond our own jurisdiction unless we have an agreement with the relevant legislature. Some tests might be carried out in laboratories that are well beyond the United Kingdom's shores. The issue must be addressed. I will leave sunbeds for Kenny Macintosh to talk about, but not because I do not think that they are an important issue—in fact, the committee might have to take evidence on sunbeds at stage 2, because the present provision is merely a marker; the detail has not yet been provided. Some of the existing processes must be changed, but I repeat to the minister that when changes are made, a balance must be carefully and transparently struck between the protection of society and the rights of the individual. Whenever possible, the opportunity must be provided for an  individual whose property is to be isolated or whose liberty is to be curtailed or denied in its entirety to be represented and to have their case heard. I thank the minister, because I think that she is addressing that issue. I look forward to the lodging of constructive amendments at stage 2 that reflect the concerns that the committee has so ably identified. We learn something new every day—and not just about old legislation. I refer to part 9, "Statutory nuisances"—which, I hasten to add, does not cover politicians. Section 91(3) advises that a specified subsection of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 "does not apply to insects that are wild animals". It is important for the minister and the Parliament to know that, notwithstanding any view to the contrary that we might have, the Scottish midge is a wild animal. It is therefore not a statutory nuisance under the terms of the bill. I am sure that all the midges in Scotland are pleased to hear that.

The First Minister will be aware that there are more than 4.5 million people of full or partial Scots descent in Canada, while in Australia, there are about 1.5 million. Those figures come from the most recent censuses in those countries. What plans does the First Minister have to extend Scotland week to those nations, to tap into their undeniable good will and investment potential?

Does the member share my concern about the deterioration of evidence when there are delays?

I welcome this extremely interesting debate. The Solicitor General and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice are aware that, along with Margaret Smith and, as it turns out, many other members, I considered venturing into this area of law with a proposal for a member's bill. As many members have said, the system is ripe for review after all these years, because time has moved on.  Fatal accident inquiries are a little-known area of the law to members of the public until they become involved or try to become involved in one. I will refer to two cases with which the Solicitor General is familiar and which raise issues about the need for review. The first case is that of the death of Stuart Foster. The case raised my awareness of and, consequently, my concerns about the process, the representation for third parties—who are usually the deceased's family—and the delays in decisions on whether an FAI should be held. I can talk about the case in public because there has now been a fatal accident inquiry and because Stuart Foster's parents went public when they were not granted one. Stuart Foster died on 11 June 2004, aged 28. He had been employed in a bar and, that day, after his work, he continued to drink and drank himself to death. The death certificate said that he died choking on his own vomit and from alcohol poisoning. Because, technically, he was no longer working, a fatal accident inquiry was not mandatory. I took up the case in 2005. I have the pester power of a three-year-old at the sweeties near the cash till, but it was only after a lot of pestering—I personally talked to the Lord Advocate to ask why the case had not moved on—that we got a fatal accident inquiry. That took three years although, from what I have heard today, that was pretty quick compared to the five years that it has taken for some other FAIs to be held. Issues arose about serving alcohol to someone who was clearly intoxicated. There was a failure to deal with Stuart Foster when he slumped to the floor. Without malice, his colleagues took pictures of him lying there. They must have thought that they were in a wild west movie, because they threw water on him, but the man was unconscious with drink. He was put in the back of a car, from which his girlfriend could not lift him, and he died at some time in the back of that car. As has been said, the FAI process is a hard journey for parents. However, despite the anguish of sitting through the proceedings, they want to know what happened. I thank the procurator fiscal, who went out on a limb to assist Stuart Foster's parents. She involved them in the processes and told them what was happening, such as that the hearing had been adjourned because they had not been able to get hold of a prime witness. She was with them at the hearing, at which Mr Foster represented himself. I also thank the sheriff, who dealt with them tactfully and sensitively. Important issues arise, not least of which is the time delay and the deterioration of evidence, particularly eye-witness evidence, which I do not think anyone has mentioned yet. Given that I cannot remember what I did a month ago—that is  nothing to do with increasing senility—I would not be able to remember what happened three years previously in a case in which I had not played a major part but in which I knew something that was crucial evidence, especially if I had been distracted by doing something else. I turn to the protection of evidence. Closed-circuit television coverage was significant in the case that I mentioned. The police had decided not to prosecute, so we wondered what was going to happen to the CCTV evidence that showed what had happened. It took some time to locate it. That case told me that many aspects of FAI procedures needed to be reformed. I am glad to hear that access to legal aid is being considered. We understand that financial eligibility tests for access to legal aid pertain in various procedures. We accept the probable cause issue. Reasonableness is the difficult issue. Is it reasonable that, if people pass the tests, the state should give them legal aid? The second case, which raises different issues of public safety, is the tragic death of Pascal Norris in 2006 from anthrax. Wild speculation followed his death in the Borders. It was put down anecdotally to badgers carrying anthrax; the poisoned stream that ran near his isolated cottage; and his drum making. It brought a whole cloud of fear, panic and suspicion to all the people in the neighbourhood. I pursued an FAI in that case in the early days to expose the flaws in the processes, because things went wrong. The isolation of premises applied to his house at Black lodge, which was very remote. I went there when it was isolated; it looked like something out of the space age with people in decontamination suits, fencing, police, barricades and goodness knows what. However, his house was not the source of the infection. Pascal Norris had contracted the disease at Smailholm village hall but, to the best of my knowledge, that was not identified as the source for six weeks. Issues arose about the power of the state to isolate premises. I understand that, under the then public health law, only one premises could be isolated compulsorily. Smailholm village hall was isolated voluntarily. The new Public Health etc (Scotland) Bill, which the Health and Sport Committee has been considering, will deal with that matter. Mr Norris had gone to drumming lessons and had been playing on drums made from wild goat skins from Africa, which were carrying anthrax spores. Mr Norris had leukaemia, so he was vulnerable. To the best of our knowledge, that is how he died. The case raises huge issues, such as the importing of products from Africa that may carry  anthrax spores. There are also issues to do with processes. Who was responsible? Did the buck stop with Scottish Borders Council, NHS Borders or the police? The Public Health etc (Scotland) Bill might remedy some of what happened in the case. My colleague Helen Eadie will know that from some of the evidence that the committee has taken. I welcome the review of FAIs. I welcome the consideration of whether to have an expert assessor to try to accelerate the FAI process or the decision whether to have an FAI in the first place. I do not take Michael McMahon's position that every case in which a road accident fatality is caused by careless driving should involve an FAI. Sometimes, what happened speaks for itself. I dealt with a case where a young man was killed in a road traffic accident and it was obvious that he had run out in front of a car that was not going over the speed limit. I welcome legal representation for the bereaved and the expansion of legal aid. I wish to pick up on what Pauline McNeill said about the possibility of appealing against refusals to grant FAIs. It might be difficult to do that, given what the Scotland Act 1998 says, but the idea is worthy of investigation. However, I do not think that that would come under our remit.

To ask the Scottish Government when it last held discussions with Lothian and Borders Police and what issues were discussed. (S3O-2785)

It has been brought to my attention that eight football teams in Penicuik, involving 140 boys, are very short of funding to support payments for use of pitches and payments  to referees. Will the cabinet secretary ask in discussions with Lothian and Borders Police whether those clubs can access funding from police funding or from the proceeds of crime? If not, how can they access funding for such pursuits, which keep young people active and out of mischief?

The First Minister will be aware of the increasing number of children in Scotland who are classified as "new to English". Those children are very welcome. Does the First Minister agree that councils throughout Scotland must, when making  political choices in their budgets, ensure that those children are properly supported?

I do not want to repeat what other members have said, but I, too, congratulate Gil Paterson, who has a long track record of taking up the issue, along with Trish Godman, Sandra White and others in the chamber and outwith it. The issue, indeed, crosses all party politics. As has been said, we tend to focus on women and sexual exploitation. By all means let us do that—it is appalling and a living nightmare—but we should remember that trafficking also involves young boys and men. What concerns me is the  lack of data. We know that the reason for that is the inability to identify the people who are affected. Kenny Gibson said that it is mainly women who are affected—that might be the case but, to be frank, we do not know. I could not say at this moment how many children have been trafficked into Scotland, what they are being used for, how many men have been trafficked, how many boys or how many women. This is a first stage and this must cross boundaries. I agree with Bill Aitken about international co-operation, but I was concerned to read in the papers that were provided to us by Amnesty International that there are some countries on a white list to which, for example, women who have been trafficked and sexually exploited are sent back without question—places such as Moldova and Albania. They are immediately in a worse position with the gangs because they have spoken out and broken ranks. They are brought back and their penalty is even greater. That situation is appalling and we must deal with it. Questions have been asked about how the police system deals with women who have been trafficked and sexually exploited. I believe that they require even more compassion and help—if it is possible to say that—than other female victims. The situation is compounded, perhaps, with language difficulties, fear of further prosecution and a lack of a sense of security. These people cannot feel secure at all. Kenny Gibson is right that access to health care, support and accommodation is a major issue. Again, I have concerns about the number of children who may be in need of support systems but about whom we simply do not know. I am quite persuaded by the recommendations from Amnesty International. I suggest that we first set about collecting data to identify who the various people are—young and old. Thereafter, we can start to expose the size of the problem, reach out to the people concerned and provide them with security and compassion. We should change our relationship with other nations so that people are not sent back to where they were trafficked from, which can sometimes be the case. We should give them additional health care, and we should show that Scotland is a compassionate country that will have none of this evil trade.

I thank the minister for attending the launch of the National Autistic Society's "I exist" campaign on 26 February. Given the recognised gap in support that opens up when ASD pupils leave the school system, what is the minister's department doing to assist such adults during that period?

I apologise for intervening on the member, but, given the honourable position of the Liberal Democrats at Westminster on the issue, does he share my disappointment that not one Liberal Democrat member is contributing to the debate?

As the First Minister is aware, my consultation on a licensing bill that would require people to have a licence to sell cigarettes has closed. Mixed views were expressed on positive and negative licensing. The First Minister is aware of my preference, but does he agree that either scheme would not only outlaw rogue traders who are engaged in underage selling but help to eradicate the sale of counterfeit cigarettes that, because of their content, are even more lethal than other cigarettes?

Higher!

There is a requirement in the Parliament's standing orders, which Mr Rumbles is familiar with, that motions that members lodge for members' business debates or for support should have titles. It would be interesting if the same requirement applied to motions that are lodged for the ordinary business of the Parliament. Members would then be given opportunities for light relief. For example, Mr Purvis's motion could be called the let's give the Borders Party more room to sabotage the Waverley line motion; the forty years of Lib Dem inaction, true to form motion; or simply the bare-faced cheek motion. Mr Purvis gave a history of the Borders rail line. I will give mine. In the 40 years of David Steel rising through the humble ranks to lordly status, not one piece of track was laid. In that time, the Scottish Borders continued to slide down the economic ratings. It still has the lowest household income in Scotland. In eight years of Lib Dem and Labour government—as members have said, we had Lib Dem transport ministers in that time—not one piece of track was laid, and the economic status of the Borders stayed exactly as it was: rock bottom. Indeed, in those eight dreary years, the Lib Dems and their Labour pals did not bring to the chamber one debate on the Borders railway.

Not after the member had a go at me in the final minute of his speech. In the first months of the first session of the Parliament, I secured the first debate on the Borders railway line. I established the cross-party group on Borders rail and assisted petitioners through the parliamentary process, from the Public Petitions Committee to the Rural Affairs Committee. That culminated in the unanimous vote in June 2000—which has been referred to—to build the line all the way to Carlisle. The SNP led the way. We tried to get the line to go to Hawick, but there was no Lib Dem support for that. In those eight years, no feasibility study was commissioned to extend the line to Hawick. I know, because I kept asking about it. Indeed, efforts to include a station at Stow were blocked by Mr Purvis's predecessor, Ian Jenkins, who constantly told me to keep shtoom about Stow or the Borders would get no line at all. It took the  Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee to remedy that wrong.

No. Jeremy Purvis had a go at me in his last minute and I could not intervene—silly man. Six years after that vote, as the Conservative amendment states, Parliament voted unanimously to pass the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill in what was also a committee debate.

I am not going to allow Mr Purvis's deputy to deputise for him. The problem for Mr Purvis is that I have been here from the start, and his party's record on urgency for and commitment to the railway is etched in my memory. If the past eight years have been an example of Lib Dem urgency, I would not want them near me if there was a fire, because I would be what the Lib Dems are now, politically speaking—toast. Today, the former employee and self-proclaimed disciple of Lord Steel told the world, on "Good Morning Scotland", that Borderers are "appalled" at the delay, one year on from the previous completion date that was announced by his own party. However, at one time, the previous Administration was going to complete the railway by 2006—I know that because Nicol Stephen, the then Minister for Transport, told me so in 2004. Furthermore, Lib Dem councillors are in control of Scottish Borders Council, but are they shouting? Are they appalled? Councillor Jim Hume will, no doubt, tell us what his Conservative coalition partners are saying.

David Parker, who was elected by that coalition as council leader, is delighted. Jim Fullerton, Scottish Borders Council's executive member for roads and infrastructure, is delighted. For "appalled" read "delighted". The constituents who come to see me at my surgery in Tesco in Galashiels are pleased, but still wait like doubting Thomas for proof—track on the line. Who can blame them after 40 years of Lib Dem false promises and false dawns? They are dismayed by Mr Purvis's deliberate—and somewhat spiteful, I have to say—negativity, but what is new in that? In his 2003 election material, Mr Purvis said: "We will start construction of the Waverley Line." Where is his wee bit of track? Is it OO gauge? Is it going round his living room? The document continued:  "In the next term of the Parliament Jeremy will give the area a strong voice and working with Liberal Democrats in the Parliament will ... ensure the Waverley line is constructed".

I am in my last minute. [ Laughter. ] Mindful of the need for Mr Purvis to get Penicuik votes, the document added: "and campaign for a light rail serving Penicuik". Penicuik should not hold its breath. In a spirit of compassion and because spring is in the air and the sun is shining, I will settle for the title "bare-faced cheek".

I congratulate Kenny Gibson on securing the debate. As he said, eating disorders are complex diseases and it is likely that they result from a combination of factors, events, feelings or pressures rather a single cause. Someone may be unable to cope at work or university or may have family stress. Sometimes eating disorders are related to seeing skinny models on the television, but that is an anecdotal, stereotypical view of the issue that is not always well founded. Eating disorders are less about food than about control of what is happening in people's lives. I found it useful to look at some case studies on the internet. In one case, someone went on a diet during their second year at university. Within a year, she was not allowing herself to eat from any food groups and was living off grapes. She was living a horrible life, could not eat and was starving; all that she could think about was food. She could not get out of bed, go to university or hold a conversation—she just wanted to die. Why should someone deny themselves the basics of life? Those who are affected do not know the answer to that question, which has a mixture of psychological, emotional and physical components.  As Kenny Gibson said, physical changes take place as a consequence of eating disorders. We have to consider the illness as emotional, and to acknowledge that thinness is an outcome rather than the start of the problems. The girl whom I mentioned says that she thought that she "had to be thin to be loved, and to be successful and to be cared about. Thin is so much more than a tiny, four-letter word to anorexics." For her—although not all anorexics are like this—it meant "love, caring, success, popularity, intelligence". To some extent, that is reinforced by images in society. One needs only look at the Oscars, where some of the women could barely be seen when they turned sideways—that is not true of me. The image that is presented is that that comprises beauty and success, and that if someone is not like that, they are not successful. The girl changed her whole life—she did not get up until 3 o'clock in the afternoon, because that meant that there was less temptation to eat. She had a structure to the day of going to the shops to fill in time—anything, rather than sit down and eat. Her eating patterns became very formalised—she had the same plate, and the same amount of the same salad, at the same time every day. Whenever she digressed from that, she thought that she had failed. It was about control, and the food was controlling her. Another girl was described as an atypical anorexic—she was rather flattered at the time, as she thought, "Well, if I'm going to be anorexic, I won't be ordinary." The point is, however, that all anorexics are atypical—each one is different. That woman had a great life, a happy marriage and a good job, but for some reason she began to lose confidence. A tiny little knock happened in her life—she did not get to travel to a job somewhere that she wanted—and that seemed to set off a chain reaction. She started to live by rules, and the rules became about the way in which she dealt with food. She had fixed objectives—the case studies frequently come back to that—that were utterly non-negotiable, and she was negotiating with herself. She was negotiating with the fridge and the larder, and her hunger. She did not allow herself to do something else that she wanted to do, because that would give her a sense of failure. Before I move on, I will mention the other side of the story. The father—her carer—watched it happening. He says: "Anorexia is a secret illness that thrives on deception and half truths ... Anorexia defies logic. Its very essence, the idea that you can exist without food, turns all ... assumptions on their heads."  His daughter, who was anorexic for 11 years, was lying to him all the time about whether she had eaten. I have seen people in the Parliament—other members have probably seen them, too—who are not eating properly. They look as if they are eating food, and they fill a plate, but they just take little bits. There are one or two who are very thin indeed. Many years ago, when I was in practice in the sheriff court, I remember a young woman who was appearing as a lawyer before the sheriff. The rest of us were so worried about her that we spoke to the sheriff, who discreetly spoke to the law firm that she worked for. People do not like to interfere if they see somebody in that state, but we were driven to that because she looked so fragile. We must consider what we can do to deal with the issue, which is complex. I welcome the north-east facility that is being introduced as a consequence of the work of Grainne Smith and the report by the former Health Committee, to which Mary Scanlon referred. We must also consider the day-to-day arrangements, such as educating GPs. The point about school nurses is also important. Neighbours and friends should not be frightened to raise the issue when they see that someone they know is not just looking a nice size 10, but is sliding right down to a size 6. We should not back away from such issues, as I stressed in the example that I gave. I am grateful to Kenny Gibson, who has provided detail on the matter and done a lot of research. In my own patch, the Borders, which has a population of more than 110,000, there is hardly any activity. I do not believe that there are no young women there, especially in the 15-to-25 age group, who are either anorexic or bulimic and suffering from an eating disorder, and who need help. The subject is extremely interesting. The trouble is that when a committee publishes a report we think that we have dealt with the matter, but we have not. The Parliament needs to address that issue.

I attended a successful Borders tourism exchange event in Kelso on Tuesday, as did my colleague John Lamont—this is not a coalition. As the cabinet secretary is aware, tourism is a key growth area in the Borders. Has he had any contact with this fledgling partnership? If not, will he or the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism meet representatives and me to discuss ways of assisting this development?

I remind the minister and the Presiding Officer that I led the first debate on the reinstatement of the Borders line as far back as November 1999. In 2000, having debated a motion from Alex Johnstone's Rural Affairs Committee, the Parliament voted unanimously for the line's reinstatement. It is a bit rich to hear Jeremy Purvis and Des McNulty asking us when we will start building the line when their parties had eight years in which to lay track. I welcome the end to the speculation. At least security has now been brought to the local councils. There was wild speculation from Opposition parties represented here that—

There was speculation that the railway line would not proceed. I welcome the ending of uncertainty for those whose homes have been blighted over the past eight years, when not one bit of track was laid.

This is an extremely interesting debate—I keep scoring things out and changing my mind as I am persuaded by one or other of the arguments. As members all know, and as the cabinet secretary has reminded us, we have an ageing health service that is 60 years old and no longer fit for purpose. We have demographic changes; a higher expectation of service—quite rightly—among the public; and extraordinary developments in surgery, medicines and treatments. On the other side of the balance sheet, diseases that were once unknown, such as HIV, put huge stress on the system. The health service is a great tanker of a vehicle. We require it to change tack, and we have to put time and thought into how we go about achieving that. The Kerr report was an interesting start for the Parliament, although some of us read different things into it, as did the public. In particular, to quote from the executive summary, Kerr said: "we need to ... develop options for change WITH people, not FOR them". However, I do not think that that was the public's experience of the various closures that took place. I am, of course, thinking back to the past threat to close Ayr and Monklands accident and emergency  units. I will not dwell on what the scrutiny panel had to say on the matter, but I will come on to what was felt elsewhere in Scotland—on my own patch, when Jedburgh and Coldstream cottage hospitals were closed. Regrettably, the matter is now done and dusted, but there was a huge campaign by local people to keep those hospitals open. They were very precious to them, and they were greatly used by the elderly for respite care because people could stay in the middle of the community. People marched in a bid to keep the hospitals open, they sent petitions here and so on. However, when it came to the day when Borders NHS Board sat down to make its decision, I do not think that anybody in the room did not know, in their heart of hearts, that the decision had been taken many months previously. Notwithstanding impassioned and articulate speeches in favour of keeping the hospitals open, they were closed. The interesting thing was that people were sitting round that U-shaped table whom nobody knew. They were from NHS Borders. I am not saying that the individuals are bad people, but nobody knew who they were until that day, yet there they were. Margaret Curran spoke about people making major decisions that affect communities at their core. Nobody knew those people, and nobody had elected them. They were responsible for the decision, but not in a face-to-face way, before their electorate—if I can put it that way. Given how people felt, the word "consultation" became somewhat sullied currency. It was just about boxes getting ticked. Afterwards, an appraisal was carried out, which said that the processes had been gone through properly, but people could not argue against the substance of the decision. I very much welcome the debate, which I think is timely for the Parliament, eight years down the line. We are a small country of 5 million people. We can be much more in touch with our communities than Westminster can be, with its greater representation. I congratulate Bill Butler on the work that he did on his member's bill, which I supported. I have listened carefully to what has been said about the genuine difficulties on the path towards—I hope—some form of direct elections to our health boards, and I acknowledge those difficulties. They include the mechanics of the elections and turnout issues which, as members of the Parliament, we know about to our cost. There is also the potential hijacking of elections by self-selecting interest groups—goodness me, there are a few community councils on the planet like that, some of which we might say are not very representative. There must be a careful balance between lay people, professionals and councillors, bearing in mind the  cross-cutting provision of care in the community, including social work, housing and the whole shebang as we know it. However, one cannot say that we should not proceed because of all that. As a back bencher, I can say that I am quite attracted to Margaret Curran's piloting idea. However, if one was to go down that route, because of some of the issues that Mary Scanlon raised about remote and rural areas, we would have to choose several different areas with different problems, including logistics and local campaigns and issues. If I were to pluck three areas from the air, I would choose a really remote area, a rural area and an urban area, and we could see how the pilots operated in practice. There would be no egg on anybody's face; there would be no difficulties in that regard. I was going to make a comparison involving a pilot boat pulling a tanker. Anyway, we would be able to step back and measure progress. This is not a party-political issue. Everyone knows from experience in their constituencies that the status quo is simply not an option. As has been said, people must feel that they are properly involved in what happens in their health service. We do not expect lay people to make clinical or medical decisions, but we expect them to be able to have a say in what suits their community and what works for them. I am pretty sure that, if we had had a different health board in the Scottish Borders, with a different balance, we would have kept at least one of our little cottage hospitals, which were happily located and which were doing a super job with respite care. However, that possibility was not open. As I have said, I welcome the debate. I am actually enjoying it. It is interesting to have such an exchange of ideas, instead of just trying to head-butt one another politically.

Trams.

As the minister is aware, not all of those who represent and live in rural areas support snaring. I am implacably opposed to it and consider it to be an indiscriminate and inhumane activity. It is certainly not a party-political issue. The minister referred to bad practice. Given that there are only two full-time wildlife crime officers in Scotland, one in Grampian and the other in Lothian and Borders, how does he intend to police the snaring that he will permit? Moreover, will he review the operation of the legislation that will be introduced to ensure that the chamber can fully debate its effectiveness?

To ask the Scottish Government whether the digital switchover in the Scottish Borders will signal a review of the Scottish Government's policy on providing public information broadcasts to people in the south of Scotland currently served by Border television. (S3O-2177)

I thank the minister for a full and interesting answer, but does she agree that, following the recent announcement of plans to carve up Border TV news and current affairs and to generate output for the region from Newcastle, the time has come to ensure that the people of the Borders and, indeed, the whole of the south of Scotland are provided with programmes that are produced and made in Scotland? Although the changes that have been announced for Border TV might be regrettable for staff in Carlisle, the proposals represent an opportunity to enhance programming for the south of Scotland, by making it more relevant to the people there.

I welcome the First Minister's comments about the additional £9.5 million for GPs should they accept the deal, which is distinct from the situation in England, where GPs will be penalised if they do not accept. What do patients groups say about the negotiations?

As the minister is aware, I am pursuing the establishment of a specialist neurological nurse  post in the Scottish Borders, which would include provision for people with Parkinson's disease. Has the minister been contacted by NHS Borders about the proposal?

It is always delightful to listen to hypocrisy in the chamber, and the hypocrisy of the Liberal Democrats knows no ends. They kept the Labour Party in Government for eight years. They pretended to be in Government here and in opposition there. Unfortunately, they are now properly in opposition and do not know how to do anything. They lodged no substantive amendments to the budget—no amendments at all. Putting the Liberal Democrats aside for the time being—where they deserve to be—I turn to the Labour Party, whose members are banging on about the vulnerable. As Alex Neil rightly said, the vulnerable have lost through the raid on charities and the lottery funds. The vulnerable are losing, in UK terms, £175 million in extra VAT to the Exchequer as a result of recent price rises. During the Labour Party's eight-year reign there was a 60 per cent increase in council tax. I hope that Labour members are not trying to justify that—consider that a Scottish pensioner gets less per week than Lord Foulkes gets for one day at the House of Lords. The budget is set against one of the worst settlements. I quote Professor David Bell: "The 2007 CSR is the tightest spending review of this decade." He said that it is also clear that the increase in Scotland—

Certainly, Lord Foulkes.

I know how much you get, Lord Foulkes, because I am on your case, and I will soon be telling you how much it is from spring to December—

I will be telling Lord Foulkes. In relation to the tight spending review, it is the first time that a Government has managed to recoup from Westminster the £900 million end-year finance that was left. Previous governments have never tried to get that money. That has brought good things for places such as the Scottish Borders, where Borders Council—which is not a Labour or an SNP council—has agreed to a freeze on the council tax. The reduction in ring fencing is much welcomed. The extra money for buses in rural areas is a positive step, as well as the rates reduction for the small businesses that are the core of the small towns, villages and rural communities. That is excellent news, in addition to the extra police. I want to focus on health matters, because of my role as convener of the Health and Sport Committee, although I am not speaking as convener. Some excellent initiatives have been introduced, such as extra money for the budgets to address drug, alcohol and smoking problems. The Health and Sport Committee had a successful session with the cabinet secretaries in charge of various portfolios, so I say to Margaret Smith that there is an endeavour in the Parliament—after eight years of learning curve for us all, including ex-ministers, back benchers and committee members—to try to make a real difference in those areas. Members across the chamber must welcome that.

That was a long intervention. I point out that the budget contains  £85 million over three years to reduce harm done by alcohol; £3 million a year on further action to reduce smoking; and an £11.5 million a year programme on diet and physical activity for health and to prevent obesity. Those figures are hardly opaque; indeed, they are as clear as crystal. The Parliament must welcome moves, at last, to phase out prescription charges. After all, at the moment, people with multiple prescriptions have to pick and mix what they can afford. Members must also welcome the reprieve of the accident and emergency departments at Monklands and Ayr hospitals. Of course, that raises the issue of direct elections to health boards, which Bill Butler has pursued and which I hope will soon come before the Parliament. As in Jedburgh and Coldstream—where the decision, made under the previous Administration, cannot be reversed—people in Monklands and Ayr felt that, when the closures were taking place, there was no accountability. They simply had no idea who was making those major decisions. I very much welcome the budget and the fact that sportscotland—and, indeed, sport in general—is now part of the health portfolio. Instead of just firefighting, as we have done for eight years in the health budget, we can now attempt early intervention and prevention measures. Such an approach has been long delayed and is very welcome. I would have thought that, by this stage in opposition, Labour and Liberal Democrat members would have learned to lodge positive and useful amendments to the budget. They did not do so in committee and no evidence was taken on any proposal. The fact is that they simply missed their opportunity.

Mr Rumbles, do not heckle from a sedentary position. You are wasting your breath.

Those are encouraging words from the minister, but they come too late not only for the Pringle workers but for those at J Barbour and Sons in Galashiels, where many jobs were lost recently. Will the minister's officials enter into discussions with Scottish Enterprise to determine  whether some of the public funding that Barbour received can be retrieved? Does he share my concern over the company delaying contact with Government and enterprise agencies? Given that it did not make contact before announcing the closure, will he ask his officials to determine whether, if the company had sought help at an earlier stage, support could have been made available to it to avoid the job losses?

As we all know, over the centuries  Scotland has exported many of its able and young, whether willingly or otherwise, and, regrettably, it continues to do so. It is therefore ironic that young and talented people are migrating here—they are very welcome. Many migrants come from eastern European countries. As Margo MacDonald said, they are making their home here temporarily, or they are making a permanent future here and multiplying the diversity that is modern Scotland. We do not want their talents to be wasted or misdirected. Even here in the Parliament, we can be served by a waitress who was a lawyer, an accountant or a medical practitioner. We do not want that to happen. Plumbers and roofers are as scarce as hen's teeth—I do not mind where they come from. On the subject of teeth, we could do with many more dentists, as well as medical practitioners and nurses. However, as Jamie Stone said, issues are being raised for local authorities. Pressures on housing and schools can cause tensions within communities, so we have to address those pressures. The same is true for health boards, which might find that they need more maternity units and so on. We must address those serious issues sensitively with the migrant population and the indigenous population, who must be taken along. We must not let some of the anecdotal evidence that we hear out there become facts that cause tensions. Migration is not just an urban issue, as Jamie Stone rightly said. I am delighted to say that, in Galashiels, we have a Polish delicatessen, and my newsletter is translated into Polish. Indeed, this Saturday, the main street in Galashiels will be closed to celebrate Chinese new year—complete with dancing dragon—and it will be great fun. There are serious issues about how we assist migrants. Margo MacDonald made the important point that we do not have data on the number of migrants or their skills. Migrants should not feel that that would be something sinister, as if we were some police state that wanted to find out about them. We really need data so that proper provision can be made.

That is an important point. We must recall that many migrants do not come  from what might be called a relaxed democracy such as we have enjoyed in Scotland. I want to raise three quick issues in the dying minutes of my speech. My first concern is that advice be given to migrants on how they may not be paid less than the minimum wage. Accommodation and board are sometimes scooped up into migrants' wages so that employers exploit not only the migrants but the local workforce. We have had incidents in Scotland of local workers losing their jobs to migrant workers and both lots being exploited by unscrupulous employers. Secondly, I have reservations about Gavin Brown's suggestion that we should actively recruit in migrants' native countries. I have a certain unease about poaching skilled people and medical professionals from countries that may well need them. There is an issue about such people coming here voluntarily, but a balance must be struck. I would not like us to take from countries that are in need. Thirdly, another issue that must be addressed in tonight's short debate is disclosure and enhanced disclosure. I have raised the issue in the chamber on previous occasions. In many eastern European countries—through no fault of the migrants—there are not sufficient police records on those who come here to work in sensitive areas such as social work and care homes. Whereas indigenous employees are subject to strict enhanced disclosure checks, it is not possible to carry out such checks on immigrants. That can cause tensions. I know that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice is considering how we can iron out those difficulties.

I thank Lord Foulkes for bringing the debate to the chamber. As a consequence of all the coverage of the issue in the press and elsewhere, I registered online as an organ donor. The website is so busy that there is a delay in sending out the paperwork. I turn to consent, which must be clearly and freely given and informed, and the individual concerned must have capacity. I appreciate that that subject is for another debate, when we have time to discuss the issue. Someone who knows far more about the issue than I do said:  "It is true that organ donation rates in Spain are considerably higher than in Scotland, but this is not entirely the result of a law of presumed consent there. There is a much higher rate of acute brain injury in Spain, mainly owing to the higher number of road accidents, and there is a much more developed transplant infrastructure in place, including transplant co-ordinators in every hospital. These factors alone are responsible for much of the increased availability of organs for transplant. Other countries in Europe also have a policy of presumed consent, but some actually have lower rates of organ donation than Scotland. When examined in detail, the evidence that a simple change in the law to presumed consent would improve donation rates is not convincing ... It is also unthinkable that a dead patient's organs would be taken without family agreement, and hence discussion with the deceased's family after brain-stem death will need to continue as before. It is vital that this discussion is informed by accurate knowledge of the patient's wishes expressed before death. This can only be guaranteed by a compulsory registration of patients' wishes, whether for or against donation. Anything less than this form of balanced registration would be invalid as an indicator of the deceased's wishes, and could not reasonably be used to inform the discussion with the deceased's family which will still need to take place, even with a change in the law to presumed consent. I write as a senior intensive care clinician with almost 30 years experience of dealing with brain-stem death and organ donation, and who strongly supports organ donation and transplantation. I urge extreme caution before proceeding with a change in the law to presumed consent." Ian Grant—a consultant surgeon at the Western infirmary—sums up the situation far more eloquently than I could have done. I share other members' concerns. I was extremely moved by the speeches from Cathie Craigie and Nanette Milne, but we have to look very carefully at the issues that are raised in the debate, including the issue of capacity. If the aim of presumed consent is achieved and the organs of a person who was silent are removed, how do we know whether that person could have given any consent whatsoever, particularly if there is no family to talk to? We have to take families with us. I remember Ian Grant putting forward his case in a previous debate—indeed, he went further in saying that having presumed consent would make his job harder. That is why he carefully suggests two registers of persuasive—not determinant—quality. We all want more organ donation to take place, but I urge caution in how we move forward. I respectfully ask members to listen to the words of a man who deals with these matters, day in, day out.

Like Hugh O'Donnell, I make the careful distinction that must be made between forced marriages and arranged marriages. I tell the minister respectfully that I understand that new legislation might not be required. Section 2 of the Family Law (Scotland) Act 2006 deals with the grounds on which marriage can be void, which include a lack of consent, and is already operational. In the interests of faster progress, I suggest that the cabinet secretary discusses with his Cabinet colleagues establishing a discreet helpline, with the help of the various communities, for women who might be in danger because they are in the circumstances to which Margaret Mitchell referred.

To ask the First Minister what concerns the Scottish Government has regarding the use of "flying" doctors brought into Scotland to provide out-of-hours care to patients. (S3F-464)

I thank the First Minister for his response, and particularly for the contact that has been made with NHS boards, which ultimately have the duty of care.  Will the Government undertake to include the use of flying doctors in the current review of general practitioner work patterns, which are the result of a United Kingdom contract that has been inherited from the Labour Government, and endeavour to remedy the problems relating to the number of flying doctors who come to Scotland? Those problems have been highlighted by recent disclosures that are of great concern to the British Medical Association and Scottish patients groups.

Is that how you make a declaration of love?

I promise not to use any metaphors. If I  may parody Shakespeare, the quality of metaphors in this chamber is greatly strained. I want to address the serious point about the review of the budget process. I have spent eight years in the Parliament, three of them as a convener—that seems to be my destiny—and I agree with the points that were made in the previous budget debate that committees are not well served by the current budget process. The difficulties that subject committees in particular experience in considering the budget hinder their attempts to assist not only the Finance Committee but ministers, as some ex-ministers have said to me. We all know that. It has nothing to do with who is in Government now or, indeed, who was in Government previously. A review should be conducted as soon as possible. The process must be addressed. Some of the difficulties that the Health and Sport Committee has encountered relate to where we get evidence about whether the money is being spent properly. I note what Mary Scanlon said about tackling drug and alcohol abuse. I do not want to cast blame, as I want us to make progress, but, as I said during an earlier intervention, the last report on expenditure on tackling drug misuse was published in 2000. How could the Health and Sport Committee possibly know, in all fairness, whether the money was going in the right direction, even given the fact that there are now cross-cutting responsibilities between cabinet secretaries? That was not the first time that the committee came across problems with the issue of whether we had enough evidence to examine expenditure. At one point, the Health and Sport Committee received evidence that there was not enough research into whether money is making any difference whatsoever. The committee has recommended that there be evidence-based spending. I recommend that other committees do likewise. The main Opposition party is talking a great deal about vulnerable children. I quite agree with the points that have been made in that regard, but there is a huge issue involved. I refer to the part of the Health and Sport Committee's report that deals with unmet needs and harm. Catriona Renfrew, from NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, gave the committee striking evidence on the current expenditure. She said that, although £50 million is being spent on drug and alcohol services, only 10 per cent of drug and alcohol misusers are being reached. The fact that 90 per cent of drug and alcohol misusers are receiving absolutely nothing from those services gives us a sense of the scale of the problem that faces whoever is in Government. On the hidden harm that is caused to children in such families— Duncan McNeil and others have taken up that serious issue—she said that about 20,000 children live with either a serious alcohol misuser or a serious drug misuser. That is only in her area. She said that only half of those children get any social care or additional family support services. In her area alone, therefore, 10,000 children are vulnerable and at risk. Day to day, they live on the edge in a way that none of us will ever appreciate or experience for ourselves. Catriona Renfrew even suggested that the figure for Scotland as a whole could be 70,000 to 80,000 children. We simply do not know the number. We need more evidence if we are to be sure that the Government is directing its money to the right places. The sooner we rescue those children from the situation, the more likely we are to break the chain of drug and alcohol misuse that, in some cases, has gone down through three or four generations. If we were hard-hearted, we could say that long-term spending on the matter would be money well spent because money would be saved to the public purse in justice, education, health and other things, never mind the reduction in human misery. I welcome the Cabinet's collective approach. In a previous debate, we said that tackling drug and alcohol misuse is not easy. If it was easy, we would just pinch the road map from somebody else and use it. We must try to get to grips with the problem. It is possible to do so. Because we are a small country, we have a small number of health boards and there is much more collective action. It is easier to tackle the problem in a country of 5 million people—I certainly hope that it is. I welcome the linking of health and well-being. Too often, we have seen that the health service is simply firefighting, so I welcome the fact that we are now looking to align the sport budget with the health budget to increase people's health, which also crosses over to education and healthy eating. However, that approach creates difficulties for committees in considering the budget.

I have not addressed that issue, but I am discussing one of the biggest budget spends by the Government, which is the health budget. I am pointing out that, even though we have been here for years, we lack evidence not just on outcomes, but on where we should spend.  In my final point, I touch on the amendment that was proposed by the Labour members of the Health and Sport Committee. The amendment that they suggested was not put forward at any other stage. It was not put to the ministers who gave evidence. It was to move money out of the health information budget for the health boards. We could not possibly support the proposal to take £12.5 million from that particular budget and put it somewhere else, because we did not know where the money would be taken from. We know what the effect would be. We know, for example, that screening programmes, general practice information technology programmes and all of that would have gone, because that was stated in a parliamentary answer. I suggest to members that, if they are on a committee—

—they should get some evidence to convince—

Does the member share the concerns of the Health and Sport Committee that the most recent review of the effectiveness of expenditure on drugs misuse was in 2000? The information has not been updated in seven years. The committee simply did not have the facts before it to consider the expenditure properly.

Before I put my question to the cabinet secretary, I assure Mike Rumbles that I moved seats not because I wanted to sit further away from him but because the microphone on my console is not working. Will the cabinet secretary ensure that we sustain our rural village halls, which are the centre of communities, particularly for older people? Indeed, many MSPs use village halls when doing their constituency rounds.

To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions have taken place about the Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Act 2006. (S3O-1781)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that many dogs are abandoned on our streets in the festive period, which is not so festive for them. Does the power exist to make regulations with reference to section 18 of the 2006 act? If so, will his office consider making regulations on, or investigate the possibility of, microchipping dogs so that irresponsible dog owners can be traced and held responsible under that section for the duty of care to their animals?

I am interested that Mr Martin attacks us for moving towards a local income tax. At no point during the eight years in which the Labour-Liberal coalition was in power did the Executive deal with the council tax's penalisation of low-income families and pensioners. Paul Martin should be ashamed of himself for trying to prop up the council tax.

I will not spend too much time dealing with the Labour Party's self-denying ordinance on the embargo on addressing committee reports, which is quite right. However, as I said in the intervention that Derek Brownlee allowed me to make, that does not prohibit members from making points in the chamber. The guidance that I issued in that intervention was comprehensive. I can think only  either that the Opposition does not understand parliamentary procedure or that some cunning tactics are at hand and the Labour Party intends to reprise its arguments in two weeks' time. If today has been a trailer for the budget debate, I will not be sitting in on Labour members' speeches, because they will not be worth a candle. Having taken my advice, Margaret Curran made a point about reallocating money from IT to health inequalities. That is a fine idea but, if she looks through the Official Report of the Health and Sport Committee, she will see that the committee has taken no evidence on that matter. However, the committee is the place in which such a proposal could be tested on witnesses and put to the cabinet secretary. A debate in the chamber is not the place for such a proposal to be raised, as its quality cannot be tested. Nothing about such a reallocation appears in the Official Report —members can check it.

The specific proposal is fine, and the committee might have agreed to it, if it had had the opportunity to test it on witnesses. For example, we could have asked about the impact on the IT budget and how the money would have gone towards tackling health inequalities. However, we were unable to ask such questions because, as the Official Report shows, no one gave the committee the opportunity to test the proposal. It is not sufficient to make a proposal in a debate without evidence to prove its value. I will deal with three issues: the clarity of the budget; the timescale for committees; and ring fencing. Clarity of the budget has been an issue for a long time. It is enlightening to look back to the Finance Committee's previous draft budget report. Annex C, which is the Communities Committee's report to the Finance Committee, says: "The Committee is of the view there is insufficient transparency in the draft budget in relation to the CUP ... Whilst the Committee recognises that the autumn and spring Revisions include departmental transfers to and from the CUP, it notes that there is a lack of consistency and insufficient detail in the recording of the transfers". There are many comments about lack of clarity. Further on, we read a comment from the Education Committee: "The Committee noted concerns that a number of points in last year's budget report had not been fully addressed, and expressed disappointment that, despite its continued concerns, the budget has been presented in the same format."  The parties who formed the previous Administration have a cheek to come here and complain about the budget process when it was within their power for eight years to assist the parliamentary committees, which said, time after time, that they could not see where the money was coming from or where it was going to.

Let me make some progress first. In the Finance Committee's report, the Education Committee also said: "The Committee expressed continued concern that the budget continues to be presented in the same format. The Committee would welcome any refinements in budget presentation that would make tracking of performance and expenditure and budget scrutiny in general more meaningful." Hear, hear. That is why the Parliament needs a proper review process, as proposed in the Conservative amendment. The Finance Committee's report also contains this comment from the Enterprise and Culture Committee: "members are not convinced that the current budget process and the type of information provided to subject committees enables scrutiny of cross-cutting expenditure". The Health and Sport Committee fully agrees with that view. Therefore, in relation to the alcohol and drugs budget, we asked three cabinet secretaries to come before us—the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth—and made them present to us and to members of the Local Government and Communities Committee and the Justice Committee how their budgets were being fully utilised to address a matter that we all agree is a major scandal across Scotland and which costs this country a great deal of money and causes a great deal of human misery. We have tried to tackle the scrutiny problem that has been identified. Indeed, in the very format of the Cabinet, there is an endeavour to streamline and tighten that process. There are many comments in the previous Finance Committee's draft budget report. Even ministers in the previous Administration would agree that the committees' job is not only to hold ministers to account but to assist them, through detailed examination of witnesses.

I have only one minute left. One does not need to go far to hear about the problems of ring fencing. Pat Watters—no doubt  he will get the black spot from Labour now, poor man—said: "I am entering this debate, not on a party political basis, but in an attempt to provide reassurance to vulnerable members of our communities and those who make provision for them that removal of ring-fencing can lead to better, more effective services - not, as some claim, the opposite". I could not have put it better myself. Ring fencing is a lazy way of handling funding. It looks smart and it makes it look like people know what it happening, but neither of those things is true. I will never forget the words of one of the previous Executive's many health ministers, Malcolm Chisholm, who, when asked by the Health Committee whether his investment of £10 million in cancer services had made any difference, said that he did not know. With outcome agreements, we are trying to make a difference by giving local authorities the democratic control that they deserve. Goodness me, how would we feel if Westminster told us what to do with our money in our various portfolios? We would be screaming with anger, which is what local authorities were doing. The Labour Party should be ashamed of attacking its own councillors.

There is certainly confusion about the situation. There is absolutely nothing to stop anyone in this chamber from making a point about what they think ought or ought not to be in the budget as long as they do not attribute it to a committee. They can make comments in this chamber that they made in private, but they must not say what a committee discussed in private or what it reported. That is an end to the matter.

I note that, in relation to the reduction in staffing at sportscotland, the minister made the important point that there will be no compulsory redundancies. Has he discussed that with trade unions? If so, what is their position on the proposals and the impact that they might have on their members?

Here at the back of the chamber, I have been hearing choristers as well as Malcolm Chisholm.  As a politician for the past eight years, I have had much to thank Border TV for, as I suspect other south of Scotland politicians have. Its reporters are always in the garden lobby. When we see one of our kin giving an interview, we drift past, trying to catch wind of what they are up to and what they are saying. I say that with great affection for Border TV, which is important to the democratic process. I say to Elaine Murray that people may think that she is smaller in the flesh, but they think that I am less frightening in the flesh—well, not everybody thinks that, but some people seem to. This is an important debate, but there are no easy solutions. As many members have said, Border TV has had the difficult task of serving not just twa but three maisters—England, Scotland and the Isle of Man. It has not always succeeded. I accept that there has been an heroic attempt to work the system in recent years since news bulletin opt-outs were introduced, but that has not been wholly successful. I understand why Borderers sign petitions to keep Border TV, but many would say that they would also like to see STV programmes. They do not see football matches and other programmes, such as Government information programmes—I know that they are not the most exciting things—or my occasional punditry, which could be a good thing or bad thing. The point is that people are missing out on STV network materials. I am grateful to John Lamont for lodging the motion, but I do not know whether I wholly agree that merging Border TV news and STV news would be a wholly bad thing, although I am not an expert. As Ted Brocklebank said, the status quo is probably not an option—indeed, it has not been an option for some time given the new democratic situation in Scotland, as people in the Borders often hear about legislation and other issues that pertain only to England and not to Scotland. Constituents of mine who have affection for Border TV have frequently raised that issue with me. They think that there should be modernisation. Borderers can make submissions to Ofcom, but they can also make submissions to the Scottish Broadcasting Commission so that we can consider the significance to the Borders of having proper local news and access to commercial networks. We should consider the success of local newspapers. The circulation of national newspapers is falling off, but local newspapers have strong constituencies and loyal readerships. In the same way, television stations have very loyal viewers. That loyalty could be galvanised and used. There could be either a Border TV station in the Scottish network or STV could have a strong opt-out. For me, the STV opt-out in respect of east and west news bulletins does not work. I might want to know what is happening in the west or the  south if I am in the east. I do not want to miss the news from elsewhere. There are solutions. There is no point in simply fighting for Border TV as it has been, although I am sure that John Lamont is being more progressive than that. I do not think that that would satisfy the needs of Borderers who want to see things other than their local news. I repeat that the way forward is for people to make submissions to the Scottish Broadcasting Commission. I encourage Borderers to do so.

I do not know why that is always said just before I get up to ask a question, but there we are. Quite rightly, the cabinet secretary stressed the commitment to break the link between early-life adversity and adult disease and she referred to the cross-Government early years strategy. The Health and Sport Committee heard evidence that between 70,000 and 100,000 children in Scotland live in households with substantial alcohol and drug problems. In Glasgow alone, 40,000 children have been identified as at risk, but only 20,000 have any form of support. How will the Cabinet address the difficulties in identifying the tens of thousands of children in need of intervention? Further, once those children are identified, how will resources be made available to meet their needs?

But they never built it.

To ask the Scottish Executive what efforts are being made to control the spread of infection in ambulances, given reports in England that ambulance crews are complaining about a shortage of cleaning products to sterilise their vehicles properly. (S3O-1503)

The cabinet secretary's answer will reassure not only passengers and patients in ambulances, but ambulance crews themselves. Through appropriate agencies, will her department continue to monitor the cleanliness of our ambulance fleet to ensure that an all-encompassing approach is taken to avoiding what we hope is avoidable—the spread of MRSA?

I put on record my thanks to all those members who signed the motion and to colleagues who have stayed behind, especially those who are contributing to the debate. The motion continues a campaign that has been pursued for decades by family members and survivors and which has accelerated since the inception of the Parliament. I made a contribution as long ago as May 2005, when I recounted the story of one man's survival in hellish, oily seas that were being strafed by German fire intent on igniting the oil, all within sight of Saint-Nazaire on the French coast. Here is a short extract from a survivor's account of that moment: "During this time the enemy continued to strafe the men on the ship and in the water. They also began dropping incendiaries in an attempt to light the leaking oil. At some point a seemingly crazed man tried to remove my life jacket, but I manage to fight him off. Even with the jacket on I stayed as still as possible in the water hoping this would improve my buoyancy. I believe I was in the water for around two hours. At one point a large dog swam by. I briefly held onto it because it was swimming away from the ship and I thought it would take me with it. I believe it had belonged to some refugee Belgian children who had been on the boat. They did not survive." At least 4,000 souls perished that day—civilians and refugees; men, women and children. Included in that number were hundreds of Scots. I sent members a roll-call of the Scottish dead, so far as we know them—men from Ayrshire, Dumfriesshire and many other parts of Scotland; men from their teens to the age of 60. They came from many ranks and from all regiments—the Royal Engineers, the King's Own Scottish Borderers, the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, the Royal  Artillery, and the field bakery. Mercifully, they never knew that 17 June 1940, the day when they embarked on the Lancastria, would be their last day and that their names would live on in the roll-call of the dead. Their deaths were silenced by a D-notice so as not to undermine the propaganda of Dunkirk. That was understandable at the time. After the passage of nearly 70 years, why should it matter to the remaining survivors in Scotland—some seven in all—and their families? It simply does. I can do no better than to quote the words of Fiona Symon, who is in the chamber today. She is the daughter of Andrew Richardson, who was aged 27 and in the Royal Army Service Corps when he lost his life. She told the Public Petitions Committee: "My mother died in 1992, still very bitter and sad that the country seemed to regard my father's life and the lives of the thousands who died with him as being of less value than the lives of others who died in world war two and who are remembered with honour. In many cases, the survivors suffered more than any of us. They had to live out their lives with horrendous memories and nightmares. Today, they would have been offered counselling; instead, they were forbidden to talk about the sinking. As a result, they are forgotten and ignored ... No shame was involved in the disaster: it did not have to be covered up, but desperate times called for desperate measures. The shame is in the silence and cover-up of the past 67 years ... Unless someone has walked in the footsteps of the victims, survivors and their families, they cannot even begin to understand the depth of the human tragedy involved, the effects of which continue to this day."—[ Official Report , Public Petitions Committee , 6 November 2007; c 230-31.] Fiona Symon said those words in presenting a petition that seeks the commissioning of a commemorative medal to put the record straight. Westminster, to this day, has refused to designate the remains of the Lancastria a war grave, which would offer sanctity and protection to the site. The Ministry of Defence has refused to issue an official medal, so the survivors and their families seek redress and justice from their own Scottish Parliament. There is an important distinction to be made between the words "official" and "commemorative". The MOD's website states: "The term 'official' could be used to describe any medals for which Her Majesty, or her predecessors, has given approval. Only these medals are permissible for wear on a service uniform. Commemorative medals are those which have been produced by organisations or private medal companies"— or indeed the Scottish Parliament— "to commemorate particular branches of service or areas of operations." As some of us know, issuing commemorative medals is well within the compass of the Scottish Parliament. I know that because I have one, and I did nothing to get it.  The Lancastria Association of Scotland has made progress in establishing a memorial in the grounds of the Golden Jubilee national hospital, because the ship, which was originally a cruise ship, was Clyde built. There is a memorial service each year in Edinburgh to commemorate the unsung dead, and there is also such a service in Saint-Nazaire. Yet there is still no official recognition of the individuals who were involved in what was the worst maritime disaster in Britain's history. The history books have largely bypassed it. Outside the chamber today is an exhibition on the Lancastria. I ask members in the chamber and outside to pause even for a short while to inform themselves of the rightfulness of the campaign and to sign the book of remembrance if they have not already done so. There is a photograph to be auctioned to raise funding for the memorial site. We have a new Scotland, a new Government and a Parliament that has outgrown its infant clothes. There is no legal impediment to commissioning a medal for the few hundred people who desperately seek public recognition of their loss. I am sure that the people and the mayor of Saint-Nazaire, together with the Parliament, could provide the means and the method to commission those well-deserved medals. I therefore ask the minister to meet me and survivors' families in the Lancastria Association of Scotland to take the proposal forward in the spirit of the words that are woven into thistles at the head of the Parliament's mace, which represent the aspirations of the Scottish people: wisdom, justice, compassion, integrity. Those words should inform all our actions, especially those that we take on such a solemn and long-deserving cause.

I welcome what the minister said, particularly the proposal to introduce a minimum allowance of between £119 and £198 per week for all carers, whether they are approved kinship carers or what we would know as foster carers. The emphasis should be on the word "approved". I raised this issue in my members' business debate a few months ago: I said that at least 1,700 additional foster families are required because of  the patchiness of provision—Mary Mulligan referred to that—and because many kinship carers receive nothing at all. Payments are long overdue and I am sure that they will be welcomed by everyone in the chamber, the organisations, the carers and across all parties. With the recognition of status will come the need for training, assessment and appraisal. I am sure that we all support that. I also welcome the fact that the minister said that he will look at the manner in which those things are done because, in that members' business debate, I drew attention to the fact that training sometimes takes between six and eight months. Of course we want training and appraisal to be rigorous, but they should not deter good people with good intentions. I am pleased, therefore, that the quid pro quo for the allowances will be training and support. That is necessary. In the earlier debate, I welcomed the minister's £4 million package for training, advice and information for foster carers and approved kinship carers. He may have answered this question, but where will that money be directed? I refer him to the briefing from Citizens Advice Scotland, which will be expected to do quite a bit on the issue. I took it from the minister's answer that the money will come through normal local authority funding. I will listen to what the minister says but, given that the benefits system may be the main support for foster carers and approved kinship carers, the interaction between allowances and benefits is an issue.

I suggest that more oversubscription may come the minister's way because the Citizens Advice Scotland briefing states: "It is estimated that as many as 10,000 children have more informal arrangements." Such people may never have thought of themselves as kinship carers. They may provide such care simply because it involves the family or because they are in extremis and in an urgent situation. The issue is quite complex. The issue is also complex with regard to reserved and devolved matters. If someone who is on benefits takes in a child and, after approval and training—they are not paid, but receive benefits—gets an allowance as an approved kinship carer, what will happen to their benefits? What is the  interaction? Will they be worse off? I do not know the answer to that. In the final part of my speech, I want to refer to other issues that have been raised. On the business of supporting families—I speak from 12 years' experience as a family practitioner—the welfare of the child is of course at the centre of everything we do in legislation and in policy. If possible, the child should remain within the immediate or extended family, as that is a far better thing. Evidence suggests that children who stay with their extended family—with granny or granddad or with an uncle or whomsoever—are, at the age of 16, more likely to remain in the same household than those who are put into more formal foster care. Children in more formal foster care are more likely to break loose and to want to be independent, sometimes with the predictably sad consequence that they repeat the cycle of their own childhood. All kinds of benefits can be gained if the child stays within the family, although there are times when that is highly inappropriate and, frankly, the child needs to be removed, either temporarily or permanently. As Jeremy Purvis mentioned, Children 1 st has a family centre in Selkirk. I was very impressed by its family group conferencing, of which I saw a demonstration recently. The child is at the centre of the whole programme. When the child who is finding things difficult at home is asked which people should be involved in discussing what should happen, they sometimes make very strange choices. For example, neighbours might be brought in of whom the rest of the family might not necessarily approve, but the process is consensual. Such conferences take place before any of the professionals are involved. I commend the programme to the minister, if he has not already seen it. I note that 50 per cent of the funding for that family group conferencing project comes from statutory sources and 50 per cent comes from the voluntary sector. I believe that we need to move towards better funding for such programmes, even if it means only shifting the balance so that it is 60:40. I put that bid into the pot now. We have a great deal of sympathy for that kind of front-line work which, because of its focus on early intervention, might prevent children from going into any kind of foster care.

Is the member aware of Children 1 st 's family group conferencing programmes, which deal with the immediate and the wider family in just the circumstances that the member has described?

Short, sharp and to the point—George Foulkes will never be that. Unlike the churlish comments of the former people's party, I welcome the 50 per cent reduction next year in the cost of prescription prepayment certificates, from £98.70 to £48, with further reduction each year until charges are abolished. I understand why the First Minister does not want to compile a list of chronic conditions but, given her remarks about the Parkinson's Disease Society and the hard choices that people currently make about which prescriptions they will purchase and which they will not, will she advise the chamber with which other organisations she has had discussions about charges for prescription prepayment certificates?

I thank the cabinet secretary for clarifying that the data were at no time in the wrong hands and for mentioning the strenuous efforts that were made by the staff at the SPPA offices in Galashiels. Given his warm words, I ask him whether he will visit the SPPA to thank the staff personally. The fault apparently lay with FedEx.

This is one of several such debates that I have taken part in—indeed, I once led for the Scottish National Party on this topic. I recognise the progress that has been made both inside and outside the Parliament during its lifetime, through policy, legislation and debates such as this, as we seek to minimise, if not eradicate, the misery of women and their children caused by the violence that pervades their homes, which ought to be places of security, sanctuary and loving care.  Today, I wish to focus on a specific group of women and their children that I feel has not had the attention of the Parliament. They are not specifically described in either the motion or the amendment and no parliamentary questions or motions referring to them have been lodged, as far as I can determine, in eight years of devolution. They are the women who are trapped, silenced and imprisoned, with their children, in forced marriages, as referred to by Gil Paterson in connection with the UN declaration. Let me emphasise clearly and emphatically the distinction between arranged and forced marriages. In arranged marriages, the families of both spouses take a leading role in arranging the marriage, but the choice of whether to accept remains with the individuals. The crucial element is the consent of both parties. The reality and horror of a young woman confronting a forced marriage—although it can sometimes happen to young men, too—was brought home to me when I read the account of a young woman called Inshana. When Inshana was a virginal 16-year-old, little more than a child herself, two uncles arranged a marriage with her first cousin, who lived in Bangladesh. Her mother agreed to the wedding and, a few weeks later, she met her husband to be. This is part of her account. "It was like a bad dream. He was 49, bald and weighed 19st. He waddled into the room, and the smell of his stale body odour almost made me ill. He sat next to me, and I saw that he was sweating heavily. He kept wiping his face with a handkerchief, looking me up and down. My uncles were laughing and joking, and when they all started to talk about the 'marital bed' I felt physically sick. As soon as my cousin left, I threw myself onto the floor and begged my uncles not to make me marry this man. Their answer was to drag me into my bedroom and stub out a cigarette on my foot for being disobedient. They were both upstanding members of the Asian community yet they treated me like a piece of dirt. My virginity was a mere bargaining point for them - while my happiness and future was irrelevant." The young woman was taken to the registrar's office. The registrar knew that there was something amiss but, she continues, "My aunt, sitting next to me, grabbed hold of my leg under the table and pinched my skin with her long nails. She warned me, in Bangladeshi, 'If you say anything we will kill you' so I remained silent - rigid with fear." With the help of another aunt, the young woman managed to escape. Her story is one of many. She was both brave and lucky. For others, the future is bleak. It is a flight full of dangers, sometimes culminating in death, through so-called honour killings, in which there is, of course, no honour—only killing. Girls who do not escape often suffer a life of sexual abuse and domestic violence. Of course, children will tether the women to those violent homes.

The member has anticipated where I am going. I do not know how large the problem is. The forced marriage unit that was established by the Home Office deals with 250 to 300 cases a year. The problem affects children and adults of many races and religions—Christians, Hindus, Muslims, Jews and Sikhs. The Home Office deals with cases in the middle east, the western Balkans and Africa. In England, the Forced Marriage (Civil Protection) Act 2007 received royal assent this year. Such legislation is not necessary in Scotland. Section 2 of the Family Law (Scotland) Act 2006, which came into force last year, made a minor change in our marriage legislation. It inserted into the earlier legislation a section stating that, among the "Grounds on which marriage void" are cases where the party "was capable of consenting ... but did so by reason only of duress or error." Legislation is only a small and final part of the solution. I suggest that education is a preventive tool, as is early identification of those at risk, so that sensitive and supportive intervention can take place. For those in homes in Scotland today who dare not speak out for fear of retribution from family and the community, we must put in place secure routes out of these dreadful marriages. We must face head on any false accusations of our being racist, because every young woman—some of those involved are barely past their childhood—or young man should have the right to choose their partner and be offered the protection of the state if that right is under threat of abuse. They deserve no less than any other citizen.

I, too, welcome the cabinet secretary's statement, particularly what she said about multi-agency planning, which is not only essential but is common sense. I also welcome the special attention to the mental health services. Paragraph 8.3 of the framework document is headed "Isolation, voluntary quarantine and social distancing". It states: "While it might be possible to isolate initial cases and quarantine their immediate contacts, such an approach will become unsustainable after the first few hundred or so cases." How can the cabinet secretary reassure patients who are already in hospital that they will be safeguarded if isolation is not viable?

Given that the Borders railway business case is partly predicated on house building in the travel catchment area, what progress has been made on housing development?

The First Minister will be aware of the recent questionable motivation of Peter Hain, the United Kingdom Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, in his drive to reduce the number of Scots on incapacity benefit. Does the First Minister agree that that will put additional strain on our allied health professionals, such as physiotherapists, and that, should the proposal proceed, Westminster should return to Scotland any share of benefit savings that flow as a consequence—which the Liberal and Labour parties singularly failed to do when we introduced free personal care, and Scotland lost £40 million?

Will the minister consider locating local tourist information centres in many of our rural post offices? As I learned from my consultation on post offices earlier this year, it is already a fact of life that they are used for that purpose. Not everyone is on the internet, and many a traveller turns up at Innerleithen post office to find out what local places tourists should visit. Will he consider that suggestion as a route through which the Parliament can protect our sub-post office network, which apparently is to be axed? [ Interruption. ]

I thank in advance the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing for agreeing to appear at a joint meeting of the Health and Sport Committee, the Justice Committee and the Local Government and Communities Committee to answer detailed questions on their budget lines for alcohol and drugs issues, which cost the Scottish taxpayer several billion pounds per annum. I welcome the additional investment for children at risk, better support for drugs rehabilitation and funding to tackle alcohol abuse. Will the cabinet secretary focus specifically on the 70,000 or so children who, as the Health and Sport Committee learned today, are living in households with substantial drug and alcohol problems? Without intervention, those children may well become fourth-generation addicts.

As many other members did, I knew that the bid had been successful when I saw my three formidable parliamentary sisters dancing together. Does the First Minister agree that, apart from stimulating competitiveness at grass-roots level, the games provide a unique opportunity to increase the fitness of this generation of our children, at a time when obesity and the consequential increase in, for example, type 2 diabetes are of such concern? I advise the First Minister that the Health and Sport Committee, subject to the agreement of its members, might want to be involved in the project, as appropriate, given that the project impacts on the committee's remit.

In her discussions with Scottish Gas, will the minister consider the introduction of prioritisation in the scheme for people with special health needs, such as those who have been diagnosed with a terminal illness?

I say to Mr Henry that it is as plain as a pikestaff that, when a party has the slimmest of majorities, it will not be in a position to deliver all its manifesto pledges and will have to seek consensus among the various parties in the chamber. I am astonished at how much we have achieved in 100 days, especially when we compare it to how little was achieved in the previous eight years.

I have only just got started. There is a whiff in the chamber today. Is it of self-righteousness, political opportunism, hypocrisy or plain raw sabotage? I think that it is a cocktail of all four, stirred up with the raw grief of political bereavement. I say to Labour members that they should get used to it—they lost. That is what is at the back of all this. Let us picture this. The Scottish public vote and no party gains an overall majority. A deal is done, Tavish Scott—a deal, a marriage of convenience. The Lib-Lab pact is born. Eight years pass. Budgets come and budgets go, and subject committees scrutinise and then report to the Finance Committee on a very short timescale. Eight long and weary years pass, but the processes remain the same, as everyone is saying. Events at Westminster, beyond the control of this chamber, delay the SNP in coming forward with its planning for budgets. It is no fault of this Government that that has happened. But now let us picture this. After the 2007 election, Labour has a majority of one over the SNP, but it does not form a coalition. Pinch me, but I do not think that, in such a case, we would be having all this posturing. I do not think that we would have a motion from that Labour Government like the motion that we have before us this morning. And if the Liberals had again gone into a coalition—although, thank goodness, not with us—would we be having this debate? Of course not. As many members have asked, why, if the process is so flawed, did the previous Executive not approach the Procedures Committee in eight years? The coalition had a majority, so it could  have changed the rules for the scrutiny of the budget.

Let me remind the chamber that we are all minorities in here. Let us park the political posturing.

Begging does not become the member. Let us consider committee scrutiny. The Health and Sport Committee will be taking evidence on one budget line—on alcohol and drugs—from a range of witnesses such as alcohol and drug action teams, health boards and local authorities. We will have a budget adviser. That is the proper way to help a committee to scrutinise a budget. Together with the Local Government and Communities Committee and the Justice Committee, we are planning a joint meeting at which three Cabinet ministers will be before us. We will consider drug and alcohol budget lines, we will consider how the money is spent and we will try to ensure that money is not put into silos. We will consider how we can remedy this dreadful scourge affecting individuals and communities. The approach will be innovative. We will be taking the Government at its word and saying, "Okay. You say that you are cross-fertilising and are discussing issues across boundaries, so come before three committees and let us take evidence so that we can report to the Finance Committee." The idea came from the Finance Committee itself, which is well aware that the scatter-gun approach to considering the budget—the approach that we have been trapped in for eight long and weary years—did no service to the Parliament or to the Finance Committee. We agree that the scrutiny of the budget is not satisfactory; it never has been. However, Labour's suggestions for change are just opportunism. If Labour members feel that the scrutiny of the budget should be better, they should seek changes through the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. Those changes should be binding on all Governments, now and in future. The changes should not be just for the coming weeks. Let us have more light and less heat. If Labour members want to sharpen the focus and to shine a light into dark corners of the budget, they should leave it to the committees. The balance of power in the committees is not with the Government but with the other parties. I give members on the Labour benches this advice: they lost the election, and they have to acknowledge that they have no divine right in this  chamber or in our council chambers. They should acknowledge that before they lose all dignity and waste the Parliament's time. To the Liberal Democrats I say this: please stop sulking with that torn face.

Will the member get on to it, then?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am concerned that Wendy Alexander is not speaking to the motion in hand. Can you please advise on that?

A sinner who repenteth.

I am lodging a motion—sign it.

I do not want to get into a legal debate, but Nigel Don may find that arbitration is sometimes a contractual obligation, meaning that if there is a dispute someone must go to arbitration. They could be described as willing at the point of contract, but they are contractually bound to go down that route.

Did the member specialise in construction law?

The lawyers come out of the woodwork at the mere mention of the phrase "alternative dispute resolution". When I was listening to the speeches that have been made, I calculated that 14 per cent of members here are former practising solicitors, and there are other members with law degrees. I am a former civil court lawyer and legal aid practitioner and I agree with much of what Margaret Smith said. In dealing with family and contract law and delict cases, the last place that a lawyer wants to take a client to—believe it or not—is a court. First, the lawyer has to erase from the client's mind the idea that they will get justice. Although they might get justice if they are lucky, what they tend to get is a result. One wants to get that result out of court if at all possible. In many cases, particularly family law cases, one must try to resolve as much as possible either by mediation, to which I will return later, or simply by negotiating with an experienced family lawyer on the other side. When dealing with money, both lawyers generally know where they will end up. Sometimes issues to do with the children cannot be resolved, parties dig their heels in and, probably against their solicitors' advice, end up in court. The client has to understand that, even if they are successful in court and they get an award of expenses, that will not pay their legal costs. Certain costs are not met by judicial expenses so they end up out of pocket. That puts to the side stress and the time that is sometimes squandered in litigation when matters could have been resolved much more quickly. On behalf of my former profession, I say that many lawyers try to get their clients to a resolution sooner rather than later and it is sometimes the client who makes the lawyer continue along the road to court. Many years ago, mediation was recognised as an essential asset to family law, but it can be used in other areas too. Our language is slipping a bit between "arbitration" and "mediation" this morning, but the two terms are distinct. Arbitration is still a  litigious forum and, at the end of proceedings, a decision is imposed on one of the parties. In other words, there is a winner and a loser. Mediation is quite different—the disputing parties arrive at a mutually acceptable solution. As Margaret Smith put it so well, mediation is a "journey of the willing". In other words, there is no winner or loser; both parties agree and perceive themselves as winners. If a resolution cannot be arrived at through mediation, I regret that the parties have to go to another forum such as a tribunal or court. As I have told the chamber before, many years ago with my Justice 1 Committee convener's hat on, I went to Baltimore with an esteemed group of people, among whom I must name Lord Justice Clerk, former head of the Scottish Legal Aid Board, the Scottish Law Commission and the Sheriffs Association, and Ruth Wishart. What did I do with them on that flight to Baltimore? I will tell members now that they are gripping their seats: I went to learn about mediation in that place that Bill Aitken referred to so disparagingly as the "other side of the pond". I was on my way to Maryland where a large mediation network has been functioning for an extremely long time. I have become that terrible thing, not just a disciple but a convert and indeed a proselytiser. I saw in Baltimore how mediation can operate at all levels. The mediation approach was driven by an extraordinary state governor who was also head of the judiciary. I offer some examples of how it worked. We went to a street where the children had been kicking and throwing balls and playing basketball and had damaged some cars—the usual stuff that happens in Scottish streets. The neighbours were disputing what had happened, the children were being blamed and a rammy was going on. The neighbours, youths and children were brought together to see how the situation could be resolved. It was resolved by providing the children with an area where they could play and engaging them in competitions that were assisted by several of the neighbours. The result was that cars in the street were protected and children were able to play elsewhere. That was a street-level situation. My breath was taken away even more, however, when we went in our transportation—into which we piled every so often to see such places—to a very smart area in Baltimore and a glassy, glossy building with landscaped gardens in which deer wandered about, to be told that it was a commercial law firm. We went inside to find a whole department dedicated to mediation in large commercial contracts. We are talking about family mediation, neighbour dispute mediation and major mediation in commercial contracts when millions of pounds are at risk. They recognise in Baltimore  that they save money in the long run by reaching agreements. I am a great believer in mediation because, as well as saving money for individuals and corporations—for which we pay at the end of the day—it saves the public purse money by sustaining a court system in which we do not need so much activity. Of course, it also saves on our legal aid bill, particularly our civil legal aid bill, which is under so much stress. I commend to the cabinet secretary mediation as distinct from arbitration. I am very happy to take him with me to Baltimore to see how mediation works. While we are on the plane—I want to go business class, please—I will ask him to consider using a term other than ADR, because it is not exactly zingy.

Does the member share my delight that, after many years of the union, the Scottish legal system remains so distinct?

Although I have not practised for eight years, I was a family lawyer and I understand that sheriffs may direct parties to undergo mediation to resolve difficulties with child contact before they come to court.

I welcome the statement from the cabinet secretary, which I have now had the opportunity to scan—I was not listening to the radio this morning. I welcome the proposal to end the right to buy for new-build homes. I agree that, at the time, the right-to-buy policy was a good idea, but its consequences over the decades have been such a lack of social rented housing that people have been driven to buy, because they have no other option. I am delighted to see balance being restored. My question on the right to buy relates to the "Firm Foundations" document, which says that the right to buy a new-build house might continue, as Jim Tolson mentioned, when a tenant is moved as a result of demolition or refurbishment of their existing house, for example. I ask the cabinet secretary to consider the position of an elderly couple who have secured the right to buy over a three-bedroom house, but who, for medical reasons, are required to move to a new-build one-bedroom house. In such circumstances, would their right to buy transfer to the new property?  Perhaps a right of pre-emption for the housing association or local authority could be built in.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the latest position is on the handling by the Crown Office of the anthrax outbreak in the Scottish Borders which led to the death of Pascal Norris. (S3O-983)

I do not need introductory music. I thank the Solicitor General for his answer, which provided much more clarity than I have had in correspondence from the Crown Office. It is difficult to see how a prosecution can be made when most of the available information shows that—unfortunately and tragically—Mr Norris came into contact with contaminated badger pelt. Why were the samples that were taken from Mr Norris sent to England for analysis, which caused a six-week delay? I have received information from a senior veterinary level that those samples could have been tested equally well in Scotland, which would have reduced the timeframe for confirmation and the potential risk to other individuals.

Oh!

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it not incumbent on the member to speak to his party's amendment?

I will deal briefly with the Macphail judgment to get it out of the way, because the whole debate surely cannot focus on that. I want to discuss whether it would have made any difference if someone from the present Government had made a submission. I am looking at what Lord Macphail said. There was a great deal of argument about how far the courts could go in looking at what was said in Parliament. Lord Macphail said: "While a court in construing legislation must always seek the true intention of the legislature, it cannot ignore the natural meaning of clear words the legislature has chosen to use. The language used in section 1 and the Regulations is in this respect unambiguous." I must ask: once all the heat and smoke has died down, would it have made any difference? I say that the answer is no—from the judge's own words, the legislation is clear and unambiguous.

I have only four minutes. The legislation may be clear and unambiguous, but it is obviously not doing what we thought it would do when we started the process a long time ago. Everybody was so proud of the legislation at the stage 3 debate in 2002, when the then Minister for Health and Community care said: "Through the bill, we will ensure that nursing care is free for all who need it, regardless of the context—free at home, free in hospital and, for the first time, free in nursing homes."— [ Official Report , 6 February 2002; c 6094.]  That was what we meant. We did not mean assessments with months of delay or waiting lists. At present, some 5,000 people are on waiting lists.  We did not foresee that, or a court process in which the law was not as clear as we all thought it was. All members thought that the legislation was clear and unambiguous. Well, it is clear and unambiguous, but not in the way that we meant it to be. The intention of Parliament has not been reflected in the legislation, therefore we require to remedy that. We will have to consider whether we do that by amending primary legislation. We will have to examine whether the situation can be dealt with in guidance, which is also not doing what we thought it would do. Everybody thought that they understood what help with food preparation meant—help with a tin opener or tattie peeler if someone could not use one, or help with putting the gas on and off if they could not do that. We thought that that was what that meant but, wilfully or accidentally, it has become much more complicated than that.

No. That point is reflected in Lord Macphail's judgment—which I think has already been quoted by Mary Scanlon—in which he states that the legislation is "complex" and that there is a labyrinth of material. That is a bad sign in legislation. I hope that we will welcome Lord Sutherland's review of all aspects of the issue. I know that other aspects have been raised by members of the Health and Sport Committee, who will respond to the review commission themselves. We want to ensure that the legislation works. If it does not work, it fails not just the Parliament but our vulnerable and frail elderly people. That is the last thing that any of us wants. Let us move on from the nit-picking and get back to the issue at hand: delivering what we intended to deliver.

I thank all those members who have stayed behind for this important and timely debate and, in anticipation, I thank those who will contribute. I look forward to there being a Government debate on the subject, possibly once the national fostering and kinship care strategy has been published. I understand that that strategy will be published before the end of the year and I trust that the issue will unite the Parliament. We already know of the consensus between Wendy Alexander and the First Minister on kinship care—it is not often that we can call that pair consensual. I applaud all who have fostered or are currently fostering children, whether officially or unofficially, as in the case of kinship carers. Foster carers are a special breed of people and I can safely assert that they do not do it for the money. Some receive no money at all, while others receive a wholly insufficient payment at the vagaries of their local authority. There is a debate to be had about private provision—there are some 22 agencies—versus public provision, but that is not the focus of my debate. What a tough and demanding job fostering is. All of us who are parents can testify to the trial of parenting—from the troublesome two-year-old to the testosterone teens. I ask members to imagine what it would be like if the children in their charge were not their own children, and might also be damaged and therefore very demanding of their time, patience and emotions. Let us be clear: fostering has changed dramatically over the decades, both in the task itself and in the reasons for a child being placed in the care of another. Although it is still centrally  important that a foster carer make a child or young person part of their home, the changing reasons for children becoming looked after—which, sadly, are nowadays quite often a consequence of parental alcoholism or drug addiction and of an accompanying chaotic lifestyle that can include multiple partners—mean that the duties and skills required of the foster carer are of a professional nature. The foster carer becomes the anchor for the troubled child, but the carer must be supported by a team, including respite carers to give them a bit of a break, social workers, medical staff and so on. Yesterday, those points were brought home to me in a discussion with Tanya Bradshaw, a foster carer from the Borders. She had newly completed a foster placement in which the child had first been introduced to drugs and alcohol by his mother when he was only eight. He was placed with Tanya when he was 12. Fostering him was not an easy task. I have been told of children aged two who were already severely damaged emotionally and behaviourally before they were placed in care. Whether society should step in sooner is a debate for another day, but we should have it. Becoming a foster carer is no easy matter. I understand that the process—from an initial inquiry through Disclosure Scotland, through to medicals, interviews, assessment and report, and then through to training—can take from six to eight months. That is as it should be for the duty of care that we must discharge for this most vulnerable group of children. Many applicants—some 90 to 97 per cent—fall by the wayside. To me, that demonstrates the quality and resolve of those who stay the course, but what does society pay our foster carers? Of those who are paid—which is not all of them—three quarters receive less than £100 a week and some two thirds receive less than the minimum wage. What about in-between placements? Some receive nothing at all. If no other work can be found, they have to return to benefits, which poses additional difficulties for the foster parent claimant. As Tanya Bradshaw told me, it is not a job for a part-timer. Only being paid allowed her to give up her employment for that career—for career it is. It is a vocation. We pay lip service to placing the welfare of the child at the heart of our social policies. We applaud the dedication, commitment and skills of our foster carers, but we do not put money where our mouth is. We do not ensure that there is a national minimum payment for those carers, or a statutory duty that provides a framework and enforcement. No wonder that at least 1,700 additional foster families are required. With the norm being placements of more than one,  members can do the arithmetic on the unmet need and the number of children—vulnerable and at risk—who are kept in unsuitable domestic situations because there is absolutely nowhere for them to go. On those grounds alone, we are failing those children more than their parents are. We should know better, and we can do better. I have known the minister for a very long time—it has probably blighted his career prospects. I know that he is a caring individual; he is the right man for the job. He is not as dour as he is depicted. I have seen him smile—I made it my diary entry a few years ago. Now he is smiling again. I want him and the cabinet secretary to lean hard on the finance secretary to recognise, when it comes to divvying out the funds in the comprehensive spending review, the professionalism and dedication of carers—whether fostering or kinship—and to ensure proper and secure remuneration, with allowances between payments. In doing that, we will not only secure those much-needed foster carers; we will secure the prospect of a happy future for our most vulnerable and damaged children. Then we can truly call them looked after.

I thank the cabinet secretary for her statement and for clarifying that, in many cases, there is a role for the courts in disputes over health matters, although such cases will be few and far between. Given that the statement by Norman Lamb, the Liberal Democrat shadow health spokesperson at Westminster, adopted SNP policy on a patient's contract, does she expect to gain the support of the Scottish Liberal Democrats for her proposals?

I think that we joined together when we went on a trip around the Bass Rock.

I welcome the Solicitor General to the debate, which is not party political—as it should be. He is a master of the quiet understatement. When he said "I have had some professional dealings with that person", a shiver went up my spine as it sounded quite sinister. I welcome the tone of the debate and, in particular, some of the remarks that Sarah Boyack made about accurate reporting. That is a difficult issue for the Procurator Fiscal Service in other areas, too, when there is a combination in the charge. It is important that the PFS looks at that. I also echo Sarah Boyack's comments about patterns of crime. I declare an interest as a member of the RSPB and of the SSPCA, and as the convener of the cross-party group on animal welfare. Like many members, I have a long-standing interest in and commitment to animal welfare issues. I therefore commend the minister for introducing what I think is the first subject debate on the issue. I may be wrong about that, but I think that other wildlife debates have been on pieces of legislation. I thank all the organisations that provided helpful briefings for the debate, including the Scottish Parliament information centre. In its briefing, I learned, inter alia, that the violet click beetle is a  protected species, as is the lagoon snail. I fear that the latter now inhabits my garden as its only haven and sanctuary. Thanks to SPICe, I can now check that one out. I want to move on from that rather trivial comment—a type of comment for which I am becoming a little too renowned—to talk about wildlife crime, which is cruel, covert and cowardly. If we require to be reminded of that, we need only look at the graphic pictures of badger baiting in The Scotsman today. We can see what happens to the poor beast, and to various other animals. Many of us agree that their long, lingering, painful death, and the horrific injuries they sustain, is outrageous. Sometimes, other innocent animals are used to kill them off. The Solicitor General mentioned the recent outrageous poisoning in the Peebles area of a golden eagle—an animal that had been encouraged back into the area and that was much loved by everyone, including tourists. Our difficulty, which has rightly been addressed here, is evidence. I hesitate to say anything about evidence with the Solicitor General sitting there, but the principles that apply in criminal prosecutions must apply in the same way to wildlife crime. John Scott talked about evidence being brought to court that is obtained in a different way. That is a dangerous route. The burden of proof remains the same. It is for the prosecution to establish its case, and it must do it beyond reasonable doubt. I know that there are difficulties, but we meet such difficulties in other criminal prosecutions, such as rape and sexual assault. The same principles should apply here.

I do not think that the penalties that follow from a successful prosecution or a plea can influence in any way the burden of proof on the prosecution. If I have misunderstood John Scott, I ask him to forgive me. I understood him to be saying something else. The same principles of evidence must apply in cases of wildlife crime as apply in any other case. That is important, because remoteness and rurality present difficulties. I want to ask a question to which I do not know the answer. We should not really do that—we should really ask questions to which we know the answer—but I am going to ask this one anyway. Do we have a reward system for those who are prepared to give evidence under protection for wildlife crimes? Do we have a system of whistleblowing, in which people can feel secure? As many of us who are familiar with rural areas know, somebody is aye going to know who blew the whistle on them. People may well know who  has been up to it on various estates, but they are not going to tell anyone in case the finger is pointed. I wonder whether we have sufficient protection in place. I hear what was said about specialist prosecutors and wildlife crime officers but, like many members, I think that we should wait for the outcome of the thorough review before we start tying its hands. I am sure that the review will consider what members have to say. I want to commend the work of the SSPCA, particularly Mike Flynn and his team. The SSPCA is a charity, and is recognised as an agency that reports to the Crown. It does enormous work to assist in the area of wildlife crime, which is not always easy while it is fulfilling its other duties. I commend Mike Flynn for that, as I commend the Parliament for debating the issue. I hope that, together, we can, so far as is humanly practicable, eradicate the foul practice of wildlife crime. I was disturbed by something the judiciary said. Although it rightly says that it is completely independent, I say, cautiously, that I hope that it will begin to address wildlife crime more seriously. Whether or not wildlife is protected, the killing and torture of animals is shameful and grim. That whole series of crimes must be disposed of by our courts in a manner that reflects not only that, but society's opprobrium for those acts.

Of course, all members welcome the raising of the age at which cigarettes can be legally purchased to 18, but will the First Minister, having referred to 16 and 17-year-olds who are addicted to cigarettes and may now illegally try to purchase them, say what measures are in place to support those young people?

To ask the Scottish Executive what negotiations it has had with Her Majesty's Government regarding the Scottish Adjacent Waters Boundaries Order, which came into effect in 2000. (S3O-831)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the removal of 6,000 square miles of maritime territory from Scotland—approximately 5 per cent of Scotland's total territorial waters—shortly before the Parliament came into being remains an outrage and demonstrates that Westminster is more often the beneficiary of so-called union dividends at Scotland's expense? Will he advise us what plans the Government has to make a legal challenge to the order to secure Scotland's vital strategic and economic interests?

I am mindful that time is short. Does the minister see a role for mediation procedures? The point about organisations saying sorry has been made. We know that mediation is not arbitration and that it is not meant to produce a decision; it is where parties get together and resolve the matter. If we had mediation at an early stage, fewer people might go through the maze of complaint handling.

I do not think that the recommendation was for a single body for scrutiny; I think that scrutiny would be done elsewhere—in-house, for example. I understood that the idea was that the framework and the methods of regulating would be in a standard form. However, the idea could be debated more fully than is possible in this rather short debate.

I do not want to hear anybody else talking about "decluttering the landscape". I am sorry, Mr McKee, but if we are to declutter any landscape it will be my back garden. Let us get rid of the jargon so that people can follow the debate. I will make another superficial remark, on something that annoys me about the document. Why are the important bits bright pink? I can hardly read it. I do not know why we persist in producing bright pink shiny documents.  As members have said, we inherited many scrutiny bodies and we have added more and more. I am not blaming anybody for that—we should not have a blame culture. As members have also said, we have to be seen to be doing something. When a problem arises, we introduce legislation to set up a commission and a panel here or a board there to examine the issue. Elaine Murray rightly said that that has been done piecemeal and that we have not taken into account interaction and overlapping. It is the usual old thing—this is not jargon; it is a truth of life: it is the law of unintended consequences, which we constantly encounter. Tavish Scott was right to say that we are a young Parliament. We have grown up a lot in the Parliament—individually and collectively. Given that Scotland has a population of only 4 million people, it is not impossible to trim and to make our scrutiny more focused. Indeed, thanks to the Finance Committee, the committees are trying to do that in their budget examination. We are trying to co-ordinate our approach to aspects of the budget so that we can get to grips with it. We are aware that, even as parliamentarians, it is extremely difficult for us to scrutinise where the money is and where it is going, which is what should really matter. I shall pick one or two points out of this bright pink document. Paragraph 9.6 is extremely interesting. It is about Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education joint inspections, and integrated inspections that are carried out by the Social Work Inspection Agency. I note that the report states that they should "reviewed/evaluated immediately". That is an area where we may be duplicating efforts. The same goes for regulation. Paragraph 9.9 interestingly states: "The implications for the two main public service regulators, Communities Scotland and the Care Commission, would be that their registration functions would continue but there would be a more proportionate approach to checking ongoing compliance and a relaxation of the frequency of inspections." Again, Crerar wants to shift the emphasis away from quantity to quality. I found paragraph 9.10 astonishing, because we have just completed the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005. That paragraph says that "It is questionable whether organisations such as OSCR would have been established if the criteria in our proposed new system had been in place." Those are pretty strong words and they deserve examination. Paragraph 9.12, on accessibility of reports, is terribly important—it takes us back to jargon. It  recommends that scrutiny bodies should develop "common reporting language". I want to know what such bodies are talking about; I do not want to have to refer to a glossary. There will be a prize at the end for anybody who can explain to me the jargon in the Crerar report. The complaints procedure is important and would be a difficult area for the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman to take over entirely. However, it is worth exploring some of the recommendations in the report, such as "a standardised system for complaints handling". The report also recommends that "the remit of the SPSO should be expanded" but that other things be taken out of its portfolio. I do not know whether that would work, but it is worth examining. Not recommended in the report is that greater powers be given to the public services ombudsman, which I would like to have seen. Many people go through the system and get a ruling at the end of the process. Then, there is nothing. It is like a dud firework—nothing happens of any worth to the complainant. I would like the process to be given real teeth. I will make my final point, because I want to be brief. There will be a free meal for the person who can give the wittiest or most accurate interpretation of a phrase in paragraph 10.11(b) of the report, which is on governance. Members should note what I am saying, as I do not often offer free meals. The paragraph states: "The Scottish Government and the Parliament should work with scrutiny organisations and service providers to develop impact measures for scrutiny, against which scrutiny organisations should report to Ministers and the Parliament." I say to Andy Kerr that there will be a meal on me to the person who gives on the back of a postcard the wittiest or most accurate interpretation that I can understand of the phrase "to develop impact measures for scrutiny".

Elaine Murray might like to know that Lord Foulkes has also left the chamber.

Oh dear, I do not want to be too cruel, but there was an awful lot of heat in that speech and not terribly much light. As far as I know, Helen Eadie is not authorised to be angry on behalf of the people of Scotland. I was one of five members who sat through all the evidence on the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill. At the end of the preliminary stage, two of us could not vote for the bill to go any further. That was long before any other member present woke up to the subject matter that we were considering and the evidence that we heard. Nothing has changed. There were huge issues with tunnelling under a live runway, and I raised those issues with the then Minister for Transport when I said: "I want the minister to address the issue of insurance liability: first, while construction is going on; and secondly, once the rail link is operational, in the tunnel, under a live runway. Will the minister simply tell me who will pay those premiums?" Mr Scott replied: "As we would expect in any transport project, the promoter has been in dialogue with the insurance market." I pursued the point further, asking: "who is liable for the premiums? The public purse?"  Mr Scott replied: "The member dismisses the factual way in which a commercial company has to operate. The SNP knows nothing about the commercial world. The promoter has done what any responsible organisation or promoter would do." I pressed on, "Answer the point." He replied: "I am answering the point. The promoter has already received an indication that the project is entirely insurable in the commercial world."— [ Official Report , 14 March 2007; c 33160-1.]  I am not aware that that is, in fact, the case. We are talking about spending £650 million of public money on a project with substantial risks.

I am sorry; I have only four minutes. I want to pick up on a substantial and terribly important point about the gradient in the tunnel. Charlie Gordon has a great knowledge of rolling stock, which I admired in committee, and he raised the question whether there were locomotives that we could put on to the track. I am open to intervention on this point, but I am not aware whether there exists a locomotive that can both deal with the proposed gradient and keep to the timetabling. With a hub such as the one in question, five seconds off would mean that the timetabling could not be kept to. In giving evidence, Network Rail said that, even without delays, the timetabling would be "very challenging". As far as I know, those issues have not been addressed, so let us not be silly and bowl into somebody just because at one time they thought that EARL was a good idea. Under the microscopic scrutiny of the committee, the project failed to convince two members to support it. That is a substantial objection.

I asked members to deal with the two points—not just the gradient, but keeping to the timetable. The gradient would impact on the timetabling. When we consider the limited pot that the Parliament has to spend on transport, we have to be rigorous in deciding what to do. I am delighted that we have looked again at EARL and are  prepared to come up with a modest alternative, because Scotland's budget is modest and we cannot be profligate. As for David McLetchie, I mentioned his Damascene conversion and we in the Scottish National Party always welcome sinners who repent.

As someone who was on the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill Committee, I commend the minister on his sensible and prudent announcement. There was a myth promulgated by the Liberal Democrats—that the cancellation of the EARL project would impact negatively on the proposed Borders railway. I ask the minister to clarify that it would do exactly the opposite and that if we were to proceed with EARL, it would impact negatively on the funding for that very important line.

To ask the Scottish Executive, following the recent Experian report showing that economic growth in the Scottish Borders was twice the national average, what additional investment is planned to improve productivity in the region. (S3O-729)

What the Experian report says about economic growth is welcome, but it also highlights the continuing difficulty in the Borders of attracting growth industries such as financial and business services and communications. That is reflected in the low wages for Borderers, which are still well below the Scottish and United Kingdom averages. Will the cabinet secretary consider reviewing the level of provision to support the development of those growth industries, to help match the outstanding economic growth record of the Borders with an  improving financial and business foundation for the region?

Does the cabinet secretary share my concern that in a large rural area such as the Scottish Borders, there is only one refuge in the eastern Borders? When she is looking at additional resource requirements, will she consider the special requirements of rural areas so that, for example, children who are living in a refuge can continue to attend their local primary school?

I dispute what Helen Eadie said. For the first time, there are clear instructions to patients about their rights regarding the waiting time guarantee. They are contained in the leaflet, "Hospital appointments and waiting times explained". I will deal later with some of the issues around that. First, however, I must compliment Ross Finnie. He is always good value. He always insults with wit and charm. However, he cannot get away from the fact that, for the past eight years, Labour and the Liberal Democrats were in power in the Parliament, and we have inherited the current situation from them. That includes the dreadful cases of people who cannot get released from hospital because there is not the money in social work departments to pay for their care at home. Still on Ross Finnie's speech, we have heard a lot of slurs about lawyers this morning. I am no longer a practising lawyer, but I point out that, for more than a decade, the Labour-Liberal Government failed to fund civil legal aid. There were warnings that the paucity of fees for civil legal aid would mean that income from private clients would no longer subsidise such cases and that firms would stop taking them. I welcome the lighted-hearted remark from Murdo Fraser about that but, even as we speak, and as was reported in the newspapers recently, very few people now have access to civil legal aid. We have inherited that disgraceful situation from the previous Government. I turn to the categorisation of clinical priorities. I will park the argument about having a maximum waiting time guarantee—I refer to Ross Finnie's speech. We have aired that issue enough. We should, however, make it clear that 18 weeks is a  maximum waiting time. I suggest to Ross Finnie that there is room for clinical intervention. I looked carefully at the cabinet secretary's speech on the matter, and I have raised the issue in questions to her.

I wish to proceed with this point first. Previously, categorising clinical priorities varied from NHS board to NHS board. For instance, people undergoing a double hip replacement in one area might be told that it is a specialist treatment, but they might not be told that in another area. In one case, they will get a maximum waiting time; in another, they will not. In her statement, the cabinet secretary spoke about situations when the clock would have to stop: "Another example would be the patient who has a temporary medical condition, such as raised blood pressure or a chest infection, that makes it clinically inappropriate for treatment to be undertaken. The patient will therefore be unavailable, but the hospital will keep the patient on the list and under review until the issue has been resolved. The waiting time clock will be stopped until the patient is fit again and available for treatment."— [ Official Report , 19 September 2007; c 1834.]  The idea that there is no reasonable clinical discretion is simply not right.

I will give way.

To Mr Finnie. I am sorry—I did not see anybody else wishing to intervene.

The point that we are fairly making is that the maximum waiting time that will be given to any patient is 18 weeks. If there are clinical reasons why they cannot be treated within that time, there will obviously have to be discretion.

I want to make progress. We are not given extra time for interventions, regrettably.  Some red herrings have been raised about legal issues. I do not want to overwork the Norwegian or any other example. A bill will come before Parliament and at issue will be whether there will be remedies. If it cannot be enforced, giving people a guarantee—whether it is for a television or for a waiting time—is a pointless waste of paper. Our proposal—which is open to consultation—is for a series of appeals that patients could go through. They could go to an NHS board—which we hope will be elected—or to an appeals committee. There will be remedies available to patients through the NHS system, and if those remedies fail, patients will have the right to go to court. That does not mean that patients will go to court in the first instance, just as people cannot in the first instance go to the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman or to the Press Complaints Commission—which I am thinking of doing—but have to go through other routes first. The guarantee, however, will be enforceable; I cannot say it any clearer than that.

In Norway, nobody has gone to court because the mere fact that people have that right acts as a deterrent. To give the member a parallel example, the anti-smoking legislation covering public places that was pioneered by Kenneth Gibson and Stewart Maxwell and which I am glad that you picked up—

Dr Simpson, please do not look for an intervention because I named you. That legislation has worked as a deterrent because it is enforceable; very few have breached its conditions. I remind members that, although we are discussing waiting times today, a bill will come before committee and there will be every opportunity during evidence taking at stage 1 to express any anxieties about the system, to test its legal enforceability, to decide whether the mechanisms will overwhelm the system, and to lodge amendments to see whether it is worthy. Let us have the debate and examine the evidence before us. With the will of the Parliament we will, I hope, end up with an 18-week maximum waiting time guarantee that is enforceable.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to issue fresh guidance to schools and colleges to ensure that they meet their obligations under the Disability Discrimination Act 2005. (S3O-632)

I am pleased to hear the minister's answer, but how concerned is he to note that the Disability Rights Commission is considering a potential breach of the act by schools in Scotland that have acquiesced with selection criteria applied by the British Army during its school visits programme that specifically prohibit children with learning difficulties from taking part in activities with the armed forces? Does the minister agree that schools and colleges should remain places of learning for all, regardless of disability, and that, although the armed forces rightly are legally permitted to discriminate in recruitment activity, that does not absolve schools of their statutory requirements under the Disability Discrimination Act 2005? Does he agree that schools and colleges should not be involved in any capacity in a selection process that discriminates against those with a disability?

Will the member take an intervention?

I hope that this will not descend into a party-political sniping match. It is perfectly possible for the Opposition to hold the Government to account and to use the correct tone. I welcome Sarah Boyack's speech, which, while robust, was consensual in some respects. My able colleague Roseanna Cunningham has already dealt with Mr Rumbles, whose contribution was as ill-judged and mischievous as ever.

As for Mr Tolson, I shall be gentle with him, because he is a novice in the chamber. The topography of the Borders, whose many rivers—the Tweed and its tributaries; the Ettrick; the Yarrow; the Gala; the Leader; the Teviot and its tributaries; and the Liddel—powered the mills of the 19 th and 20 th centuries, can lead to the kind of flash flooding that may not always hit the newspapers. Roseanna Cunningham referred to the small occurrences that can make lives a misery. In the Borders, inland and along the coast, about 4,500 properties are at risk of flooding. Sarah Boyack rightly reminded us—not that we needed it—of the human misery that flooding can bring.  In 2003, the Bannerfield estate in Selkirk was flooded and more than 50 houses were affected. I was called in a week later, because Scottish Borders Housing Association was, to put it mildly, being tardy in its response. The houses were stinking. There were black flies everywhere and beasts crawling about. It was a mess. Elderly people were upset. People with young children were at real risk of illness and disease—this in Scotland in the 21 st century. In a small hamlet 10 miles up the road in the Yarrow valley, an entire house had been swept away because a culvert had become blocked. Water is unforgiving and cruel. It finds its natural course. It left other houses standing, with the house, garden and everything else absolutely untouched, while two doors away everything was wiped out. An elderly couple called me into their house, where the only thing left intact was a row of bright orange geraniums in the conservatory. I said to the couple, "Your conservatory has stayed up. It has a sloping glass wall." They told me, "It doesn't have a sloping glass wall." If someone had pushed it with their finger, the conservatory would have collapsed, leaving the couple with the plants that had somehow managed to survive the flood. In 2005, I visited a house in Hawick that the woman whose home it was had not lived in for a year. She had been about to move back in but the house was flooded again. None of us can imagine what that must have been like for her. She lost everything, for example family photographs—things that really mattered. Furniture can be replaced, but such reminders of the past cannot. She did not have the heart to cross the doorstep into the stinking mess, with its warped floors and doors. That is another reality of flooding. I have previously raised the issue of housing associations being unable to access the Bellwin scheme for funding to help in flooding disasters. If housing associations have to insure properties, they have to recover the premiums from rents. There is a real issue about the unintended consequences of wholesale stock transfer. What is Scottish Borders Council doing? To put it politely, nothing. In 2005, I discovered that Dumfries and Galloway Council—which, as the Deputy Presiding Officer knows, is very honourable—obtained £638,000 of national funds for flood prevention. Scottish Borders Council has obtained nothing. When I challenged Scottish Borders Council in 2006, Councillor Edgar told me that a number of schemes were being considered, and said: "One of our schemes is already on its way to the executive for preliminary evaluation." Well, jolly good. In a recent question, John Lamont asked my colleague Mike Russell—he answers  questions, and they are very good answers—which local authorities had applied for and been granted financial support for flood prevention schemes. Dumfries and Galloway was there again, but Borders was not. While I appreciate that not all councils have plans in place, some of them are soundly failing in their duty. I welcome the cabinet secretary's wide embrace of groups. There are issues about Scottish Water and the impact that house building has on water courses. As Sarah Boyack rightly pointed out, there are issues to do with how we deal with our little bit of garden. If we put down tarmac or slabbing, we change the water course and drainage. We can all do soft engineering in our own gardens. I welcome the debate, and I hope that it continues in the tone set by Opposition members to my left.

I commend the cabinet secretary for the clarity and accountability of the new process. I recommend that she provides, posthaste, explanatory leaflets to the Opposition. Is the cabinet secretary aware that, in some parts of the country, people who require a double hip replacement operation are categorised as requiring specialist treatment? Under the previous system, a patient could lose their waiting time guarantee because they needed treatment that was allegedly specialist. How will the new system deal with such a situation?

The process has been truncated to meet the timing of similar legislation that is being dealt with in Westminster—I would have thought that the Conservatives would welcome that. It is fair to say that the fact that there were only 11 prosecutions in this area last year—which was revealed in an answer to one of my parliamentary questions—is poor. That is why I am pressing  ahead with a proposal for positive licensing of the retailers of tobacco products. We wait to be persuaded that negative licensing will be sufficient. I hope that that was 45 seconds.

I concur, as I think everyone would, with the view that we need local and national development, but that it must be sensitively handled. Even so, it will not please all the people all the time, and probably not the lean machine known as Mr Tavish Scott. Like many others, I welcome early consultation. The word "consultation" has lost most of its currency and has been devalued over many years. I heard the cabinet secretary's answer to Mary Mulligan's question, which anticipated one that I was going to ask about public involvement in consultation. However, given that parliamentary committees are masters of their own agendas and fate, what role will they have in dealing with the national planning framework? On a different matter, I commend to the ministerial team and MSPs the Planning Aid for Scotland event in the garden lobby on Wednesday 26 September. That is a plug. At that event, all MSPs can hone their consultation skills.

Will the minister consider revisiting the  Belwin scheme? The scheme provides emergency funding to local authorities in the event of flooding, for example, but does not extend to housing associations, which can leave them vulnerable in the event of a wholesale stock transfer, as happened in the Borders several years ago. Will the First Minister re-examine the scheme in light of such circumstances?

This question might be more for the Cabinet Secretary for Justice. In response to a written question lodged by Trish Godman, which requested information on the number of victims of human trafficking who have been freed, the former Minister for Justice responded: "This information is not held centrally."— [ Official Report , Written Answers, 24 January 2007; S2W-30899.]  Trish Godman also lodged a question—S2W-30898—on the number of convictions in human trafficking cases, but those data are also not held. As I understand it, prosecutions take place under different heads—kidnapping, for example. Will the Lord Advocate review how such data are collected, so that we can identify the scale of the problem and the successful prosecution rate?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. During First Minister's questions today, I attributed a quote in error to Alan Meale MP, when the words concerned were actually those of Jason Rathbone, a gulf war veteran and campaigner. As this is the only way in which I can amend the record, I am seeking to do so at the earliest opportunity. However, Jason Rathbone's comments were fully endorsed by Alan Meale MP, whom I now appropriately quote as saying that our treatment of veterans is "a national disgrace". Thank you for giving me this opportunity to correct the record, Presiding Officer. I am seeking an early eye test.

To ask the First Minister what plans the Scottish Government has to improve health support and provision for troops returning from Iraq and Afghanistan. (S3F-122)

Is the First Minister aware that "Many veterans have strong feelings of abandonment, the sense of being used and of being forsaken", that "One in four is homeless", and that "74 per cent of serious crime is committed by ex-forces"?  Those are not my words, but those of Alan Meale—Labour MP and commissioner for the Commonwealth War Graves Commission. Will the First Minister, for a start, support a veterans charter that would enshrine a very modest right to a dedicated point of contact—say, at council level—to co-ordinate support for veterans in relation to housing, employment, benefits and health?

I will endeavour not to repeat statistics that have already been cited in the debate, but perhaps I can begin by highlighting a few other figures. Although I fully agree with Margaret Curran's response to Brian Adam's intervention that there is a high incidence of drug abuse in the pockets of deprivation in Glasgow, I should point out that, according to last year's drugs misuse statistics for Scotland, the trend with regard to new referrals is also increasing in rural areas. In 2001-02, 118 referrals were made in the Borders, whereas, last year, there were 219. I believe that the figures are worst of all in Tayside, where, in 2001-02, 346 referrals were made while, in 2005-06, there were 902. Perhaps that trend suggests that dealers are simply moving out to fresh fields. I welcome the tone of the debate and the view that it is the duty of the Parliament, including both ministers and committees, to try to deal with this major issue, which is a tough one. If it were not, somebody would have solved it somewhere and we could just pick up a map and follow the solution. Another unfortunate statistic, to which someone may have referred earlier, is that, according to Professor McKeganey, there are currently 50,000 heroin addicts in Scotland and 22,000 on  methadone. All their families and communities are also affected by this dreadful plague. After eight years of this young Parliament, we have increased drug addiction, increased alcohol abuse and an increased prison population, which relates both to acquisitive crimes and to crimes of violence—the former are more often related to drugs and the latter are more often related to alcohol. Unfortunately, there is also the ever-increasing spiral of teenage drinking. This morning's Herald has the headline "Teenage drinking spirals into drug abuse and crime". Many years ago, when I was on the Justice 1 Committee, we visited Barlinnie prison. A medical officer there made it plain that, in his view, the gateway into drug addiction is alcohol. Sadly, that point is now reflected in the report in The Herald . This is obvious stuff and there are short-term and long-term solutions. On the former, I welcome the attitude to the failure of custodial sentences because, as we know, short-term sentences do not give prison officers an opportunity to get into the rehabilitation of prisoners. There is no joined-up progression from rehabilitation in prison to life outside it. The drug dealers used to wait at the prison gates and sometimes threw the drugs over the prison walls to the prisoners. There was a cycle of drug abuse that just brought people back into prison. The public quite rightly expect people who steal and who are violent to be punished, and they expect to be protected from such people, but there must also be a role for rehabilitation. The protection and the punishment are only short term if someone offends again after a short-term sentence and then receives a further short-term sentence. That view is sometimes a hard one to sell; it appears that we are being soft on certain people, when in fact we are trying to be hard in a way that helps the individual and society. I commend the work of the drugs courts, which I have seen in operation. However, their work is very intensive and involves a lot of sheriff manpower. For a drug and/or alcohol abuser, it is often one step forward, two steps back. The drugs courts service must therefore have a high level of commitment, but that is dependent on available funding and manpower. The issue of education on drug abuse is difficult. What we do does not work. Advertising campaigns about drug addiction tend to be just short term; at the time, they look as if they will work and they might indeed have some impact. Some public health advertising campaigns in other areas have worked. For example, campaigns about violence against women have had an impact. However, the message on drug addiction is obviously not getting  through to our young people, who think that they are immortal.

I defer to Dr Simpson's knowledge in certain areas, but the headline that I quoted refers to a serious report, which I hope he will read. Its evidence reflects what we see on our streets. When we talk about drug addiction, we must also look back to see where that comes from for our young people. Obviously, it often starts with excessive alcohol consumption. Professor McKeganey states that there only 300 places for residential treatment. National health service boards refer people with drugs and alcohol problems to residential places in Castle Craig hospital in the Borders for treatment and rehabilitation. There were 149 such referrals in 1997, but it is predicted that there will be only 33 this year. Either NHS boards do not have sufficient money, or they are not using their money for residential treatment. I welcome the new structure of the cabinet, which is much more integrated than it was previously. I hope that that structure will be reflected in how the parliamentary committees work. When the Health and Sport Committee was considering whether to do work on drug addiction and so on, members kept saying, "Well, that's a justice issue," "That's an education issue," or "That's a housing issue." It would be useful if committees could work together on a parallel investigation on drug addiction and do so in tandem with the Government. I commend the Social Justice Committee's report of December 2000, to which Margaret Curran referred. Everything that it said is worth while. I do not know whether that was one of the reports to which the minister referred. If it was not, he should read it.

I congratulate Dave Stewart on raising the issue, which has been raised in the Parliament on many occasions. I acknowledge the contribution of Karen Whitefield, who in the previous session of Parliament worked with me and others on the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on diabetes. I also acknowledge the perpetual and worthwhile work of Diabetes UK in keeping the issue to the fore. I came to be interested in the issue because four members of my family by blood have type 2 diabetes and two members of my family by marriage have type 1 diabetes. That is a huge proportion in a small catchment and that is just the tip of the iceberg. Dave Stewart mentioned that 193,000 people are diagnosed with diabetes and that many other people—60,000-odd—are undiagnosed. That gives us an idea of the size of the problem. One fact that arrested my attention is that 25 per cent of people in Scotland aged 16 and over are obese. There is a link between obesity and type 2 diabetes. The figure on obesity comes from 2003, so one suspects that even it is now significantly increased. As Dave Stewart rightly said, for the undiagnosed, damage is being done during all the years that they are in that situation. A written answer to Dave Stewart of 14 June stated that in my area, the Borders, an estimated 1,618 people are undiagnosed, but I suspect that the actual figure might be even greater. I commend Lloyds Pharmacy, which carried out diabetes testing of members of the Scottish Parliament to show us how simple the test is, and tested at various conferences. The test is worth while and takes very little time. One of our members was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes  after having the test. When people are diagnosed, they can go into panic mode and think that it is the end of their life. Dave Stewart mentioned a football player who had diabetes and who was very fit, as he managed the condition. However, a cautionary point is that that approach can sometimes be double-edged, because when people get over the initial problems and can manage the condition through diet or tablets rather than injecting, they sometimes become complacent and slip back into old ways—they think that they have got over it. However, people do not get over it, as it is a permanent state that remains to be managed. People who are diagnosed can also have psychological issues. A young man from Selkirk who came to the cross-party group on diabetes said that he went crazy when he was first diagnosed and attempted to challenge the disease by drinking and eating what he liked. Of course, he came to a crisis point and realised that it was not a war between him and diabetes—he realised that he was not going to win in that fashion. I acknowledge that early intervention is invaluable and that prevention is even better—it is better than cure. That is why I am pleased that the cabinet secretary's title contains the term "Wellbeing" and that the relevant parliamentary committee is called the Health and Sport Committee. I know that when people look at me they do not always think about health and sport, but we must connect the idea of exercise and being fit with that of avoiding a high risk of developing type 2 diabetes. I am pleased that Dave Stewart has raised the issue and I commend the other members who have campaigned long and hard on the issue. I look forward to hearing the minister's response.

To ask the First Minister what communication the Executive has had with Her Majesty's Government about recovering money saved by the Exchequer as a result of policy decisions in Scotland. (S3F-105)

The First Minister will agree that the Parliament's priority in relation to free personal care is to ensure that it operates and  is supported in the way that was intended. I welcome the review that has been initiated. I advise the First Minister that this morning, at a conference on free personal care, local authorities identified a £19 million funding gap—a gap that was also identified by the previous Health Committee. Given that the retained attendance allowance now amounts to around £30 million, does the First Minister share my view that savings that result from good governance in Scotland should be returned to Scotland? Incidentally, those savings would more than plug the funding gap that has been identified.

That woke me up. I welcome the commitment by the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change to the re-establishment of the Borders railway by means of the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Act 2006. Of course, I am concerned about the  statements about other issues relating to funding, but I and members of other parties have been raising those issues for some time. For example, on 15 June 2006, Derek Brownlee asked a parliamentary question about the increase in the cost of the Airdrie to Bathgate line. The question was: "To ask the Scottish Executive whether any of the factors which led to the reported increase in cost of the Airdrie to Bathgate rail line could recur in the construction of the Waverley line and, if so, what these factors are and what the financial impact might be." In the interests of fairness, I will quote Tavish Scott's whole answer. He said: "The increases in cost estimate associated with Airdrie to Bathgate are a result of scheme refinement and clarification issues in the early stages of scheme development. The scope of the Borders railway is more defined and therefore further cost increases from such refinement processes are not anticipated, apart from those which may come about from amendments to the bill by the bill committee."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 16 June 2006; S2W-26449.]  That is a fairly recent answer. I am, therefore, delighted that Transport Scotland is undertaking a review of the situation because there have been issues about whether the funding structure that was in place for the line would deliver. Indeed, when David Mundell asked the Liberal Democrat minister with responsibility for transport, Nicol Stephen, whether the Executive would fund any shortfall in the final cost of the Waverley line over and above the £151 million that had already been identified, Nicol Stephen replied: "Responsibility for identifying and securing any additional funding required for the project rests with the bill promoters."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 2 June 2005; S2W-16645.]  That was the Liberal Democrat position. It is most unfair of the Liberal Democrats to criticise us. We have been in Government for only 42 days; they were in Government for 2,921. I have a feeling that it is reminiscent of Oliver Hardy looking at Stan Laurel and talking about another fine mess. There is a huge amount of good will towards the Borders railway in this chamber—there has been since 1999—but we must examine the financing of it. I invite the minister or the cabinet secretary to meet me and councillor David Parker to discuss the issues and lay to rest any fears that might be being falsely spun—heaven forfend—by the Liberal Democrats.

Rather than stirring up mud, Jeremy Purvis should wait for the due diligence that is being undertaken by Transport Scotland to show him what the actual position is. I repeat, if there is a funding deficit, it certainly was not created by those on this side of the chamber; it will have existed before we took office. That is the issue. There is no one who is more committed to the Borders railway than I am, but if there is a funding gap, Liberal Democrat ministers were in charge of it. It is a falsity to say that, if we do not proceed with the Edinburgh airport rail link, the Borders railway will stop. In fact, if we proceed with the particular airport rail link that is being proposed, we might not have money in our pockets to pay for other transport schemes. The EARL project is a specific link; it is not simply a surface route to Edinburgh airport. It is a link that diverts the River Almond, the Gogar burn and goes under a live runway and there are indemnity issues associated with all that. I sat through the committee proceedings. At the end, hand on heart, I could not say that the evidence showed that the project should be funded for £650 million, £1,000 million or whatever the sum would turn out to be. I know that members agree that, when projects involve spending such large amounts of money, the private bills procedure is not the right way to proceed because there is simply not the scrutiny of funding that there ought to be. The scrutiny is wholly inadequate. I acknowledge Patrick Harvie's fair comments on the Edinburgh airport rail link, but I do not see how he can vote for the Labour amendment. During the debate on the motion to pass the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill, Chris Ballance said: "we do not support the Edinburgh airport rail link. We remain absolutely unconvinced that it is a priority as a way to connect Edinburgh airport to the rail network or as a missing link in the national rail network."— [ Official Report , 14 March 2007; c 33148.]  I do not think that it is enough for Patrick Harvie to say that the project will wither on the vine and die. He should come clean. He should say that he has been stitched up and that he wants to vote against the amendment.

I will take a brief intervention from Patrick Harvie.

Do I have discretion?

I apologise to Patrick Harvie. In conclusion, the Edinburgh airport rail link simply must not proceed. Despite what David McLetchie said, I do not know how the projects could be capped. Would we start building the railway or trams and then stop at some point? We should come clean and say that the Edinburgh airport rail link project is a disaster. We need a surface link. I thank the minister again for endorsing the Borders railway.

rose—

As Tavish Scott is aware, two out of five members of that committee voted against the bill proceeding any further—Jamie McGrigor and me.

This might be a pre-emptive strike—the minister is smiling, so it probably is—but will the minister consider the guidance that is issued to local authorities on public procurement, because I do not think that they are all being as excellent as East Ayrshire Council?

I congratulate Jim Hume on his contribution and recognise other members who have taken part in such debates before, including John Scott and Alex Johnstone—who would be here if he was not at the end of a tug-of-war rope. I also mention that Sarah Boyack, John Scott, Jim Hume and I will be the four cross-party MSPs engaged in Scottish food fortnight.  The debate has been going on for quite a while in the Parliament. I am glad that Jim Hume has focused on public procurement, which is an issue that I have raised several times. There is guidance issued by the Executive although, unfortunately, it is lumped in with freedom of information guidance for local authorities. The most up-to-date guidance is from December 2004. During the passage of the Schools (Health Promotion and Nutrition) (Scotland) Bill, the issue was raised with the minister and his answer was that "the bill will give schools and local authorities an opportunity to develop a school meals service through which pupils become educated consumers who understand health, environmental and wider issues."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 6 December 2006; c 4421.] He continued: "We intend to reissue the guidance when the eventual act is commenced, to remind local authorities of what we are saying to them." Now that we have new ministers in place, that guidance must be revisited and extracted from the freedom of information guidance. It must be issued as guidance in its own right, but I do not think that that has been initiated. In 2006, the Environment and Rural Development Committee did a report on its inquiry into the food supply chain, which dealt with public procurement; I defer to the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, who probably knows much more about the subject than I do. I do not like some of the soundbites in the report. For example, the use of the phrase "value for money" suggests that only the bare costs should be considered. Although importing something from France might make it cheaper to buy, that could have wider costs to the community, such as the loss of local jobs. As I have said before, it is possible to engage in creative contracting. Those are not a lawyer's weasel words—it can be built into a contract that there must be local sustainability. By including conditions to do with the sustainability of small communities, local authorities and other public bodies can avoid breaching European Union competition rules. I hope that we get a move on with that work because it has been due for a long time. A separate issue is supermarkets and consumers. We have battered the supermarkets about procurement for a long time, not just because they buy in bulk and do not often buy locally, but because they determine what we grow and, now, the breeds of animals that we keep. I went to an extremely interesting presentation on the food chain by Michael Greger MD, who is director of public health and animal agriculture at the Humane Society of the United States. He explained that the fact that we are putting flocks of hundreds of thousands of birds into sheds where  viruses multiply means that we are likely to have bird flu pandemics. Such practices are engaged in at the behest of the supermarkets and, indirectly, the consumer. I realise that I have introduced an issue that is separate from procurement, but it is essential that we tackle it. I ask the ministers to examine the intensive breeding of animals to produce cheap food. We must get away from the idea that cheap is best. Our food may be as cheap as chickens, but it may cost us a flu pandemic.

Does Lewis Macdonald agree that we all had a greater opportunity than usual today to contribute to the debate? When there have been ministerial statements, very few members get an opportunity to comment. What happened today allowed us to debate and develop the issues.

I, too, offer my congratulations to the maiden speakers in the debate. Mary Scanlon's sabbatical has certainly recharged her batteries. I beg her not to take another one, as I am not strong enough for that. When I look round the chamber at the colleagues who will be members of the Health and Sport Committee—some of them are not here—I see a robust and interesting committee ahead of us. I welcome the speech by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing. We need a rigorous appraisal of the delivery of free personal care. This is not a party-political issue, as everyone's heart was in it from the start. The policy was a wonderful statement in favour of elderly people in Scotland, but its delivery has not been what any of us anticipated. I welcome especially the independent review of the policy's implementation by Lord Sutherland. In 1999, as a fresh MSP, rather like Dave Thompson today, I went to meet Sir Stewart Sutherland, as he was then, because I had read "With Respect to Old Age: Long Term Care— Rights and Responsibilities". I asked him about help with heating food and dressing, and he made the issue seem straightforward to me—how wrong can one be? He said that help with heating food could include using a tin-opener or potato peeler for a person who could not use them, and that help with dressing might mean doing up the buttons on their jacket or tying their shoelaces. It should not be beyond the wit of anybody to put those things into guidance in a way that would ensure that provision was uniform throughout all our local authorities. I will come to guidance and the role that committees have to play shortly. On 28 November 2001, during stage 1 of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill, Malcolm Chisholm said, quite rightly: "Equity and fairness are the final two principles on which the bill is built."— [ Official Report , 28 November 2001; c 4221.]  However, as we know, that is not what has been happening. Richard Simpson mentioned medical treatment. The schedules to the act say that "If the person requires medical treatment, assisting with medication, as for example by— (a) applying creams or lotions; (b) administering eye drops", they should not be charged for that care. Those are just two examples. The point is, people were supposed to get help if they are on multiple medication. The same thing applies to the section on feeding. The schedules talk about "assisting with the preparation of food". Again, we are back to the tin-opener test. If someone needs help to open a tin of baked beans so that they can put them on their toast, that counts as assistance with the preparation of food. Similarly, the schedules talk about "assisting with getting dressed". If someone needs help to do the zip up on their dress or do up the buttons on their coat, that is assistance with getting dressed and it is for the professionals who visit someone to make an assessment of whether an elderly person needs that assistance. Most elderly people are extremely proud. They are not going to stand there asking for assistance with the preparation of food or with getting dressed if they are capable of doing those things for themselves. Everyone in the chamber who is fighting against the vagaries of age that stop us doing more and more things knows that people do not give in when that happens. It is a huge issue that some local authorities have been hiding behind a fig leaf in order to save funds. I am being consensual, but I am also being honest—that has been an issue.  A letter from Lewis Macdonald to Shona Robison that was written on 13 June 2006 and has been placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre talks about the extraordinary number of people—nearly 1,600—who were waiting for home assessments in Edinburgh at that time. Someone who is waiting for an assessment is not getting better; they are getting worse. They are getting worse not only because of the lack of an assessment but because of the emotional stress and damage that can be done to someone when nothing is being done for them and they do not know when something is going to happen. The situation is perhaps even worse when people who are assessed in hospital go home and find that there is no one in the social care sector who can pick up the work that needs to be done to ensure that the person's home receives aids and adaptations and that social workers and health visitors are provided. Those people sit in their homes until they have to be reassessed and, at that point, it is discovered that they have not improved and that, instead, they have become more institutionalised and their care needs have risen. Somebody talked about joint budgets. There are huge arguments between social work departments and health boards about whose budget the money is supposed to come out of. In that regard, I point out that it is all our money. The personal care is not free—those people have paid for it through their taxes and national insurance contributions. Let us have a budget that works in the interest of the people who require help. The previous Health Committee—whose record I hope the next one can live up to—produced an extensive report into the delivery of free personal care. The committee asked local authorities how much they received in 2005-06 for free personal care and how much they thought they had spent on free personal care. We have already heard the extraordinary figure from Aberdeen City Council, which said that it got £6 million and spent £12 million. Moray Council got £2.5 million and spent nearly £6 million. North Lanarkshire Council got nearly £6 million and spent £15 million. Those are huge gaps. The figures might be unrealistic, of course—I do not know; that is something that the inquiry must consider—but the issue is certainly an important one across Scotland. When we delivered free personal care, it was a fine moment in the Parliament. That is what makes the current situation more galling and disappointing and makes it more urgent that we do what we said we would do and ensure that the act delivers what it said it would deliver and what we all thought it would deliver when it was passed.

I congratulate Karen Whitefield on securing a very important debate. I feel that I can speak about the value of education because, 50 years ago—there it is; I am very old—I was the first in my council house scheme to go to university and because I spent 12 years as a secondary school  teacher before I took on a second degree, this time in law. It does not matter whether one is brought up in Scotland or in Africa: education is still a basic human right. As you know, Deputy Presiding Officer, two years ago, during the G8 summit that Karen Whitefield referred to, we had the W8 summit, which was addressed by eight women from Africa. The story of one of those women, Hauwa Ibrahim from northern Nigeria, illustrates not only the value of education but women's struggle for education. She brought the W8 conference to silence; indeed, one could have heard a pin drop as she explained how, every day, she would walk for three hours each way to bring water for cooking and washing back to the village where she lived with her sisters and brother. Her father and brother had priority over that water and the women in the family had to use whatever was left. Hauwa Ibrahim's destiny would have been much the same as that of many young women in that situation, but for the fact that she had a very strong temperament. I will read out her own words, which I first read out on 23 June 2005, during the members' business debate on the W8 summit. She said: "I was born and brought up a Muslim. My father was ... one of the mullahs who call for prayers. It was not allowed for girls to go beyond the elementary schools (in my village). At the age of 12, 13, you should be ready for marriage. I refused to get married because I thought, 'I want to get more education.' I picked up a newspaper on the road, and I saw a university graduate with a four-square cap. And I thought, 'I must be like that person.' I funded my schooling by picking roots to hawk. I was hawking anything that is hawkable—food items, vegetables, peanuts." She went on to have an extraordinary career. As an advocate, she took on Sharia law by using its very elements. In 1999, when she first appeared in court to conduct an appeal, a man had to speak her words because, as a woman, she was prohibited from speaking. What did this woman to do with her education? She practised law in the northern part of Nigeria, which, as she told us, exposed her to all 19 states of the federation. She had to go into the hinterland. Because the villages that she went to could not be reached by bicycles or motorbikes, she had to travel by camel and donkey. Once there, she tried to stop the amputations of young men who had stolen because they were starving and the stoning to death of young women who had allegedly committed adultery. She was not simply trying to save individual young men and women; she knew that, once one of those punishments was carried out, the whole thing would spread. As I said, Hauwa Ibrahim operated within the terms of Sharia law, which meant that she was well aware of the difficulties that she faced.  Indeed, she went on to say: "I do feel uncomfortable, at times fearful. When it comes to the issue of death, the moment you stone the first woman, there may be no stopping of it. And I cannot live with that. Because of that, I fight ... I fight my fear. Almost all those women ... are from a very poor background, the same background that I came from. I feel that I'm returning back to humanity what I was given in terms of my education". As far as I know, she has succeeded in everything she has done and in preventing women from being stoned. Adding to what Karen Whitefield said, I feel that if the women get educated, the family gets educated, and that if one generation gets educated, it educates the next. The political ramifications of Hauwa Ibrahim's actions are extraordinary. Through her deeds, she has taken a small step towards preventing the spread of the misinterpretation of Sharia law. Her story of being educated against all the odds in Africa supports Karen Whitefield's motion.

I remind the First Minister that when I sought to amend the Schools (Health Promotion and Nutrition) (Scotland) Bill at stages 2 and 3 to extend eligibility for free school meals to families on working tax credit and council tax benefit, for example, the Liberal Democrats and Labour opposed the attempt on both occasions. Does he share my delight that consensus is now coming and that he may consider extending eligibility now that we are in government?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the remuneration of foster carers will be included in its fostering strategy. (S3O-167)

I refer the minister to motion S3M-80 in my name, which addresses the fact that 37 per cent of foster carers receive no remuneration and that two thirds of them receive less than the minimum wage. I advise him that, although full-time foster carers receive a lump sum of up to £500 for replacement of appliances, such as washing machines, as a result of wear and tear, respite carers receive nothing. Will he  consider introducing a sliding scale of payment, so that respite carers, who provide vital support to full-time foster carers, are not disadvantaged?

It is unfortunate, to say the least, that not one member of the Labour Party and not one Liberal Democrat is attending the debate.

I apologise to the member and beg his pardon. I should have said only that not one member of the Labour Party is attending the debate. I hope that there will be no repeat of this when such important issues are being debated in the future. Such debates provide a chance for members to highlight, as Roseanna Cunningham has done, issues of which we have not all been aware. Obviously, I want to focus on the Borders. In 2004-05, there were nine rescues from water in the Lothian and Borders Fire and Rescue Service area. In March, the Fire Brigades Union in Perth—what I am saying follows on from Roseanna Cunningham's comments—passed a motion of no confidence in the management because of the lack of, or inadequate, training on rescue from water. Let us compare that with what happens in Dublin. Dublin has three main waterways and 135 fully trained and equipped swift-water rescue technicians, who are highly and specially trained to carry out rescues. Those technicians have skills in fast-current swimming, hydrology and in using technical equipment to effect such rescues. Compare that with what happens in the Scottish Borders, which has five times the number of waterways but only one specialist team, to which Roseanna Cunningham referred. That team is based in Galashiels and consists of seven specialist fire and rescue personnel. We must not think that the relatively low number of rescues from water—as I said, there were nine incidents in 2004-05—means that no further training in the use of equipment and so on is needed. Obviously, more people could be rescued if there were more highly trained people. Lothian and Borders Police have nine part-time officers who are trained in rescue from water, but that does not constitute a 24-hour shift pattern. There are seven qualified water technicians in the Lothian and Borders Fire and Rescue Service area. An additional 24 have related water rescue qualifications, but do not have qualifications for entering the water. All front-line crews are trained as first responders in talk, reach and throw techniques, but would not enter the water to effect  a rescue. That is part of the mixed pattern that my colleague highlighted. There is a central training fund of around £40,000 for Lothian and Borders Fire and Rescue Service, which was not increased in the past five or six years under the previous Government. There have been pressures on the fund to pay for other courses, such as working at heights courses, so water rescue training has been squeezed. In 2004-05, there was a mere £1,500 for it; in 2006-07, the figure was £7,500. We are talking about a pauchle and the matter must be addressed. There is an internationally recognised set of standards and a training programme that is based on Rescue 3 International's programme. Rescue 3 International, which was formed in 1979, is a specialist water rescue organisation whose techniques, training and approach have been used by rescue professionals in 32 countries worldwide. Its approach is, of course, applied in Dublin. In Scotland, there are three Rescue 3 International course providers—in Dundee and Aviemore—which could offer the training that is needed so much. I say to the minister that concern that there is no consistency has come out of the debate—there are delivery anomalies. I represent Galashiels and my concern is that although it is all right if a person falls in Gala Water in Galashiels, they would—because the appropriate service is located in Galashiels—be in difficulties if they were to fall in the water at Coldstream. The minister should consider the anomalies that exist, the need for consistency and clear lines of responsibility, and funding for training along the lines of that which is provided in Dublin.

I do not know what that means.

I recognise the expertise of the many farmers in the chamber, and I will let others bandy about the detailed arithmetic. I commend the cabinet secretary for making the best of the bad ingredients that he has inherited. He has been in Government for only a few weeks, not eight years.  Mike Rumbles was bleating about consultation. This subject is indeed about consultation, not coalition—Mike seems still to be in a coalition with the Labour Party. I remind Rhona Brankin that Labour lost the election. She should accept that with at least a modicum of grace, which was not evident in the tone of her speech, unlike that of her colleague, Mr David Stewart. There—that was the consensual beginning to my speech. "Voluntary modulation" is not an expression to trip easily off the tongue. I asked Robin Harper for a definition of it, and what he said was imaginative, but unrepeatable. It is, however, a serious issue for farmers. I will now address what Mike Rumbles said—it is so handy that he is sitting just in front of me. Naughty Mr Rumbles only took little bits out of our manifesto when he was talking about voluntary modulation. In fact, we start by saying: "Voluntary modulation will not be used to disadvantage Scotland's farmers." As I understand the issue, we are moving away from giving subsidies directly to farmers and are putting the funds into a pot of other money that is accessible by farmers for rural development. We are not endeavouring to disadvantage farmers; we are shifting the emphasis.

The bait has struck.

The member is arrogant as usual. I certainly understand the principle that is in operation. I will let others argue about the percentages, but the principle is that the money remains in the sector. What bothers me is that today's farmers must not just be experts in their profession, but also accountants and economists. They need rigour not just for winter winds and spring storms, but for all the jargon and technospeak and for the blizzard of EU regulations. I will therefore broaden my speech into that area, whereas other members have kept to the narrow focus of voluntary modulation. There is the mire of planning regulations, and there is the might of the supermarket sweep. Our manifesto contains programmes to deliver a shift of emphasis, with lighter effective regulation. That does not mean regulations for regulations' sake, but cutting red tape. For every regulation that comes in, another one must get thrown in the  shredder. To achieve that, we in the Parliament have to work to give Scotland a stronger voice in Europe. We must not be left outside the door when fishing and farming are being discussed. We should have our ministers inside, making representations for the industries on which so many communities throughout the South of Scotland region depend, ranging from East Lothian vegetable growers, Eyemouth prawn fishermen and Borders hill farmers to Galloway dairy farmers. Local planning regulations often work against farmers who wish to develop their farms. Many cases cross my desk in which local development is being inhibited. There are good things that we can do under planning regulations, however. For instance, if a supermarket wants to come into an area, we can include in the regulations a requirement for the supermarket to purchase locally; otherwise, they do not get to build. That is one direct intervention that could help our farmers. I recognise the efforts that John Scott and other members have made on buying local, fresh Scottish produce. We have raised that issue in the chamber before in Executive debates and in members' business debates, and we made representations on the matter to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body. Apparently, we cannot have Scottish food in the Scottish Parliament, because the contracts are drawn up in such a way that the cheapest source must be used, and the cost of food miles works out cheapest. However, it is possible to draw up other sorts of contract that do not breach EU regulations. That is called creative contracting. It is about sustainability. That has been achieved in Orkney, which was mentioned earlier. Orkney Islands Council contracts locally because that sustains local communities. The National Assembly for Wales has the Welsh national health service buying Welsh produce. Ironically, Welsh produce is being brought up to Scottish hospitals. What have we been doing in here for eight years? We have been sitting on our hands, allowing that to happen.

No, thank you. The Parliament could set a similar example. We should extend farmers' markets. I have visited John Scott's stall, and he produces wonderful lamb—there is a plug for him. Farmers markets are an excellent initiative, but they do not go far enough. I have already talked about the possibility of granting planning permission to the big boys—the supermarkets—only on a certain basis. Labelling is also extremely important. People think that, if  they buy a chicken with "Produced in Scotland" on the packaging, it is a Scottish chicken, whereas it is not in fact a Scottish chicken. It could be a Pakistani or Indian chicken that has been processed in Scotland. That is what is wrong. We need labelling that is clear to people so that, when they buy something labelled as Scottish produce, they know that it was on the hoof in Scotland. I am glad that I am making members smile. I listened to Jamie McGrigor's romantic description of the landscape. How true it was.

Yes. I also commend the SNP's campaign of about 20 years ago to buy Scottish produce. We led the way in that. As I was saying, Jamie McGrigor was correct to suggest that it is farmers who create our landscape, whether it is the bleak, dramatic mountains, the green sweep of the Borders hills or the black and white dappling of the herds in the Galloway fields. Farmers make those areas brilliant tourist destinations, and we should assist them. On a final, consensual note, I think that Rhona Brankin and I must know the same Borders farmer. He got a grant to do up his two old cottages through European funding, and he used local joiners, who provided a high-quality finish. The cottages are now open 365 days a year for bird-watching, and that brings money into the community and the farm. Let us have more such examples. There—I thought that I would be consensual at the end.

I take it that I am to set an example. I welcome the new cabinet secretary to his post and share the sentiments that Tavish Scott expressed about the vital service that is provided in sub-post offices throughout Scotland. I refer the minister to my consultation of 14,000 borderers on the likely closure of sub-post offices across the Borders, 90 per cent of whom said that the post offices provided essential services. I want to pick up on the issue of other businesses. A Selkirk businessman responded: "As a local small business owner, access to a local post office is vital." A businessman in Heriot responded: "Our business (turnover £1.4 million) would suffer without a post office locally."

I ask the cabinet secretary, in his meetings with the Royal Mail Group, to push for formal consultation with either local chambers of commerce or local businesses that are ancillary and that would be affected by any closures that took place.

Why do you have to keep saying it?

To ask the First Minister how many instances of self-harm involving asylum seekers NHS boards have dealt with in the last four years. (S2F-2796)

That is a sad response, as I am sure that asylum seekers would like us to know. The recent case of the Nepalese asylum seeker, who had been here for six years, is only the latest tragic case to demonstrate the callous inhumanity of the United Kingdom immigration system. The much-trailed letter from the Minister for Education and Young People on the deportation of asylum seekers' families frankly changes nothing. Further to the issue raised by Linda Fabiani, and following yesterday's landmark House of Lords decision in the case of Huang on proportionality and article 8 of the European convention on human rights as it will apply to established families in Scotland, will the First Minister instruct the Lord Advocate to initiate breach of the peace proceedings against officials who use force to attempt to remove established families—that is well within his devolved powers—so as to prevent more misery?

I want the minister to address the issue of insurance liability: first, while construction is going on; and secondly, once the rail link is operational, in the tunnel, under a live runway. Will the minister simply tell me who will pay those premiums?

But who is liable for the premiums? The public purse?

Answer the point.

My preliminary remarks are directed at the powers that be and my fellow committee members. We were a motley crew—Iain Smith, Charlie Gordon, Jamie McGrigor, the goodly chair Scott Barrie and me. One cannot get more motley than that. I am thankful that the procedures for private bills are being reviewed. The procedures are wholly inadequate for committing to the building of a railway line and the spending of some £610 million and rising. The motley crew were akin to castaways or housemates in a stuffy committee room but, considering our pedigrees, we got on reasonably well with what was a worthy but very technical exercise. I defer to Charlie Gordon's extensive and intimate knowledge of transport and, in particular, rolling stock. It is important to remind everyone in the chamber that this is not an Edinburgh rail link. The link is badly named; the name is a misnomer, because the link is supposed to be for Scotland. Any comments that I make are made on that basis and on the basis that the link was sold as being a link to a transport hub. Early on in our work, I had fundamental concerns—which, I can assure members, Fergus Ewing knew nothing about—to do with this particular rail link. I stress that when I refer to "this particular rail link", I am not talking about the principle of having a transport hub or the principle of having a link from Edinburgh to the airport; I am talking about this particular link, built in this particular way, with the particular engineering difficulties that it faces.  If I may say so, I find Mr McLetchie's Damascene conversion to the project rather unconvincing. I wonder whether it has anything to do with an election to the Edinburgh Pentlands seat looming on the horizon. Let us consider the realities of this rail link. There are huge engineering difficulties—diverting the Gogar burn; diverting the River Almond; and constructing a tunnel, complete with interchanges, under a live, working runway, as opposed to constructing a surface link. There are other engineering problems that I do not think have been addressed. If we have longer trains, what do we do about extending the platforms at Glasgow Queen Street station to allow trains to pull in? Are we going take the line right up into Queen Street itself? There is no room to expand the station. Timetabling is another issue. I recall the precious understatement of Network Rail when it was asked about timetabling: it said that timetabling would be "very challenging". The length of some journeys will be increased. I am sorry that Margaret Smith is not in the chamber to hear this, but if we add up lots of five-minute delays such as the one that she mentioned, the compounded impact on the whole network timetable is substantial.

I hope that this is not a technical question, because I do not want anything technical.

I did not say "all"; I said "some". The issues have not been resolved. The minister says that he is busy buying rolling stock now and making his bid for it, but on only 19 December 2006, Ian Mylroi of Transport Scotland said: "The perfect train that we would like does not exist today."—[ Official Report , Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill Committee , 19 December 2006; c 332.] It is pretty good to have produced that suddenly in two and half months so that it can be ordered for leasing. I would like to hear details about that—where the stock will come from, when it will be delivered and so on—from the minister in his summing-up. That would be handy. Scott Barrie referred fairly to ticket pricing, which has not been resolved. Will commuters be charged premium prices? Pricing was a big selling  point in relation to social inclusion. The Scottish Parliament information centre briefing says that the rail link is "to assist in the delivery of social inclusion to Scottish towns", which it lists. By the way, that list includes no towns in the Scottish Borders, which were all forgotten about. It is not made plain that if a premium fare is charged, we can say goodbye to social inclusion—the link will be simply for Edinburgh and will benefit only Edinburgh and close surrounding areas, if I may paraphrase Karen Whitefield. It will not benefit the rest of Scotland. I base all my comments on points that were made to the committee. Away from the quasi-judicial shackles, I can now compare the rail link's cost with that of other major transport projects, to which David McLetchie fairly referred, such as the Borders railway, other rail links, roads, the crucial Forth crossing and Edinburgh trams. People talk about our billion-pound gap, but I do not know where the Executive will obtain all the money for those projects. Who on earth is carrying the insurance premiums for accidents and damage in the tunnel, which will go under a live runway, that mean that the airport cannot function? I would like the minister to add that to the list that he is making for his answers. What will be the cost of such insurance? Will the taxpayer bear the cost? If not, who will bear it? For all the reasons that I have given, and having heard all the evidence, I do not support the bill. However, I will end on a lighter note. My colleague Scott Barrie referred to the great crested newt, which I had the privilege of asking a question about—I have always wanted to do that. I say to him that perhaps the great crested newt will stymie the project by abandoning its fear of hard hats and making an appearance by demonstrating. I also say to him that his poems about that are in my safe custody for the time being.

I have already quoted the figure provided by Save the Children that 240,000 children in Scotland live in poverty. The 11 th hour proposal by the current First Minister to extend eligibility for free school meals to children in families that are receiving the maximum working tax credit will, by his own admission, lift only 100,000 children out of that trap. That will leave 140,000 children—more than 50 per cent—still in poverty and not eligible for free school meals. Furthermore, a briefing that I received from Capability Scotland addresses the specific issue of families in which there are people with a disability. Seventy per cent of those families rely on benefits, but they are not the benefits that qualify the children for free school meals. If I can put down a marker for Parliament in the next session, I think that the Education Committee, the Health Committee or the Communities Committee should investigate that specific pocket of people who are being deprived. I will speak to five issues. The first is the need to ensure that children have at least one decent meal a day. That is a basic right. We all know what it is to have at least one decent meal a day. Extending the eligibility criteria for free school meals is crucial, and the SNP's amendments would have done that. Widening the criteria so that there was universal access to free school meals in primary 1 to primary 3 would have let us test out what difference universal provision made not just to the physical well-being of children, but to their social and mental well-being. The Scottish National Party will be happy to discuss the matter with COSLA when we are in power, as COSLA has said that it wants the criteria to be extended. The second issue is the quality of the food that is provided. It is essential that meals are of good quality if we are to encourage children to take up provision. Attention should also be given to the size of the portions. It is not appropriate for primary 1 children and primary 7 children to receive the same portions of food, which is what happens in some of our schools. In addition, bad eating habits among our children mean that type 2 diabetes is now rampant, and the number of such diabetics is set to explode. That will have permanent health consequences for those who are affected.  Thirdly, in so far as is practicable, school food should be prepared in-house and eating should become a social experience. We need to consider that issue when we are building schools, given the concerns that have been raised about schools that are built by public-private partnerships and under the private finance initiative. In one of the Communities Committee's evidence sessions on the bill, a representative of the Educational Institute of Scotland said that contracts are so tight that schools cannot even move a socket. What are the prospects of developing the size of the school kitchen if the contract does not allow food to be cooked on the school premises? That issue needs to be considered. Fourthly, the use of local produce is key. Having chased this issue for years, I am glad that the minister has recognised that by agreeing to review and reissue the guidance to education authorities. Some authorities seem to be terrified of the European Union and do not realise that they can comply with the rules while using issues such as social inclusion to develop contracts that mean that produce is bought from local people. Fifthly, we need to recognise that, if we want to encourage children to take up the free provision to which they are entitled, we must not only address the quality of the food, the size of the portions and the wider social experience but tackle the issues of identification. The SNP shares the concerns that Patrick Harvie raised about developments in technology. In particular, we are concerned that it seems—from what we have heard today—that consent from a parent or guardian is not always obtained. I cannot see why the minister did not issue a code of conduct to ensure standard practice across Scotland. That is absolutely basic. I was delighted by Donald Gorrie's speech. I am not usually delighted by his speeches—I will get a set of all his speeches for when I have a sleepless night—but today he gave us a delightful journey through Donald Gorrie logic. If it is right to have universal provision of breakfasts, snacks and milk, what makes the provision of lunch different? The answer is Greenwich mean time. I also hope that some head teacher challenges that provision in the bill by having lunch start at 11 o'clock. It is a further testimony to the Toryisation of new Labour and its Liberal Democrat partners in crime—who take credit for the good things and take the blame for nothing—that they voted down our amendments, which would have brought our poorest and most vulnerable children into the ambit of free school meals provision. The Executive's end-of-term report card—I know that the Tories keep such report cards hidden—will show "failed" next to the 240,000 Scottish children who live in poverty but who do not get free school meals.

Patrick Harvie makes it sound exciting, but it never was.

Will the member give way?

Can we not do both those things? Can we not find ways to encourage take-up of free school meals among children who are currently eligible for them and extend eligibility? We could do both—at least, the SNP could.

The First Minister has said that he wants to do that.

I refer to the comments that I made on my amendments at stage 2. During stage 1, Barnardo's Scotland referred to the "difference between the percentage of children who live in poverty—23 per cent—and the percentage of children who are eligible for free school meals, which is 18 per cent". Barnardo's further commented: "It seems strange that an anti-poverty measure is set at a level that excludes an awful lot of children who it is accepted live in poverty."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 22 November 2006; c 4331.] I am also obliged to Save the Children for its paper entitled "Children Can't Wait", which advises that there are currently 240,000 children in Scotland who live in poverty. The SNP seeks to extend the provision of free school meals to children whose families are on a wide range of benefits other than the current qualifying benefits, which I understand are income support, income-based jobseekers allowance and support for asylum seekers. My amendments seek to extend eligibility to children whose families are on low incomes and receive the following benefits: the working tax credit, because the parents are getting back into the jobs market; the lone parents benefit run-on; council tax benefit; housing benefit; and local housing allowance, which I understand applies instead of housing benefit in some areas, such as Argyll. We all know how difficult it is to access benefits in Scotland, so the people concerned are very needy. Jack McConnell, who has been in power for eight years but who has now been pushed into a corner by the Scottish National Party, said recently that the Executive "will, in the first year of the next Parliament, extend entitlement and reverse the shameful decision made by the Tories to cut school meals." It is not my position ever to defend the Tories, and I am not doing that. However, I want members to consider who is really to blame. Jack McConnell said that he would extend entitlement "to families on maximum working tax credit" in order to "give nearly 100,000 kids"— his word— "access to a free healthy meal, and ... improve their lives." In the debate on the Education (School Meals) Scotland Bill in June 2003, my colleague, Fiona Hyslop, proposed those very measures, yet the  Labour and Liberal Democrat Government voted against them. I smell an election coming. The Executive parties feel that they have to do something, just as they did for the nurses. When I lodged my amendments at stage 2, Scott Barrie said of children in Glasgow: "They were already entitled to free meals but sought to go outwith the school to the local shops or wherever to get snacks or meals. We really need to address that point. A number of people who are entitled to free school meals do not take them. By extending provision, there is no guarantee that the very people we want to reach are the ones who would actually take up free meals." He continued: "That is where we should be concentrating our efforts, certainly at the start. We should see whether that makes a difference before we spend resources in a way that might not achieve what we all want to achieve."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 13 February 2007; c 4569.] I suppose that Jack McConnell has had a word in his ear since then.

I commend David McLetchie for a thoughtful speech. The Scottish National Party supports many of his comments and shares many of his views, especially with regard to Holly Wells and Jessica Chapman, Dunblane and—in my case—Miss X in the Borders. We support what David McLetchie said about the difficulty of ensuring that protection is proportionate and his comments on society generally. On a lighter note, I tender to the chamber the apologies of Fiona Hyslop, who has been detained. That is the reason why I am here, with my parachute lying outside. I have found the debate very interesting. Pupils from Earlston high school were here today, and during their visit I found myself strenuously defending the Parliament. We are growing up, and this is a difficult bill on difficult issues. I, too, praise Robert Brown, despite the fact that he is a Liberal Democrat, because he is sincere and a good egg generally. His career is now completely blighted—votes are melting away. I turn to the issue of those who work with children. I have two sisters who are primary teachers. Ken Macintosh described how the fear that some kind of allegation will be made against them if they even touch or help a child permeates teachers. They cannot even help a child to tie their  shoelaces in case something is read into that. Those in the voluntary sector are even worse off—they have to keep looking over their shoulders. Again, it is a matter of balance. I have only just found out that 300 amendments were lodged to the bill, so, again, I must praise the Education Committee for its work. The committee seems so consensual and committee members so nice to each other that I think that I belong there. The committee managed to get part 3 deleted, although I should once again commend Robert Brown for listening. As I understand it, it was a victim of the bogeyman of legislation—the law of unintended consequences—so its deletion was no bad thing. That shows the importance of committee scrutiny, but I will come to the issue of post-legislative scrutiny in a moment. As far as the voluntary sector is concerned, the jury is definitely out, particularly with regard to funding. We all know from our case load that the sector is already in financial difficulty; indeed, I could trot out the usual mantra about its funding not being secured for three years. Donald Gorrie, who is in the chamber, knows perfectly well the background to all this. Those concerns will grow when money starts to be siphoned off to fund the Olympics. The fact is that the smaller voluntary organisations will suffer. After all, the big boys and girls in the sector can generally take care of themselves. Concerns have also been expressed about the commencement date of 2009. As I understand it, that is because of the additional work that will be needed for the subordinate legislation, regulations and all that stuff. We are eight years on in this Parliament, so we should all realise that subordinate legislation is the meat and gravy of the matter. It is certainly a huge issue, because we must be able to examine the actual gubbins, as it were, of the legislation. We must always look at legislation as a helpful tool. However, as David McLetchie and others have pointed out, no legislation can guarantee 100 per cent that all volunteers and teachers will do right and that nothing bad will happen to a child or vulnerable adult. It is important to make it clear that, regrettably, some dark and evil people will always find a way of circumventing legislation. As a result, all of us in this chamber should put down a marker for the next Parliament, whichever party is in power. As Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said with his usual charm, which we will all miss, we must return to and examine carefully the operation of this legislation. I finish with my mantra: if we legislate in haste, we will be sued at leisure.

To ask the First Minister what plans the Scottish Executive has to review the management of 999 emergency calls for ambulances. (S2F-2775)

I put on record my admiration for the dedication of ambulance crews. Crew members and patients have contacted me to express concerns. A crewman from the Scottish Borders shed light on why ambulance crews in the area are taking longer to answer calls, when he said: "It is definitely a management issue. Crews are being taken from the Borders up to Edinburgh to work. It doesn't seem to matter what is being done on your part, or the press. The service still continues to send crews out of their area." In the light of a fairly recent case in the Borders that almost had very bad consequences, does the  First Minister have an idea of the scale of the problem in Scotland? If he does not, are there grounds for an independent review or inquiry to determine the scale of the problem?

I understand that the basis of review is the scientific and clinical evidence, not costs.

I want to explore some of the issues around the SMC. This is new territory for me in some respects. Are the SMC's deliberations and decisions, along with the reasons for its decisions, in the public domain?

I will try not to repeat what members have said and to provide additional data. There is no national register of people with MS in the UK or in Scotland, so the figures that are quoted are an estimate and are based on local studies. Work in that regard should be progressed. Similarly, there is no accurate record of the number of new cases of MS that are diagnosed each year. The nationwide application of the results of local studies suggests that about 2,500  people in the UK and perhaps some 250 in Scotland are diagnosed with MS each year. We need to start gathering information on the condition. I applaud Tricia Marwick's dedication to the cause of MS since she entered the Parliament in 1999. I also applaud the hard work of the MS Society Scotland, which has lobbied hard and successfully on various occasions in the Parliament and has made progress for sufferers of the disease. In the most recent parliamentary answer on the matter, in response to a question from Irene Oldfather, Andy Kerr said: "As at 30 September 2005, NHSScotland employed 10 Multiple Sclerosis Nurse Specialists".— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 19 December 2006; S2W-30479.]  If I have got my figures right, that is about one specialist nurse per 1,000 people with MS, but the distribution will not be as neat as that and some areas will have none. I draw the minister's attention to the fact that those nurses, like other specialist nurses, are usually funded partly or wholly by charities. That is inappropriate, because they are highly skilled staff who provide a lot of information and support to sufferers in places such as the Borders. Members said a lot about Tysabri. I challenge the idea that it is expensive. The MS Society states: "No other drug has shown this potential to reduce disability, and any short-term savings are likely to be outpaced by the devastating financial costs of living with severe, progressive disability—not to mention the emotional costs to people with MS and their friends and families." My colleague Maureen Watt and others described the broader picture. Tysabri costs £14,740 per patient per year. I do not think that that is dear. I would not argue about spending that sum, which is less than £15,000. As Tricia Marwick said, if we subtract the cost of other drugs, the cost is reduced to about £7,000. The cost is small, especially given the small number of people that the drug will help—40 to 50, as I understand it. What will happen next? People will be rejected by NHS boards—Eleanor Scott alluded to that. People with money will buy the drug and will be treated, but people who do not have the money will not be treated. We will have not just a postcode lottery, but an economic divide between those who can pay and those who cannot. The SMC has no appeals process. I do not want to give ideas on the hoof, but it seems to me that there is scope for a procedure to review the SMC's decisions. The Government should not have its fingers in the pie. Instead, an independent board should consider the decisions. Individuals or  organisations that can demonstrate an interest—such as the MS Society—should have the right to have decisions reviewed. They should not find that a decision has been taken and that that is the end of the process.

Presiding Officer, when you indicated that I  would have nine minutes, there was a groan from behind me and someone said, "You don't need to use it all." That hardly gives me faith in my oratorial powers, so please do not say that I have any longer. With friends like these, who needs enemies? Whatever our constitutional position, we must accept that, to tackle the problem, we have to examine the causes, many of which are reserved: consumer credit, advertising legislation and the culture of credit and borrowing that pervades contemporary society. Gone are the days when my worthy mother saved up to buy something and dad came home with a record player, for example, to rounds of applause. That was how we did it then—we did not buy now and pay later. That has changed, and we cannot turn back the clock, but we must look at how we deal with the situation and prevent the problems from spiralling out of control. In Parliament, we deal with the consequences of those causes: debt recovery, which I will touch on, deprivation, matrimonial problems—which Kenny MacAskill mentioned—alcoholism, violence and crime. Many a relationship breaks up because of rows about money problems. Like others, I applaud the work of citizens advice bureaux. I used to be a volunteer lawyer for a bureau, and most queries were about consumer debt. I support what was said by—I may miss some members out—Ken Macintosh and Colin Fox about core funding for the bureaux. It is the place where people go at the last minute, with a writ or letter demanding payment in their hand. When they are asked when they are due in court, they say, "Tomorrow". The bureaux are on the street, so people can walk in and get a stay of execution. I also applaud the work of credit unions—I am a saving member of a credit union. I have always felt that the name is a bit difficult and I have raised the point before. I do not know whether they need to rebrand themselves to help more people understand exactly what they do, which is what the old TSB used to do before it became a profit-making bank like the others.

I thank Stewart Stevenson for that suggestion, and I will forget what he said earlier about me and the length of my speech. I want also to remark on the post office card account, which must be supported. We all know that there are threats to shut some of our rural post offices. If that is done, it will mean that there is no bank in those places either. There is a huge issue of access to services for people both in  isolated, rural communities and in some city suburbs. The money advice scheme is also a good idea, but I do not think that it is working as it should. In part, that is because of the shortage of accredited advisers. I know that there are none in the Scottish Borders, so we cannot have money advice schemes there. I hope that the minister will address that point. Education was rightly touched on by others, including Bill Aitken. We have a generation of children who sometimes never see cash. We know how easy it is to pay by putting a card into a machine and getting a slip—the pain is later. We have a generation of children who not only have credit being thrown at them, but do not actually see the money coming out of their purses when they spend it, leaving only 10p pieces or whatever. That is a big issue for schools. How will such education be timetabled—in either primary or secondary schools—with the current emphasis on various subjects? There is no easy solution. We heard graphic descriptions of loan sharks from Christine May—they are sinister, insidious and ruthless. Frankly, I do not think that the solution is simply more police in the community. There is a huge problem with fear and victimisation. Word gets around like wildfire, and comments are made like, "You're the one who shopped him." Although I welcome pilot schemes and would agree with a cap on interest rates as mentioned by Christine May, we cannot do that from this Parliament.

If people are desperate to go to loan sharks, they will go to them. We will just drive them behind even more closed doors and into more alleyways. I do not know what the last bit of the Conservative amendment means—Dave Petrie did not address it in his summing up. It says "that tackling personal debt and financial exclusion is an issue of social responsibility". That looks like waffle to me. The way to get rid of loan sharks is to make them redundant. That brings us back to reserved matters, and I want to return to advertising, which was mentioned by Mr Petrie and others. We are in a must-have culture: we must have something now, whether or not it is needed. Offers to borrow  money and get credit are thrust through our letterboxes day in, day out. When we go into shops, we are asked, "Will you take a store card?" Most of us who know that we are not financially sensible say no, but if someone was desperate and needed something, they could take a store card. Again, at that moment it is painless and there is some kind of satisfaction and gratification. The pain comes later with high interest rates. As has been mentioned, a lack of affordable housing is driving people to borrow four or five times their income. All that needs to happen is for a couple to split or someone to become ill, and that house, like a pack of cards, tumbles down around them. They may not have enough equity to pay off the loans, and they may be left with a personal debt. That causes homelessness and is another issue to consider. My colleague Kenny MacAskill mentioned predatory lending. I mentioned the unsolicited mail, but let us look at the consolidated loan companies. We see their adverts on afternoon television, and there is one that I particularly despise. It shows a lady smiling while she is talking on the phone. Her son cannot find his skateboard or roller skates, so the dad is looking for them as well. There is a homely conversation going on, with genteel domestic chaos. In the middle of that, the woman says, "£25,000? Yes, that'll be good," as if that is all that it means to borrow £25,000. The adverts do not say out loud that the loan is secured against their home. I would love to see the Parliament tackle that and ban those adverts, but unfortunately we cannot. I must address land attachments, which are a big mistake. My colleague Kenny MacAskill said that the average personal debt in Scotland is £7,000-plus, but a land attachment needs a debt of just £3,000. I will consider the principle that operates. If I want to borrow £10,000 as a secured debt, I know what I am doing; I take legal advice, a legal document is drawn up to secure the debt against my property and the interest rates that I pay reflect that—they will be 6 or 7 per cent over 10, 20 or 30 years. However, if I take out an unsecured loan of £4,000 and I do not repay it, it will transmogrify into a secured debt—a land attachment. That is although I never had a legal document at the time of contracting that said that that would happen and the interest rates that I am paying—20, 30, 40, 50 or 60 per cent—reflect that. That is unjust and it flies in the face of contract law, because when someone contracts to do something, they should know the duties and obligations, which are not known in the situation that I described. The Deputy Minister for Communities talked about guarantees that this or that will not happen, but they cannot be given. That situation will be a sword of Damocles  over people who, to fend off land attachment, will have to borrow from the consolidated loan companies with their adverts on television that none of us wants. All those issues come to bear.

We return to the buffers of what the Parliament can and cannot do.

No, because I am in my last minute. Many of us—not just SNP members—who have been here for eight years, or four years, are becoming exasperated by knowing what we are dealing with but not having the tools to eradicate endemic poverty. When we get rid of endemic poverty, we get rid of loan sharks. [ Interruption. ] Someone rightly said that that is trite. Only the rich can afford credit.

I am interested to know how we can interfere with interest rates when we do not have the powers to do so in this Parliament. Is Mr Aitken suggesting that we should have those powers?

From the member's comments, it seems that he supports the statement in the SNP amendment about the burden that legal moneylending puts on people. Is that the case?

Now there is an admission.

Does the minister share my concern that Ofgem supports discounts for direct debit customers, while saying that its duty is to protect vulnerable customers? Can it do both?

I congratulate Scott Barrie on securing this debate and want to narrow the focus to highlight the injustice of the direct debit system. Frances Curran will be pleased to know that I, too, will have a go at Ofgem. Energy companies are making a financial killing on the back of the less well-off. Figures that I have obtained show that some companies are charging customers who will not pay by direct debit almost £300 a year more. That said, I know that when prices go up, the amount that people pay by direct debit also goes up. Indeed, my own direct debit went up, despite the fact that, in December, I was £300 in credit. Not only are the companies overcharging people who are not on direct debit, but they must be making tens of thousands of pounds from the interest on the thousands of people who are in credit to them. When I asked Ofgem for those figures, it said that it did not have  them. The companies have a banking system, so they are making a double killing. With regard to the overcharging of non-direct debit customers for gas and electricity combined, the worst offenders—I will name and shame them—were npower, Powergen and Scottish Power. The companies who penalised customers who took only gas the most for not paying by direct debit were Scottish Gas/British Gas, npower and Atlantic Electric and Gas. The worst companies for customers who required only electricity and who chose not to pay by direct debit were npower, Powergen and Scottish Power. I thought that I would find out what Ofgem does about that. According to its website, "Protecting consumers is Ofgem's first priority. We do this by:   promoting effective competition, wherever appropriate, and   regulating effectively the monopoly companies which run the gas pipes and the electricity wires".    Ofgem also says that it takes account "of the needs of vulnerable customers, particularly older people, those with disabilities and on low incomes". Frankly, I do not think that it is doing that. I was interested to find out that "Ofgem is funded by the energy companies who are licensed to run the gas and electricity infrastructure." That immediately suggested to me that there might very well be a conflict of interest, so I wrote to Ofgem. In the reply that I received just this week, it said: "You ask what Ofgem is doing to ensure that customers who pay by cash or cheque, as opposed to those who pay by other methods, i.e. direct debit, are not penalised and for details of the amount of credit held by energy suppliers in relation to consumers who pay by direct debit." I got the usual spiel: "Ofgem's principal duty is to protect the interests of consumers by promoting competition." That is fine for people who are on the internet and who can go to uSwitch, but most vulnerable people are not doing that. The letter went on to say: "We do not think it unreasonable that energy suppliers offer better deals on price to consumers who are able to pay by direct debit, as this reflects the lower costs they have incurred in dealing with this payment consequent savings are therefore passed on to the consumer." Ofgem is saying that people who are rich and who can pay by direct debit will get the benefits. I do not see how that is protecting vulnerable customers, which is supposed to be one of the organisation's principles. Ofgem also told me:  "We would encourage consumers who pay by cash or cheque to consider switching to a supplier who offers a prompt payment discount", but not many vulnerable people are able to make prompt payments. It said: "Ofgem does not collect information about the total amount of money held by utility companies belonging to customers or the amount owed by customers to those companies." I think that it should find out. I would like to know how much of people's credit the utility companies have in their accounts. Let me tell members what it costs to run what I think is a pretty useless organisation. In 2005-06, Ofgem's income was £52.4 million—that could do a lot for people who cannot pay their bills. It received £46.7 million in licence fees from the suppliers and £13 million from the Department of Trade and Industry. I pose the question: what is Ofgem doing to protect the vulnerable consumers who so badly need its protection? I do not think that it is protecting them.

Will the minister give way?

I do not know what it is about boys and cars—there should be a testosterone tax. I may be wrong, but I think that I will be the only woman to speak in the debate. I was one of the 1.8 million people who signed the e-petition to which Tony Blair responded. In his response, he says that road pricing is "a complex subject" and that we need "a full and frank debate". We have been here before. We have had full and frank debates about Trident and nuclear power when the Prime Minister had already made up his mind—their purpose was to soften up the electorate for decisions that had already been made. Even when Blair gets a response, as was the case with Iraq when it was discovered that there were no weapons of mass destruction and we went to war anyway, we know what his position is. No one is fooled—a full and frank debate is being held just to soften up the electorate. Douglas Alexander, who is a self-confessed disciple of Margaret Thatcher, has made clear his support for the proposed tax. Together with his unlikely lieutenant Mr Rumbles, the Government's Minister for Transport, Tavish Scott, wants to pilot the idea in Scotland. Good grief. What an image. Who would want to board a plane that had Tavish Scott at the controls with Mike Rumbles navigating? I will be fair by contrasting what Tavish Scott says as a Liberal Democrat with what he is allowed to say as a Government minister—we all know that he is two-hats Tavish. As Liberal Democrat transport spokesperson, he said: "we would replace Brown's blunt motoring taxes with a fairer UK-wide scheme"— I did not know that he was standing for Westminster— "which does what it is meant to—tackle congestion and meet ... climate change." The Liberal Democrats cannot do that, of course. Their amendment says that such schemes "need to be fully assessed, tested and evaluated in order to keep Scotland moving." That is typical Lib-Dem speak. As a Government minister, Tavish Scott cannot advocate the measures that he proposes as Liberal Democrat transport spokesperson. The Lib Dems are in Government, but at the same time they are not really in Government. Why the Labour Party lets them get away with it after what happened in the  Dunfermline and West Fife by-election is a mystery to me. I do not know what dark secrets they hold that allow them to keep Labour in its place. I thought that I was already paying a road tax through my fuel duty and my car tax. When the fuel tax escalator was first introduced, it added 3p to the price of a litre of fuel and tax accounted for 72.8 per cent of the total cost. That figure has risen to 81.5 per cent. People who live in rural parts of the Borders pay far more than others pay for petrol. The minister said that the proposed new tax will not impact on rural areas because there is no congestion, but that is not true. People who live in rural areas have to use motorways to commute to hospitals in central locations, so they will have to pay the new tax. We are talking about a triple whammy. It will be interesting to find out what happens when the real consultation takes place on 3 May, when voters in the Scottish Borders and other rural areas at last have the chance to get shot of the hypocrital Liberal Democrats who stand on one corner and say one thing then stand on another corner and say something else. I urge Labour members to come out of their shells and have a go at the Liberals; they know perfectly well that the Liberals are seeing them off day after day on television and in the newspapers. Tavish Scott has been found out—he cannot hide under his Viking hat any longer.

You have embarrassed her.

There is a great whiff of electioneering, which is a pity in a debate that should be much more consensual. I will focus on low-level crime and the fear of crime, which my colleague Kenny MacAskill mentioned. We all know the realities of the groups of people on the street who are bevvied up, who batter the wing mirrors off cars, and who are noisy and threatening, and we all know their loci—the streets, and empty store car parks and municipal car parks. We all have in-trays full of constituents' concerns about such matters. Mobile phones allow such groups to be mobile, which wastes police time because the police must chase a moving and ever-dispersing target. Communities are frightened to come out, to speak and to report incidents because they are understandably afraid that they will be victimised or their property damaged.  The SNP supported the introduction of ASBOs. They have their place, and those who issue them mean well. However, we know that for some hoodlums—I will use that word—ASBOs have become a badge of honour and a rite of passage. To an extent, Parliament must draw back from having the highest expectations of ASBOs. They have their place, but for some individuals they are not a cure. People's perceptions also mean that decent youngsters become stigmatised. The noisy and boisterous group on the corner will probably be considered to be part of the problem and youthful exuberance will become as feared and intimidating as the real McCoy. I will give a brief map of the problems, the solutions to which are complex. Drinking, which has been referred to, and to a lesser extent drugs, make people lose their inhibitions and increase aggression. Fire-water fires people up. The ringleaders are the real baddies who lead groups. They have lieutenants and camp followers who gain some community recognition for being part of the team. Boredom is ever the cry of the young, and always will be, and disconnection from the community is another factor. No simple solutions exist. We agree with some solutions that have been offered. Fixed penalties have their place, so why waste police time with drunken louts on a street corner when a fixed penalty can be issued to get that sorted? Money would be spent on penalties rather than on buying more drink. I commend the marking of bottles and whatever else it takes to stop proprietors selling drink to underage purchasers or to adults for people who are underage, as Mr Pringle said. We must have severe penalties for that. As for education, I have previously mentioned the up to you project in the Borders, which is a mentoring project in which pupils of Peebles high school go to feeder primary schools to discuss issues with primary 7 pupils. That works for the primary pupils and the secondary pupils, who are properly trained. The project is now to be extended to Penicuik. The minister mentioned CCTV, but that must be used in a discriminating fashion so that it picks out ringleaders and does not catch in the net the innocent or those who have just gone along for the excitement. They should be separated out and the penalties should be different. I suggest simple measures such as better lighting in some areas, so that people cannot move about in the dark. As for boredom, the selling-off of playing fields and community centres must stop. Young people must be engaged so that their energies are properly used.  The disconnection from the community is part of life: it is part of being an adolescent. People grow apart from their communities as they grow apart from their parents and they return as they mature. Sullen teenagehood will always exist, but it must not be destructive teenagehood. In that regard, the comments that my colleague Kenny MacAskill made about deprivation need to be addressed properly. As I said, no party-political solution exists. If the debate becomes just a tub-thumping exercise or a bidding war, we will do communities no service whatever.

I am interested in the adult protection committees' reports back to ministers. The minister talked about uniformity throughout Scotland. Is there a role for the Social Work Inspection Agency in that?

When Dr Turner referred to the "tea and toast brigade", Roseanna Cunningham and I found ourselves competing with each other to meet the test, although we thought that she had also used the word "tetchy".  More seriously, the Scottish National Party welcomes the recognition—as I think all members do—of the vulnerability of some adults and some elderly people; I chose those words carefully. It is extremely difficult to legislate on what is proportionate, or on the difficult balance between state intervention and individual autonomy, to which Roseanna Cunningham referred. We must always remember that not only is capacity variable, it is not absolute. When someone says, "No, I don't want you to come into my home" or "No, I don't feel threatened", the authorities have a very difficult decision to make. Somebody has to judge whether that is the case, which is extremely difficult. It was important that the Health Committee took a hold of the bill and made it workable. However, I say to the minister that some of that work should have been done before the bill even reached the committee, as it was self-evident that parts of it needed to be amended. The committee should not have had to do that, bearing in mind that we have a unicameral system. That issue should be considered during the next session of Parliament. I will touch on some of the hot spots in the bill, against the backcloth of the issues of balance and proportionality and the fact that capacity is variable and not absolute. Section 13 deals with removal orders. I have faith in Scotland's sheriffs, who have a great deal of experience in dealing with intricate matters such as interdicts and interim responsibility for the care and protection of children. Sheriffs know what they are doing, so section 13 provides a terribly important protection. Euan Robson referred to section 9, which is on keeping records. I agree that that is important, but the problem is with people reading the records. In the Borders case, the information was on record, but nobody read it or passed it to somebody else.

I do not want to get into that specific incident, but there was information on record that was not followed up. I know that, because I had that information before me. The issue was not just that the records were incomplete, but that there were warning signs that nobody followed up. I see that Euan Robson is agreeing with me on that. The issue comes back to people. The issue of urgent cases is difficult. It will be difficult for somebody to decide to ban a person when no sheriff is available and they have to go to a justice of the peace. I accept that there will be a time limit, but much will depend on judgments and  the implementation. The introduction of adult protection committees is to be welcomed. They should have been set up before now and they have already been set up elsewhere. The issue is about the interaction between agencies. Section 45 is on the code of practice. We have said over the years that codes of practice and regulations are where the meat is in legislation. The code will be enforceable in court. That is where the issues of operation come in. It is extremely important for the Parliament to pay attention to those issues. We have passed primary legislation before, only to find difficulties on the ground in following the codes of practice. Sometimes, such difficulties cannot be discovered until legislation is implemented. However, as many members have said, we need monitoring processes. Roseanna Cunningham commented on the appeals procedure. I am a bit concerned about section 48, which states: "No appeal is competent against the granting of ... an assessment order, ... a removal order, or ... a warrant for entry." That is it. End of story. No appeal procedure is competent. Issues may arise that relate to the European convention on human rights. I hope that the minister is right on that issue, but there may be issues about having no appeal procedure whatever in those instances. Legislation—whether primary legislation or regulations—and the guidance that is produced under it are mere tools of the trade. At the end of the day, we come back to the people who use those tools. However, I do not want to encourage a blame culture, because being a social worker today is a thankless, complex and ever-demanding task that is underresourced and underpaid. Social workers continually have to make choices about what comes to the top of the pile on their desk and what does not. We ask an awful lot of our social work departments and their management. That is why, although I agree that we should pass the bill because we all accept that it is probably a good thing—my history teacher used to say, "It is either a good thing or a bad thing"—I argue that funding and personnel resources must be put in place. The Scottish National Party generally supports the bill, but we have caveats to do with the operation and interpretation of the legislation in what is a sensitive area and on the provision of staffing and funding. At the end of the day, I return to Roseanna Cunningham's point that the bill is not about policing; it is about adult support and protection. We must ensure that we get the balance right between support and protection and that we do not go too far down the road of  protection, which can sometimes mean shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted.

The debate has been consensual, but I am a little disappointed that the minister has not addressed early intervention. He talked about managing the condition when it has been diagnosed, but the issue that has been highlighted is the initial diagnosis. I do not know whether the minister was going to move on to that, but I am trying to accelerate him.

I congratulate Margo MacDonald not only on bringing the motion before the Parliament, but on this morning's substantive presentation. I also commend Yvonne Murray's very moving speech, from which Margo MacDonald quoted, about her experience with her daughter—an experience that  came as a huge shock to me. I say to Margo MacDonald that this is one of the debates that will produce ministerial results. Some of the solutions are not too difficult. I thank Coeliac UK for the substantive briefing that it gave to members, the key point of which was that, if people think that someone who is a coeliac sufferer simply has a food allergy, they underestimate and understate the situation. Of course, we are talking about an auto-immune disease that has severe short-term and long-term repercussions. I understand that as many as 50,000 Scots could have the disease, but that only one in eight may be diagnosed. That is because of the difficulties in diagnosing the symptoms, but also because of lack of knowledge in the medical profession. Again, that point was highlighted by the presentations that we heard from Yvonne Murray and Gordon Banks MP, the latter of whom was diagnosed late in life. I want to focus on the price of gluten-free products. Gordon Banks made the point this morning that, even when someone is buying foods that are not marked as gluten free, they have to take a long time to read through the list of ingredients to ensure that the offending ingredients are not included. It is good that Tesco and Sainsbury's now have gluten-free areas—we have all seen them—but we need to look at the prices. I will compare some foodstuffs: if bread is normally 35p, the gluten-free price is £1.78; if plain white flour is 29p, the gluten-free price is £1.43; and if a packet of penne pasta is 37p, the gluten-free price is £1.48. As I listened to Yvonne Murray's speech this morning, two things came to mind. First, I was struck by the way in which this able, informed and determined woman managed to secure a resolution for her child, through pursuing the issues, and by how she has moved on to helping others. What if someone is not that kind of person? What if they do not come from that kind of background? Perhaps they come from a deprived area, they are not the brightest of people, or they are not determined or informed. If so, they will not be the kind of person who can unlock this puzzle for their child. I wonder how many such people there are in our communities. The second thing that came to mind was that, even if someone is diagnosed, how can they afford the price of gluten-free products? The coeliac sufferer or the parent of a coeliac cannot deviate from those products. I leave members with that thought. Perhaps some members should approach the supermarkets, which make great profits, and ask them how they can defend the price differences between products. We should ask the supermarkets to bear in mind the many  people who are required to purchase gluten-free products. I thank Margo MacDonald for bringing the debate to the chamber and congratulate her again.

I congratulate Ken Macintosh on securing this very important debate and on his commitment to the cross-party group on cancer. I do not know whether Shona Robison, who has a constituency engagement, will be able to stay for the whole debate, so I shall press on. The most recent parliamentary answer on deaths from cervical cancer reveals that, in 1975, 55 per cent of deaths were in the age group 60 and over, 44 per cent were 30 to 59, and 0.8 per cent were under 30. It is the latter group that we must consider, because the written answer went on to show that although the figures for 2004 remained fairly static for the first two groups—60 and over, and 30 to 59—the figure for the under-30s had risen to nearly 4 per cent. Ken Macintosh properly focused on that increase. I fully endorse what he said. The vaccine is not, as it were, a magic bullet—the intention is not to mislead people—but neither is it an endorsement of promiscuity. It will not accelerate promiscuity; it is an example of something that can be used to help women, indeed to prevent them dying. The vaccine is not the complete solution. Every year, more than 500 women in Scotland are diagnosed as having cervical cancer. It must be a dreadful diagnosis, but it is not the end for all—although about 100 do die. Because of the high level of underage sex to which I have already referred, the incidence among younger women is increasing. More than 30 per cent of girls aged 15 are sexually active. The solution is a mixture of addressing the vaccine and looking at behaviour. I note what Ken Macintosh said about the vaccine and I understand that different ones are available. I do not know the technicalities but, so far, the one to which he referred has been effective. Shona Robison mentioned delay. I understand that the JCVI first met to discuss the vaccine on 25 October. Ken Macintosh's comment that it is a question not of if but of when gives me even more concern about a delay. I hope that the minister will  address that. I understand that Austria is already running the programme and that the Nordic countries have committed themselves to it. As Ken Macintosh says, delaying this any further will unnecessarily cost lives. A woman's death impacts on the entire family. As Ken Macintosh said, take-up of the smear test has been falling off. Perhaps familiarity breeds contempt, but it is terribly important that even with a national vaccine programme the Scottish screening programme should continue. Perhaps the minister will advise us how he will ensure people take up the invitation from their general practitioner to attend for a smear test. As we all know, the sooner cervical cancer is detected, the less invasive the treatment and the higher the chance of survival. That is important. It is interesting that when mothers were asked whether they would allow their daughters to have the vaccine, 75 per cent said that they would. There is therefore parental consent for the vaccine, which gives the lie to the suggestion that people fear that it would encourage promiscuity. We do not want to scare people. Most women have the virus most of the time, and most of them will never develop cancerous cells. Nevertheless, it is important that we have screening to detect the virus early and that, if it is detected, we are able to cure it. We should also be able to offer vaccination to prevent its occurrence, when that is appropriate. I congratulate Ken Macintosh on securing the debate this evening.

Has the minister considered how mediation is used in planning in the state of Maryland, where it is used extensively? If not, will he do so?

The SNP welcomes the debate, which has  been, in the main, consensual, apart from a tiny hiccup from Christine May. I commend John Scott on his noted appearances at Ayr farmers market—my sister keeps me in touch with that. We will not support the Conservative amendment; notwithstanding my colleague Richard Lochhead's comments, we will abstain on it. Although its sentiment is correct, it would delete worthy points from the Green motion—for which we thank Mark Ballard—which we will support. We will reject the Government amendment, because although there are also some good words in it, we agree with Patrick Harvie that the Executive's good-practice guidance is not being taken up throughout Scotland, notwithstanding the shining example of the kingdom of Fife. Patrick Harvie and others mentioned the Schools (Health Promotion and Nutrition) (Scotland) Bill. Although we on the Communities Committee have received evidence from the Soil Association about good practice in East Ayrshire, issues about bulk purchasing, which have been addressed by others in the chamber, have been raised by the Scottish Consumer Council. Bulk purchasing flies in the face of purchasing locally. I will speak about value for money shortly, because I want to examine the dividends from local purchases that other members have mentioned, which include employment, quality, freshness and the carbon footprint. Sticking with food for the moment, we must make children aware of where their food comes from. It does not simply come from the freezer and the microwave; it was something else before it got to the freezer, and we can do things other than microwave it. Some children do not even know where eggs come from. We have to educate children so that they know what they are eating. That is important for the good of our society. From food to fabric. Patrick Harvie raised issues about buildings, which were also touched on by Robin Harper. I would like builders to access local sympathetic materials. I am weary of the ugly march of the ubiquitous Legoland houses that are a blight on the landscape. Let us see builders purchasing locally and building with materials that are sympathetic to the landscape, as they used to. That was a short digression. I return to the mantra of value for money. I would like the minister to define value, which was also mentioned by Donald Gorrie. It is not just about money. For example, Orkney Islands Council tries to purchase as much as possible locally in the interests of the sustainability of the Orkney Islands community. To the best of my knowledge, the national health service in Wales also endeavours to purchase its food locally. I fear that, in Scotland, the Government considers the cost of everything but not the value. Local authorities and NHS  boards are paranoid about being prosecuted under EU regulations. I agree that that mindset must be challenged. I am not talking about working our way around the rules; I am talking about using the rules to our advantage. In that regard, I will give an example of bad practice, featuring Scottish Borders Council and NHS Borders, which cancelled a long-standing contract for stationery and overprinting and gave the contract to a company in France. Apparently, that represented value for money, but what was the cost? It was more than 30 local jobs—30 people who are now out of work. That is not joined-up thinking, nor is it value for money.

Does Mr Harper agree that Christine May might get the answer to her question if she read the evidence that was submitted to Communities Committee? Under the contracts, people cannot even change a plug point let alone put in a new kitchen.

I commend Murdo Fraser for lodging a very solemn and fitting motion and I endorse everything that he said. Passchendaele was known as the battle of the mud. Indeed, one soldier, Private Richard W Mercer said: "Passchendaele was just a terrible, terrible place. We used to walk along these wooden duckboards—something like ladders laid on the ground. The Germans would concentrate on these things. If a man was hit and wounded and fell off he could easily drown in the mud and never be seen again. You just did not want to go off the duckboards." As for the battle itself, by spring 1917, the British had placed 21 huge mines totalling 450 tons of the high explosive, ammonal. At zero hour—03:10 on 7 June 1917—after the most intense bombardment of the entire war, the allied mines were detonated, killing an estimated 10,000 German troops in moments. The explosion was said to have been audible as far as London and Dublin and was possibly the loudest man-made noise that had been made up to that point. The battle spared no one. After three months of fighting, the Australian, New Zealand and United Kingdom casualties—wounded and killed—numbered 448,000 and the Germans suffered 260,000 dead or wounded. The Canadian corps finally took the village of Passchendaele on 6 November 1917. As for what life in the trenches was like, I will quote Siegfried Sassoon's poem, "Suicide in the Trenches": "I knew a simple soldier boy Who grinned at life in empty joy, Slept soundly through the lonesome dark, And whistled early with the lark. In winter trenches, cowed and glum, With crumps and lice and lack of rum, He put a bullet through his brain. No one spoke of him again. You smug-faced crowds with kindling eye Who cheer when soldier lads march by, Sneak home and pray you'll never know The hell where youth and laughter go." I do not want to end on a sour note, but I do not think that we have learned the lessons of the past. I want to read another passage—again from Siegfried Sassoon—that could well have been written today. He said: "I am making this statement as an act of wilful defiance of military authority, because I believe that the War is being deliberately prolonged by those who have the power to end it. I am a soldier, convinced that I am acting on behalf of soldiers. I believe that this War, on which I entered as a war of defence and liberation, has now become a war of  aggression and conquest. I believe that the purpose for which I and my fellow soldiers entered upon this war should have been so clearly stated as to have made it impossible to change them, and that, had this been done, the objects which actuated us would now be attainable by negotiation. I have seen and endured the sufferings of the troops, and I can no longer be a party to prolong these sufferings for ends which I believe to be evil and unjust. I am not protesting against the conduct of the war, but against the political errors and insincerities for which the fighting men are being sacrificed." I am sorry, but I think that we could say that of some of the wars that we are engaged in today, such as the war in Iraq. I fully support the proposal that the minister should put funding towards a commemorative memorial to the men who died at Passchendaele, but the greatest commemoration to those men would be not to go into any more wars.

I refer the minister to his written answer of 12 January to my question S2W-30516, in which he said: "We are on track to deliver our target of 17,500 Warm Deal installations between April 2006 and March 2007."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 12 January 2007; S2W-30516.]  As of today, how many installations have taken place? What is the average waiting period between a positive assessment and installation?

Central heating.

I draw members' attention to the fact that the Scottish National Party's spokespeople for health, education and communities are present for the debate, as is my colleague the housing spokesperson, who is a member of the Communities Committee. We consider that eating runs across all those portfolios. As Fiona Hyslop said, you are what you eat. Unfortunately, some of us eat a little more than we ought to; we should take a lesson from Alex Johnstone on that. Poor eating impacts on people's educational attainment, as Donald Gorrie said, and their behaviour, as Cathie Craigie and Shona Robison said. Charlie Gordon mentioned early intervention. I subscribe to that, which is why the SNP supports the provision of free school meals at nursery. We must start early, before children's palates become malformed, by which I mean they prefer salty and sweet food to what is good for them. Investment in ensuring that all our children—including those who are educated in the independent sector—eat at least one square, healthy, balanced meal per day is investment in the future well-being of society. David Davidson and Karen Whitefield mentioned the obesity epidemic and Tricia Marwick highlighted the poor state of our children's oral health. Both have numerous consequences. Eating the wrong things results in poor educational performance and reduced lifetime attainment and, in extremis, can lead to antisocial and even criminal behaviour. I repeat that, in our view, investing in our children's diets through the provision of free school meals—which we recommend should be begun in pilots—will lead to vast savings to the public purse, which at the moment meets the medical, educational and social costs of people's unhealthy diets and lifestyles. According to the 2003 Scottish health survey, on average, children between the ages of five and 15 consume 2.6 of the recommended five or more portions of fruit and vegetables per day. Only 12 per cent eat the target number of portions, and 12 per cent have none at all. That is the backcloth to the bill. Fiona Hyslop spoke about the whole experience of eating and a number of members made the worthy recommendation that cooking on the premises is the best way forward. I do not totally accept Dave Petrie's argument that the preparation of food on site is not practical in small rural schools. There are big issues to do with the transport of prepacked food 15 miles up wintry roads. In some small schools, meals could be cooked on the premises. I refer the minister to the paragraph of the committee's report on new builds and school refurbishments, whether under public- private partnership or private finance initiative arrangements, that recommends that full account be taken of such matters. That should apply not only to dining areas, but to gymnastic facilities and playing fields. Robin Harper has often highlighted local authorities' selling off of school playing fields for housing developments. It seems to me that what the Executive is doing with one hand it is taking away with the other. We must have a holistic approach—I hate that word, but it seems apt in this context. I and other members have pursued local sourcing, which the Scottish Consumer Council and the Soil Association advocate. I understand the problem of EU directives and the difficulties of procurement, but they are not insurmountable, as has been demonstrated in East Ayrshire. "Creative contracting" is one of my favourite phrases; it can be done. The minister mentioned that guidance exists in which local authorities are advised to source locally, but I do not think that they are all aware of it. I hope that the guidance will be examined in detail and revised. The case for universality was well made by many members. Fiona Hyslop's comparison between universality in the provision of child benefit and the lack of it in the provision of school meals was ably made. The take-up rate of child benefit is 98 per cent. I accept that simply offering free school meals does not mean that everyone will take them up, albeit we have such a deficit in society at the moment. We must not get hung up on the red herring of stigma. If we go down that road, we will end up not looking at the real issue, which is that many children who are entitled to free school meals do not take them—we will end up not seeing the wood for the trees. Many children who are living in poverty—some 77,000 in Scotland—are not entitled to free school meals because of the way in which the benefit is operated. The SNP would extend the availability of free school meals through the use of other benefits, such as the working families tax credit. Enormous issues are involved. Frances Curran, in an eloquent speech—her summing up was particularly eloquent—rightly pointed out the inconsistencies in all of this. The Executive has made provision for free breakfast and free fruit, but not for free school lunches. I neither understand that nor do I see the theme and logic. Surely if free provision is good enough at breakfast time, it is good enough at lunch time. If the Executive feels that there are issues about whether free school meals provision has been properly tested and thinks that a critique of how it should operate is required, let us have a pilot. We should find out for ourselves how this would work. Perhaps we will go the way of lovely independent Finland.  For a moment, I thought David Davidson was saying that he would vote against the motion, but it turned out that his was a remark that was out of kilter with other contributions from across the chamber—it must have been something he ate. I am glad to hear that he will support the motion, but I am sorry that he cannot support the SNP amendment, which is very tentative by our standards. We are asking only for the flexibility to run a pilot; we are beginning to sound like the Government, which we will be shortly. We are also very sympathetic towards Frances Curran's amendment, but the wording does not allow for flexibility to pilot free school meals provision. Although we will abstain in the vote on her amendment at decision time, we think that there is much merit in what Frances Curran had to say. We welcome her speech. In the last few moments of my speech, by way of trying to make it plain to the minister that the current system is not working, I will read out a short roll-call of those who support free school meals for all primary children. The list makes interesting reading. It is supported by the Scottish Women's Convention, Child Poverty Action Group in Scotland, Children in Scotland, Save the Children, Children 1 st , One Parent Families Scotland—it seems that the minister is not enjoying hearing this; don't listen then, minister—Scottish Low Pay Unit, church and society council of the Church of Scotland; Scottish local government forum against poverty; the Scottish Secondary Teachers' Association, the Professional Association of Teachers, and the Association of Head Teachers in Scotland. Those people know the children in their care better than the minister does.

I understand why the minister is cautious about introducing universal free school meals, but the Scottish National Party's amendment simply asks that the bill be flexible so that universal free school meals could be introduced at a later date. I think that he said that he will review the matter later, but we are simply asking for flexibility so that a pilot scheme can be introduced. We have made a very small request.

I congratulate my colleague Linda Fabiani on securing the debate. She gave us the figures  on homelessness, to which we should add the number of young people who are—to use the slang—sofa surfing. Many young people who are doing that do not consider themselves to be homeless despite the fact that they have no legal entitlement to stay where they are staying. I say to Donald Gorrie that my anecdotal experience is that many young people are continuing to live in shared tenancies even into their 30s. They are doing so for want of somewhere to stay; they have not moved on from a student lifestyle. It can seem to be terribly glamorous to have a place of one's own and to have independence but, as we all know, home ownership is very different to that and even older people can find the responsibilities of home ownership difficult. We need to learn a bit about it before we do it. I will tell the tale of two young women whom I met not so long ago. At 16, a young person can discharge himself or herself from foster care—he or she can make the choice to stay on or move out. One of the young women decided to stay on voluntarily past 16 with her foster parents. She wanted a bit of independence, but still to have the support of the foster family, just as many young people do when they decide to stay on at home. The other young woman decided at 16 that she wanted to go out into the big wide world and get her own flat. She was allocated a flat in Selkirk, but what happened was exactly as colleagues have described. Her flat became a place for parties and became known as somewhere that everyone could go. The young woman did not know how to gatekeep her flat—I think that that is the term, but Donald Gorrie will correct me if not. She did not know how to say no to people and she thought that she was popular. Within a very short time, the young woman found that she was pregnant. She sat in front of me—she was a lovely young girl and very bright—and said, "I've gone and got myself into the same situation that my mother was in. I never wanted to be in this situation. I wish I'd done what my friend did and stayed with my foster parents, but I thought I knew better." We were all like that at 16—we all thought that we knew better—but the consequences were much more severe for her. Of course, if a young person in a tenancy has such problems, they can get the dreaded antisocial behaviour order and could lose their tenancy. They then become voluntarily homeless and are on the slippery slope. Homeless people have no anchor. If they are asked where they live, they have to admit that they have no address—they lose their identities and become homeless people. Where we live, as well as what we do in life, constitutes much of what we are. I will contribute to the debate another suggestion for the minister. I have not shared it with my  housing colleagues, so I might get a rap on the knuckles for it. There used to be a scheme called the golden landlady. I was told about it 20 or 30 years ago—there is nothing new in life. Donald Gorrie talked about learning to do housekeeping at school. We did that in primary 3 and 4 with Miss Murray—I think that was her name—many years ago. It will all come round again. The golden landlady scheme involved a woman who was on benefits because she was unemployed, for example, being able to take on a tenant who was older than 16 and had been in foster care. The landlady was paid, but her benefits were not affected. Such a scheme seems to me to be worth investigating. I have only thrown the minister a vague clue, but he is very able—I know that he is actually Des McMuscle—so he will be able to sort it out. It seems to me to be a sensible suggestion. The landladies were experienced; they had brought up families and were the salt of the earth. That was exactly what the young women and young men required, because they got a feeling of independence but still had the security of knowing that they were going back to somewhere. I ask the minister to consider the golden landlady suggestion.

I congratulate some of the many members who have spoken and who made serious comments in what is an important debate on issues that impact particularly on vulnerable people and communities. I exclude from that Duncan McNeil, with his disgraceful trivialisation of the debate. I intend to circulate his flippant speech to postmasters throughout Scotland for their contemplation.

You are hoist by your own petard, sunshine. I do not need to exclude Government ministers from my congratulations, because the Minister for Environment and Rural Development and the Minister for Communities, both of whom could have been involved in the debate, have excluded themselves. Scotland's rural communities will not fail to notice that fact. In previous debates on the issue in Parliament, the Minister for Communities has spoken and, in John Swinney's members' business debate on the issue, the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development was here. However, no minister has been present during today's debate. That is an insult to Parliament and to Scotland's vulnerable people and communities. I point out to Euan Robson that social exclusion and vulnerable communities are not reserved matters—Derek Brownlee was right to draw attention to that. As many other members did, John Swinney made clear the vital role that the post office has as a hub in our communities. He and others also made it plain that there has not been—to use an abominable expression—joined-up thinking between the various Westminster departments that have eroded the stability of rural post offices. As Alasdair Morgan rightly said, that has resulted in people retiring and no one else taking up their businesses, because people do not know whether there will be a proper business to run. I can think of many examples of that, although, for once, I will speak not about the Borders, but about Flotta, where my sister is the sole and head teacher in the primary school. Flotta post office, which is in the middle of that rural area, is the centre of information, the local shop and a tourist information centre. It is extremely important to the community, which is a vulnerable one that has just managed to hang on to its school, thanks to my sister.  Richard Lochhead raised the issue of rural schools and communities that are fighting to keep their schools. I will have to mention the Borders: Oxton has kept its school, but the question is whether it will keep its sub-post office. Many places are fighting on that issue. When people are deciding on a place to live and see a village that has a school and a post office with a shop attached, they think that it is a living place. However, when they go to a village that has no school, post office or shop, they pass through. Many of the people who live in such places leave, too. The people who are left are the elderly, the disabled and the vulnerable, who cannot move and who will have to go long distances to access post office services. That is made plain in research that Postwatch Scotland has carried out. One disabled customer who would have to travel between 8km and 16km to the nearest post office said: "It would cause great difficulty in more ways than can be described as I am disabled. Travelling alone causes undue and unnecessary pain and suffering." Another elderly customer said: "It would be over 40 miles in a boat to collect pension and get any cash. Would be unable to do any posting." Those are the people who should be protected and looked after. We should make their communities thrive. We must not think of the system of post offices only in terms of a balance sheet, with debits and credits in bold black figures on the paper; we need to think of the more subtle effects that the system has in keeping communities hearty. Help the Aged in Scotland supports John Swinney's motion fully. It has stated that it welcomes and supports John Swinney's motion on the threat to the rural post office network in Scotland and that it has campaigned for some time on issues relating to the future of the post office network, including a recent campaign on the future of the Post Office card account. Many members have mentioned the card account. I return to the most disgraceful matter at hand, which is that no minister has sat through any part of the debate, contributed to it or responded to the serious issues that members of different parties have raised. I hope that I never have to experience a similar situation again in Parliament. It will not be forgotten.

Given what the member has just said, and given the impact of the issue on vulnerable communities, does the member not find it quite disgraceful that not a single minister is here to speak? Is the member aware that, in a debate on this issue several years ago, ministers responded?

To ask the First Minister whether Scottish ministers have assessed the level of additional social exclusion that will result from the proposed closure of rural post offices. (S2F-2622)

As the First Minister grew up in a rural community on Arran, I am sure he agrees that post offices are at the centre of sustaining and nurturing such communities. I am also sure that he agrees with Tom Begg, the chairman of Postwatch Scotland, who has highlighted the importance of rural post offices not only as places from which to post parcels and letters, but as vital meeting places in communities such as those in the Scottish Borders. I hear what the First Minister has said. Will he inform the Executive's representations to Her Majesty's Government by commissioning an assessment of the impact of the proposed closures on communities? If he does, will he report back to the Parliament on that before we rise for our final recess?

Not at all; we are your greatest fans.

I am beginning to feel a bit sorry—just a bit sorry—for George Lyon. When the going gets tough, Tom McCabe gets going and George Lyon is plucked out to deal with matters. Derek Brownlee set the tone for a consensual, pragmatic debate, so he is reaping what he sowed. The Tories are scandalous. They broke the link between pensions and earnings and now they are talking about restoring it. They imposed the poll tax on Scotland—we were the sorry guinea pigs, but who is sorry now, Mr Brownlee? It is like an albatross around his neck, from which he will never escape. Scotland's pensioners have nothing to thank the Tory party for and they have nothing to thank the Labour Party for. As John Swinburne so eloquently described, the Labour Party happily kept a Tory policy and has not restored the link with earnings. It has kept the council tax. In fact, that is how it got elected in England: it pinched the Tories' clothes and now Mr Cameron is trying to steal them back from a very weary Tony Blair.  What people require is a decent citizens pension and a proper taxation system that takes account of income. John Swinney talked about flogging a dead horse—I could not have put it better myself. How many times have we stood here and said, "Forty-eight per cent of pensioners entitled to pension credit do not claim it. More than 40 per cent entitled to council tax benefit do not claim it"? There is no point in saying that we must encourage pensioners to claim those benefits—they just ain't working. Targeting and means testing have been a failure for the poorest in society. I say to Bristow Muldoon that, as we know, the Burt review was yet another shameless delaying tactic to stitch together the Lib-Lab coalition until after May, when they will all pretend that they have had nothing to do with each other for the past seven years.

Mr Rumbles is stating the obvious. The point is that this is the umpteenth time that we have watched Labour and the Liberal Democrats keeping their marriage together on the slimmest of grounds. After the election we know that the Liberal Democrats will try to take the credit and blame the Labour Party—hence Mr McCabe's absence. Two principles should be applied to a tax: it should be equitable and collectable. A local income tax meets those tests. It is based on the ability to pay. We have an income tax system that already identifies those who are liable, so we have the processes in place. It is clear and simple, and would not involve the bureaucracy of the council tax and the council tax benefit system. It would protect not just pensioners, but others who we have not mentioned, such as those on low and fixed incomes and families on the poverty line. A local income tax would be reliable to collect. Income tax collection rates are around 96.17 per cent. Collection rates for the council tax are 92.7 per cent. A local income tax would be easier and cheaper to collect. Collection costs for the council tax were £78 million, £30 million of which was spent on the failing council tax benefit system. There are people out there who must despair that, after seven years of a Liberal-Labour coalition, we are no further towards a fair, accountable system of local tax. We have had yet another fudge on the Labour and Liberal Democrat side of the chamber, while on the Tory side of the chamber, for "interim measure", read "election bribe". Everyone can see through that. No wonder the Scottish electorate is turning to the Scottish National Party, with our local income tax—which  would remove people's fear of losing their house—a decent citizens pension and a nuclear-free Scotland. I rest my case.

Will the minister give way?

I congratulate Jeremy Purvis on securing the debate. The joint campus initiative has been on the go for years and I applaud the tenacity of Borders College, Heriot-Watt University and others in achieving it. I recall the threat of Heriot-Watt University pulling out altogether. The Borders campus was not in favour and the university was going to centralise everything at the Riccarton campus, which would have dealt a deadly blow to the process. I confess a family connection, as my niece attended the then school of textiles at the Borders campus. However, this is not the end of the journey. There are plans to develop further tertiary education in the Borders. There are existing links between Borders College and Napier University Edinburgh, particularly in nursing training. There are also links with the University of Dundee, which teaches qualifications to the college's staff. All those links can be enhanced because of the march of technology and the security of the joint campus. The joint campus will mean shared services, which has implications for staffing. I have been advised that, because those implications were anticipated, there are many temporary posts in line and natural wastage—I do not like that term—will mean that there should be no redundancies. Of course, if we take away administrators, more money is diverted from administration to front-line educational purposes, which is good. Those matters are being investigated now. Hawick has its new community college, and Borders College is working in tandem with Hawick high school. That alleviates the fears from not so long ago that Hawick would lose any college and that everything would be centralised in Galashiels.  The campus will be a modern learning centre, with teaching rooms for business, information technology and construction skills. Those facilities are badly needed, not only in the Borders but elsewhere. The Borders construction forum is engaged in the project, but it is also engaged in the construction of the buildings themselves. I hope that not only the existence of the joint campus, but the building of it, will bring business and work to the Borders. Apparently, the main contract at Netherdale has been split into smaller contracts of £1 million to £3 million that will have a bias—if I may use that word—in favour of local companies because, I understand, they currently fall below the threshold for contracts that must be put out to competitive tender in the Official Journal of the European Union . However, the contract for the larger development at Netherdale has to be put out to tender, because it is worth about £18 million or £19 million—and we all know the rules of European competitive tendering. Therefore, I have asked Borders College to consider some creative contracting. I understand that there is a pre-qualifying period before tendering that will allow Borders College, which is letting the prime contract, to examine the make-up of the organisations that are tendering for the job to find out whether they can service the development after construction, for example. That is important and I want Borders College to pursue it robustly. The campus is good news for the Borders. It will be a key employer and an asset to the Borders economy, which should not only survive but develop. Jeremy Purvis delivered his speech with his usual modesty, but I look forward to cutting the opening ribbon of the joint campus in October 2008 as the member for Tweeddale, Ettrick, Lauderdale and Penicuik.

rose—

Bankruptcy is horrendous, but under land attachment, the debtor will lose their home yet keep all their other debts. They will be homeless and will still have all the other debts, and we know that people who are at such a stage probably have a multiplicity of debts.

I know that.

I know that.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive has calculated the cost to local authorities of monitoring high-risk sex offenders released under the automatic early release scheme. (S2F-2596)

I have been informed of a gentleman who served only two thirds of his sentence but would have served it all if he had undertaken a sex offenders rehabilitation course, so that does not pertain. A very high-risk sex offender was returned to the Scottish Borders. He has got out on automatic early release, following a conviction for the serious  sexual assault and torture of a young woman with learning difficulties. He failed to take part in any rehabilitation programmes while inside and has continued to be assessed as being at high risk of reoffending.

The offender's return has placed a heavy financial burden on the local authority, which is now charged with monitoring him 24 hours a day. Does the First Minister believe that draining resources from social work services—which require them for other events—in that fashion is the best way to protect our communities? Will he consider preventing the release of such offenders, who are at risk of claiming another victim sooner or later?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I simply ask you to look at the Official Report and check what I said.

Will the member elaborate on how the family home is protected, considering the test in the bill? The only protection that exists is the unduly harsh. For everyone who loses their home it is unduly harsh, so what is the protection?

As everyone can see, I am not Alex Neil, but I will do my best. I will speak to amendments 150, 153 and 154 in my colleague's name, and against amendments 208 and 209 in the minister's name. We support the amendments in Gordon Jackson's name. Figures from Citizens Advice Scotland show that the average unsecured—and I stress the word "unsecured"—debt of their clients in 2006 was more than £13,000 and that most people in Scotland have unsecured debts in excess of £3,000, which is the trigger for a land attachment. That is most people in Scotland. I have a quote from Citizens Advice: "Without the exemption of the primary dwelling house, land attachment will be a significant step backwards in modernising diligence." Amendment 150 would exempt the principal dwelling-house, but why should it? A land attachment virtually converts an unsecured debt into a secured debt. Notwithstanding the trigger limit of £3,000, that is unjust. Because of the nature of secured debts, they come with favourable interest rates and unsecured debts attach high interest rates. Ironically, that means that the trigger for a land attachment could be reached very quickly, for example, on one credit card debt. Indeed, it would positively encourage higher interest rates to allow creditors to activate land attachment proceedings in a race against all  the other creditors, or, as the Law Society of Scotland put it so eloquently: "Once people hear how land attachment is going to work, there will be a queue."—[ Official Report, Enterprise and Culture Committee , 21 March 2006; c 2853.] So what about the can pay, won't pay debtors? There is a range of effective options for dealing with them at the moment, such as land attachment against second and subsequent homes, inhibitions, bank and earnings arrestments, attachment orders of all varieties, and bankruptcy itself. Alex Neil's amendment 154 makes it explicit that, in all cases, the sheriff should consider all the debtor's circumstances before moving to apply a land attachment. At the moment, the sheriff simply has to "have regard" to those circumstances, and he can only defer and not reject a land attachment. The only defence that a debtor has to stop a land attachment is that it would be "unduly harsh". I submit that for the majority of ordinary people who would have this kind of debt, a land attachment would be unduly harsh in all circumstances. If that was true, no land attachments would succeed. I do not know how a sheriff could apply that test. As for the minister's last-minute, fig-leaf amendments, they contain the words "may" and "could". The provision is not mandatory, it is discretionary and it uses too small a word. It would not be binding. It is simply a fig leaf to cover up and try to jettison our worthy amendments, which are backed, I might add, by Citizens Advice Scotland, the Law Society of Scotland, Shelter Scotland, Money Advice Scotland, Govan law centre, Castlemilk law centre, and, indeed, the editor of The Herald . What more can I say?

Christine May had a good try at throwing the Executive a lifeline, but if the minister withdraws his amendments, our amendments will make the bill clear. We are at stage 3, not stage 2. These proposals have been made over and over again and it is as plain as a pikestaff that the procedure proposed by the minister would be most unjust. The rich who try to avoid their debts will still be able to do that, while ordinary Scots who have credit card consumer debts totalling more than £3,000 after Christmas, including interest, could trigger land attachments. There is no protection for the people. I heard what the minister said earlier: that losing a house over a relatively small consumer debt is  more debtor-friendly than sequestration; but that is not better than sequestration.

Let me finish. Someone could lose their house and still have other personal debts; they would not have cleared the slate in the way that they would have through a sequestration. They would have lost their house because of a small debt and all the other debts would remain. Tommy Sheridan was quite right to say that people who know that they are going to lose their houses will get consolidation loans at higher rates or will go to doorstep loan sharks who will provide them with the money to keep their home; otherwise they will face homelessness.

The figure of 100,000 children lifted out of relative poverty was calculated excluding housing costs. What would the figure be if the Executive included those costs, as the Child Poverty Action Group wants to do?

I congratulate Jackie Baillie on securing the debate and on her informed and sincere speech. I also congratulate Save the Children, which has been represented in Parliament's lobby for most of the week, on its useful briefing packs. My colleague Sandra White referred to its seasonal grants proposal, which must be investigated.  Many people have said what Save the Children's literature says, but it is worth saying such things again. Being in the poverty cycle impacts on a person's health, education, job prospects and life expectancy. The poverty cycle denies many children in rich countries such as Scotland happy and secure futures. Some 83,000 children in Scotland are living in severe and persistent poverty, which is extremely worrying. That is 83,000 children too many. I do not often quote Tony Blair, because I do not agree with all his aims. However, I agree with what he said in 1999. He said then: "Our historic aim will be for ours to be the first generation to end child poverty forever and it will take a generation. It is a twenty-year mission but I believe it can be done." I am sorry to say to Jackie Baillie that, for reasons to which she referred, achieving that aim here will be mission impossible under the Scottish Parliament's devolved powers. On fuel poverty, for example, gas prices have increased nearly 90 per cent. For every 5 per cent increase in gas prices, 30,000 people go back into fuel poverty. We are not in control of jobs or the macroeconomy and are therefore unable to develop the economy that we want. Jackie Baillie rightly alluded to jobs. Decent and well-paid jobs in which people have respect and contribute to society are the pathway out of poverty and to better lives for people and their families, but what do we have? Some 85 per cent of low-income families find the basics that Jackie Baillie mentioned—such as clothes and nutritious food—expensive and cannot buy them. Children growing up in poverty can expect little in life. I heard what Jackie Baillie said about what can be done under devolution—I agree with some of what she said, but we should have more power. At First Minister's questions last week, I referred to extending winter fuel payments. That issue should be grasped. I do not know how people who are at home far more than I am and who are trying to wash, keep their children warm and keep their households going can afford to pay fuel bills. We know that poor people pay for their fuel by the most expensive means—pre-paid cards. I will not go into the fact that many cards have not been recalibrated and that people are now being charged for underpayment, which is outrageous. I am not in favour of stigmatising funds such as the school clothing fund—people should use such funds. Currently, a uniform and physical education kit costs £224.69, but people can get £51.27 from the fund. However, some local authorities do not have such a fund. I am all in favour of extending child care but, as the Poverty Alliance highlighted at the Communities Committee, there is no point in free  child care or free leisure if public transport is too expensive for people to take their two children on the bus, which means that people are denied access to such things. I urge members to read that evidence. The Poverty Alliance voiced the experience of people who are coping with poverty. I will paraphrase one lady, who said that she is teaching her child how to live in poverty. Finally, I ask Jackie Baillie to accept that, as nationalists, we sincerely believe that an independent Scotland would be a way of growing the economy. However, as she also said, the other side of the coin is social justice and redistribution.

The minister might not be able to answer my question today, but I wanted to make the point that when there is an application for an interim interdict, statements of fact—condescendences—must be supplied, and in appropriate circumstances the other party must have an opportunity to respond, so that something is on paper about which the sheriff can hear evidence. That is what I was getting at. To what extent has the minister explored the matter, given that the proposed approach would interfere with individuals' rights?

This might not be the opportune moment to make this point, but I do not think that another opportunity to do so will arise. I am concerned about the use of guardianship orders, which give access and powers of entry in the circumstances that the minister described. Has he reviewed the evidence that the committee heard about the operation of guardianship orders, for example about how expensive and difficult to renew they are? May we consider that system in the first instance, to ascertain whether it might work better?

As some members might know, I come to the bill against the background of the Miss X case in which a lady with learning difficulties suffered horrific abuse over a substantial period at the hands of her siblings to the point where her life was put at risk. The faults in that case, and there were many, were put down to the practice and procedures of the social work department including the failure to look at reports properly, the failure to make connections and the failure to follow up. One of the large failures was not to see the young woman on her own, without the siblings who were abusing her being in the background.  People might have thought that I would welcome the bill because it would have provided the opportunity to enter the lady's house and speak to her away from those who threatened her. In fact, although a guardianship order was in place that would have allowed the social work department to enter the premises to see how the ward was doing, it was not used. Although I welcome the purposes of the bill, I wonder whether it will change anything. One of the interesting comments in the committee's report came from a witness who said: "the question is whether the Bill takes a sledgehammer to crack a nut". The more I read the report and looked at the bill—I will speak about the flaws in the drafting—the more I wondered whether it is too heavy handed and will simply not deliver. The Government is in the habit of producing legislation that might not be necessary, despite which the SNP will support the bill at this stage. Nevertheless, I want to look at some of the problems. Many of the definitions have been covered, but let us consider one that has not—visits, which are dealt with by section 6. The definition of "council officer" has been dealt with, but let us look at the next words in that section. It says that a council officer "may enter any place for the purpose of enabling or assisting a council conducting inquiries under section 4 to decide whether it needs to do anything". That is extremely wide. I would like the minister to tell me what kind of places ought to be covered. Section 9, entitled "Examination of records etc", says in subsection (1): "A council officer may require any person holding health, financial or other records relating to an individual whom the officer knows or believes to be an adult at risk to give the records, or copies of them, to the officer." Subsection (5) says: "Nothing in this section authorises a person who is not a health professional to inspect health records". That is the only caveat; all other records can simply be looked at and no notice is needed. Subsection (2) says: "Such a requirement may be made during a visit or at any other time." A visit to where—the bank? All the bill says is that a visit is to "any place". Those are huge drafting issues that bother me. Does the minister want to clarify anything?

Such situations occur when people have capacity and against their will, but the bill would allow a council officer to go to their bank and look at their bank records. That is just one matter of definition that I picked out of the bill that gives me great concern. The bill heaves with procedures—it is littered with them. There are procedures to take people to court, which the minister will explain; assessment orders; and no right of appeal in certain circumstances although it seems like a clear breach of the ECHR not to have a right of appeal where a banning order is in place. Euan Robson gave the game away when he told us what I already knew, which is that there are adult protection committees in the Borders. Do we need to provide for such committees in the bill? Do we need to set up a system and have procedures? Where an authority has learned the hard way, it draws together all its agencies and applies procedure. Authorities do not need legislation to do that.

I cannot agree. The process is happening in many places in Scotland. The chief social work inspector could make plain through her guidance that that is what he expects local authorities to do. Do we need another layer of bureaucracy, form filling, pen pushing and paper clipping, which gets in the way of front-line services and takes up manpower? That takes me back to resources. Examination of the evidence indicates that this is not only my point of view. Page 11 of the Health Committee's stage 1 report lists the main concerns of SAMH, Enable Scotland and Inclusion Scotland, which covers 20 locally based organisations. The first one is a whopper. It is that "the Bill is unnecessary given existing legislation and criminal law". Those are their words, not mine. They are also concerned that it "discriminates against those with disabilities by specifying them in the definition of adults at risk"— that point has already been dealt with—and that it "overrides some beneficial measures contained in existing legislation." Those are grenades thrown at the bill. We must bear in mind the other legislation that is in place and the fact that we have guardianship orders. I  note that the evidence on guardianship orders is that the procedure is "cumbersome and expensive" and that we need to speed up the process. Let us do that—let us speed up the process of guardianship orders, which allow the guardian to enter premises where they think their ward is at risk. For me, the jury is out on the bill. I will be interested to see how the many fundamental flaws in the bill, which range from simple matters such as definitions—I know that they represent the building bricks of the bill—to procedures, can be remedied.

Has the minister discussed the civil, shrieval procedures that would have to take place? I see no mention of them. Will they be like interim interdicts? How will they work?

Given what the First Minister has just said, does he agree with the comments of Jane Gibreel, Save the Children's programme director for Scotland, who said: "It is an outrage that in Scotland, parents are being forced to make impossible decisions between such basic provisions as providing a hot meal or putting on the heating"? Given that fuel prices have risen 87 per cent in three years and in the light of Sarah Boyack's  comments, does the First Minister support my call for the Chancellor of the Exchequer to extend to low-income families the winter fuel payment that pensioners currently receive?

I note what Nora Radcliffe says, but will the issues and options paper include consideration of removing the payment of our staff salaries from the members' support allowance? Will the SPCB consider setting up an independent and separate framework, with a proper graded salary scale, so that we do not have to deal with both rent and remuneration for our staff from the scheme?

First, I intimate to members the absence of Sandra White, who was told of a sudden family bereavement during the course of proceedings. She would have liked to be here for the debate. Regardless of whether members agreed with her work on a third-party right of appeal, I am sure that they will acknowledge the huge amount of effort that she put into it. It has been a long and weary trek through a difficult bill that does not stand alone, but will amend the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997. I say that for the benefit of members who have not been paying attention. I share John Home Robertson's sentiment that that is not an appropriate procedure for dealing with major legislation. That is our first concern, but it is not the only one. I have expressed concerns previously about substantial amendments being lodged at stage 2 when the practice, although it is not mandatory, has been that evidence is not led on stage 2 amendments. The use of such a procedure, by whichever party may be in Government, could very well lead to flawed legislation. For example, the issue of national scenic areas was thrown into the pot at stage 2. For the moment, blame for that is to be laid at the Government's door, but I fear that such practice may lead to Parliament's being brought into disrepute. With no revising chamber, and helter-skelter timetables for evidence, committee scrutiny can become very superficial. I do not blame committee members for that—ministers must take cognisance of the fact that they should not be in the business of earning  brownie points for racking up the greatest number of bills. What happened to the mantra "doing less better"? That said, the Scottish National Party supports the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill, notwithstanding the amendment in my name. I regret that such an amendment is the only competent process for dealing with a purpose of the bill. The minister has pledged that the bill will herald a new culture of openness, inclusivity, accountability and of playing by fair rules in a more consensual and less confrontational planning system. I hope that that is the case, but the jury is still out, given that amendments that would have ensured that the national planning framework—which will deal with major issues such as nuclear power stations and nuclear waste—would be scrutinised by Parliament were not agreed to. In addition, amendments to provide for a limited third-party right of appeal, and even to provide a non-third-party right of appeal, were rejected even by those, such as Labour members, who claim to stand up for ordinary Scots. They were also rejected by the Lib Dems, for whom such a right is a matter of policy; but heigh-ho—they are willing to pay that price for a Mondeo or two. However, I warn the Lib Dems that, since the Dunfermline West by-election, Labour has woken up and is spilling the beans. On high hedges, the definition in amendment 147 in my name referred to such hedges being "a barrier to light". That brings to mind the fact that Scott Barrie has introduced yet another proposal on his unfulfilled promise on high hedges. This Lib-Lab Government pledged to deal with the issue seven years ago. The Government's consultation received 1,300 responses, all of which came from people who wanted action, but the ministerial team—with all the statute-drafting expertise at its disposal—was unable to come up with one provision. Ministers think, however, that Scott Barrie will be able to do so. Of course, he will not. He would be better taking refuge behind one of those ubiquitous ever-higher hedges. As for the Tories, their failure to support my far superior amendment was just plain mean-spiritedness. Mr Petrie shot himself in the foot. He will need to be tougher with the doughty Bill Aitken next time and ensure that he knows how to play the parliamentary game. On business improvement districts, I say "Well done" to Fergus Ewing and "Not bad" to David McLetchie. Small businesses that are already burdened with heavy-duty rates and water bills are to have another Labour stealth tax heaped upon them. Small businesses in our small towns and villages are already struggling against supermarket sweep. They already club together voluntarily to enhance their districts, so the  Government should leave them alone—that is the view of the Federation of Small Businesses Scotland. In any event, I have news for small businesses: next year, they will be set to benefit from the SNP's commercial rates policy, under which all businesses that have a rateable value of £8,000 and under will pay nothing and many others will be better off. At the end of this long and weary trek, what has been demonstrated to me is that we have to deal with too many bills and those that require more time, such as the bill that is before us, are frogmarched to the finishing tape. Because this Labour-Liberal Government needs to be seen to be doing something, it has introduced bill after bill and thus elevated legislation to the highest form of spin. Finally, I say to Johann Lamont that I will miss her dearly. I do not always agree with her, but I admire her feisty enthusiasm, which never seems to evaporate. I move amendment S2M-4921.1, to insert at end: "but, in so doing, expresses regret at the inclusion of Part 9 on business improvement districts as it represents an additional onerous burden both financially and bureaucratically on already overburdened small businesses."

Several years ago, I attended a mediation conference in Baltimore, Maryland, along with senior members of the legal profession, the Faculty of Advocates, the Scottish Legal Aid Board and the Scottish Consumer Council, to study the operation of mediation in that state across a whole sphere of activity. It was being used not just as we are used to it being used in Scotland—in family law courts and sometimes contracts—but in large commercial contracts, in planning and in neighbourhood disputes. It was used throughout Maryland and was promoted by the leaders in that state. I make it plain that I am that dreadful thing: a convert. I also make it plain that mediation is not arbitration. The two must not be confused. Arbitration requires a third party to come to a decision—a judgment—that is then imposed on the other parties and is binding. Therefore, in their perception, there is nearly always a winner and a loser, as there is in court judgments. That is not mediation. Mediation involves trained mediators sitting with parties at dispute and in conflict to seek, by consensus, a binding resolution. The perception in mediation is that there are no winners or losers; as Del Boy would say, "Everyone's a winner." It saves grief, money and time. I commend this enabling amendment to the minister as a progressive step. The minister says that there will be a culture change in the way in which we go through the planning process. In my view, amendment 153 would enhance that culture change and could lead to further mediation in other areas in Scotland. I move amendment 153.

As I have indicated previously in the chamber, there is a vast amount of evidence that mediation works. I suggest that the minister considers the successful operation of mediation in Maryland, the state to which I referred. Major commercial companies use mediation because it saves them a great deal of money and time. Amendment 153 does not make mediation mandatory but leaves it to the discretion of Scottish ministers, who "may by regulations make provision to promote the use of mediation". The amendment does not make the minister promote mediation, but simply leaves it open to him to take up that opportunity—or not, as the case may be. His response is rather unhappy—I was hoping that we would move forward with culture change. If we want to get away from conflict in planning, mediation is the way in which to do that. I am sorry that the minister will not support amendment 153.

I will respond to a comment by Scott Barrie. The Scottish National Party has had to lodge an amendment to the motion to pass the bill because it is not competent to amend a purpose of a bill, and one of the bill's purposes is "to make provision for business improvement districts". Otherwise, we would have lodged an amendment to delete the provisions on BIDs.

I thank the minister. These are the first and, I suspect, the last amendments on which I will win today.  Amendment 16 agreed to.  Amendment 17 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

I remind members that at stage 2, Euan Robson said that 1,300 responses were received to the Executive's consultation on the matter in 2000-01. Those have been sat on since then. We do not need another consultation.

As Mr Petrie said, the Minister for Justice said five years ago that the Executive had "decided in principle that a statutory remedy of last resort is required, involving ... enforcement action in appropriate cases".— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 31 January 2001; Vol 10, S1W-12936 and S1W-12171.]  Nothing has happened. Scott Barrie lodged a proposal for a bill, but nothing happened, at least until two days ago, when he reintroduced his proposal—no surprises there. John Home Robertson made light of the matter—I know that high hedges can be the subject of many a jocular intervention. However, at stage 2, he said: "I would hope that, between now and stage 3, the minister and the Scottish Executive could use their collective wisdom to draft an amendment that will protect the people in our constituencies."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 13 September 2006; c 3893.] So much for collective ministerial wisdom. I will make brief points about Dave Petrie's amendment 146. The operation of his proposal would be triggered by nuisance or damage, but he should not try to borrow English legislative clothes—nuisance is an English concept and would not work in Scottish legislation. Damage would not deal with the real issue, which is obstruction of light, whereas a hedge that obstructed light would fall foul of the first test in my amendment 147. The process in amendment 146 would also be cumbersome. As for the definition of a high hedge in that amendment, I must claim with embarrassment copyright of the expression "wall-like", but that was a sabotage move by me—I may no longer be Mr Petrie's friend—as the definition in his amendment does not match up to the definition in my amendment. My amendment 147 sets out a simple procedure that is triggered by two factors. I think that Mr Petrie told me that specifying 2m was too prescriptive. I would agree, if height were the only trigger, but my amendment says that a high hedge must be at least 2m high and that it must affect the reasonable enjoyment of the subjects. That covers what we are trying to get at. The other trigger in my amendment is that a high hedge must obstruct and be a barrier to light. I use the term "barrier" because such hedges are used as barriers—as a neighbour's weapon of war. The minister might have mentioned that.  As for the steps that would have to be taken, members will note that proposed new section 178A(1) in my amendment says that neighbours must have taken reasonable steps to resolve the dispute between themselves. If a complaint were lodged thereafter, an inspection would be conducted to determine whether the definition of a high hedge was applicable and whether the hedge blocked the reasonable enjoyment of the subjects who were adjacent or around. Thereafter, a notice of the complaint would have to be served with a copy of the inspection report, and the party who was complained of would have to have the  opportunity to respond and to have a further inspection. The process is not really that bad. A planning officer would just come along—officers inspect people's drains all the time—inspect the hedge, take out his tape measure and decide whether the hedge blocked the light and disturbed reasonable enjoyment. A copy of the inspection report would be sent to the neighbour. A notice of complaint would be sent by recorded delivery, so there could be no excuse about not receiving it. If the dispute were not resolved, the owner or occupier would have to take action, but even the timescale for that is not prescriptive—it is to be done "within 28 days, or such ... period as is ... reasonable". If the owner or occupier did not take action, the authority would do so and would charge them for it. That is simple. I have collective wisdom all of my own.

I support Patrick Harvie's amendments 137 and 139, which provide that the ministers "must provide for a higher amount to be payable" by repeat offenders. That is terribly important. I am told that, when penalties are imposed, they are often not paid. There should perhaps not be a three-strikes-and-you're-out system for developers who have a bad track record, but they should certainly face increased fines.

We all know that many communities feel disfranchised by the planning system. The SNP fully supports robust up-front consultation and more involvement with communities, but that does not completely  displace the need for a third-party right of appeal as a last resort. Indeed, such a right would act as a good deterrent for mischievous planning authorities or developers who breach the intended robustness of up-front consultation at the start of the process. I commend Sandra White for her tenacity in following the issue through. I look forward to the Liberal Democrats supporting her amendments, because a third-party right of appeal is their party policy.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. I have only two minutes. I commend Jackie Baillie. As she knows, I mischievously moved a similar amendment that she had lodged at stage 2. As Patrick Harvie said, Jackie Baillie's amendment 123 is better than nothing, but only just. She said that her proposal might not be the preferred option of those who want TPRA, but I hope that enough members will vote to allow amendment 123 to go through. I am sympathetic towards Rosemary Byrne's amendment 128, but Patrick Harvie said it all when he said that developers are not all bad. Rosemary Byrne's solution, as I understand it, is too draconian. We will support Euan Robson's amendments 127 and 124, Patrick Harvie's amendment 129 and Dennis Canavan's amendment 133, which are all well intentioned. The number of amendments indicates the level and strength of support in the Parliament for some form of third-party right of appeal.

I agree with Donald Gorrie: health should be a material consideration in the granting of planning permission. That is why I lodged amendment 84. I could give several pertinent examples. If someone is building a house extension, the work might go on for a considerable time and building materials, debris and noise might affect the neighbourhood. There might be a spot development. An existing development might have a small piece of land that gets built on. People might have been living in the area for a long time, and the health aspects will be very important. I know of a development in Edinburgh in which a house will be demolished and flats will be erected on the site. Along with the demolition, there will be dust and noise. When such applications come in, people should be able to object. Conditions should be attached to the applications regarding activities on the site. On a larger scale, the days of people having large pylons at the bottom of their gardens are, thankfully, past, but issues remain to do with telecommunications masts.  Given all the possible situations, I cannot see why the minister is resistant to the ideas in amendment 84. We will be discussing good neighbour agreements when we discuss later sections of the bill, but such agreements are not enforceable. If conditions relating to health were attached to planning applications, they could be enforced and neighbours would have a remedy other than the courts.

In the light of what the minister said in response to my intervention, I will not move the amendment.  Amendment 76 not moved.  Amendment 77 moved—[Donald Gorrie].

We are sympathetic to Donald Gorrie's amendments 74 and 75. We cannot support amendment 77, as it refers to "the attitude" of a prospective applicant. I do not know how we could, in reasonable terms, measure attitude. However, we are sympathetic to amendment 83. I should say that I have sent the official report staff the scribbled notes to amendment 76, rather than the notes that referred to the amendment that they asked about. I am just warning them that, if they think that this bill is difficult, I have not helped them. My amendment 76 is to do with redressing the balance of power. Developers are skilled and professional when they address consultation meetings. They put the show on the road and the community sits and has a presentation put to them. The community councillors who spoke to the Communities Committee made it plain that they find applications and planning procedures extremely complex. Many of them make themselves informed, but there is an imbalance. I cannot see the harm in having someone from the planning authority attend consultation meetings to address issues, clarify matters and throw some light on an issue if the developer is saying something that is not quite right. Otherwise, people in communities will feel that, when they attend consultation meetings, there is an imbalance and that the developer has the upper hand. My amendment would ensure that someone from the planning authority could be there to give them some guidance.

Will the minister issue guidance on best practice on consultation? In the circumstances, will he make any recommendations?

The Scottish National Party is sympathetic to amendments 114 and 115, although when I read amendment 114 I did not take the view that the documents would not be available to members of the public. Perhaps Maureen Macmillan will explain how amendment 114 would apply only to certain parties. Members  of the public often want to see documents that relate to a development.

I hope that members will bear with me, as the issue is a bit technical and therefore a bit dry. Amendments 118 to 120 are about the situation in which an application has been granted consent but the developer seeks post-consent variation. As laid out in the bill, if a planning authority considers that a proposed variation is not substantial, the variation may proceed. I have concerns about the term "substantial". For example, suppose that a community council and others object to a development proposal for 50 houses on a site and that, as a result of that, the planning authority takes the view that 40 houses is  the correct density. The developer starts to build the houses then goes into liquidation. Another developer takes over and says, "I can't continue developing on this site. Forty houses is not worth my while. I want to make it 50." The developer and the planning authority say that that is not a substantial variation and the application proceeds as varied. We must remember that the application is post-consent; 40 houses had been agreed to and now the number is 50. In those circumstances, the only right that the community would appear to have is to go to litigation. There is also an issue under the European convention on human rights, on the right to be heard. The community would not have the right to be heard. I am presuming, of course, that the community objects to the further 10 houses. On amendment 120, whether the variation is substantial—that is the key to this issue—and whether the community considers that it is substantial should be determined by an independent arbiter. It should not just be up to the developer and the planning authority to agree to the variation. Furthermore, the third party—the community, as it would be in this example—should not have to resort to litigation, which is a long and expensive process. Under the second of the two new sections that amendment 120 would introduce, an independent arbiter, agreed between the parties, would be appointed simply to determine whether, in the circumstances, the variation was substantial. If the variation was not considered to be substantial, the application could proceed; if it was, a fresh application would have to be made. I move amendment 118.

I am happy to be corrected, but section 7, on variation of planning applications, which will insert new section 32A into the 1997 act, says:  "An application for planning permission ... may, with the agreement of the planning authority, be varied after it is made." That is the issue—"after it is made". As for Mr Petrie's contribution: yes, minor and major variations, but who decides? There may be a strong conflict with the community, which might say, "In your view, building 10 extra houses here may be minor, but in the circumstances the community considers that to be substantial". The community might wish there to be a fresh application. I hope that I have answered the two issues raised.

We on the SNP side of the chamber also find this group of amendments helpful in that they will increase transparency and accountability. My one question for the minister relates to amendment 4 and the use of the expression "As soon as is reasonably practicable after a development plan scheme has been adopted". Has the minister a timescale in mind? If so, it would be helpful to have it on the record.

I will be quick. Amendment 108 is important and I congratulate Pauline McNeill on lodging it. If she seeks leave to withdraw it, the SNP will oppose that request and move the amendment.  Open space is equally important to people in rural and urban areas. The misconception is that, because people have fields all about them, they have open space. Fields are not open spaces; they are places of work. Green space is as relevant to people in rural Scotland as it is to those in urban Scotland. One example from my area is that of a school that is being built on open space, on common-good land. The ministers called in the application, because the land was not even designated in the local development plan for those purposes, but it is proceeding. If the presumption in planning law had been for open spaces to be protected, the development would not have been approved. Amendment 108 is terribly important. As I said, if Pauline McNeill seeks leave to withdraw it, the SNP will move it.

This may be a first, but I like both Iain Smith's and Donald Gorrie's amendments. SNP members will support the amendments lodged by both members, although no new coalition should be read into that. Iain Smith's amendments 98 and 99 are important because they would transfer the power to designate strategic development plan authorities to self-selecting local authorities. The  amendments would not only restore local democracy but make it consensual. Ministers should not direct local authorities for a variety of reasons. As has been illustrated, the Scottish Borders may be designated with Edinburgh, although the area might not want that. Fife could be put in with Edinburgh or Dundee, or—as was eloquently described—there could be three strategic development plans, all mixed up together. It is for local authorities to decide which strategic development plans and projects are suitable for them to take part in. Donald Gorrie offers a softer option, which is none the worse for that. Again, the process would be consensual and local authorities would be able to opt out, which is appropriate.

I press the minister a little further on that. For clarity, does he intend to bring the draft national planning framework to the Parliament by way of a ministerial statement or by another method?

I rise in support of Bruce Crawford's amendments 93 to 95 and Patrick Harvie's amendment 96, and, regrettably, against Donald Gorrie's amendments 44 and 46. Amendment 43, in my name, seeks a resolution on the proposed national planning framework to be brought before the chamber during the period of parliamentary consideration. That reflects the views of the committee at stage 1, which was that the NPF should be the subject of a debate in Parliament on a substantive motion. In the debate in committee, Donald Gorrie, who I think supported the committee's views, said: "The national planning framework is a major issue—it is as important as a budget, for example". He went on to say that, while we all accept—and indeed some of us hope—that Parliament's  composition in the future will be very different from what it is now, it should have, whatever its composition, "a significant role ... in considering the national planning framework". John Home Robertson took the view that "It is right and proper that Opposition members"— he corrected himself— "indeed, all back benchers ... should be deeply suspicious of the Executive." Well said, John. He went on to say: "It is unthinkable that the Parliament would not express a view."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 14 June 2006; c 3731-32.] The minister rejected that, however, taking the view that the NPF is a statement of Government policy rather than something that required a substantive motion. I would dispute that. Issues such as nuclear power stations, nuclear waste, major trunk roads and perhaps the proposed new Forth road bridge—issues that the Parliament would want to debate fully—are involved. Those matters are not suitable simply for committee debate; indeed, they could cut across the remits of many committees. It would be much better if those matters were brought to the chamber in a substantive motion for debate—and, perhaps, amendment, in the same way as my party has lodged an amendment to the motion to pass the bill. I am sympathetic towards Donald Gorrie's amendment 44, but I have problems with the replacement subsection (3) that it intends to insert into proposed new section 3B of the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997. Amendment 44 says: "In relation to any report of any committee of the Scottish Parliament ... the Scottish Ministers, in preparing or revising the framework, are to have regard to the report." I think that that is too wishy-washy, so I cannot support Donald Gorrie's amendments 44 and 46. We want something more substantive, which the whole of Scotland can test properly. On Patrick Harvie's amendment 96, I think that we should have a summary of the responses that are submitted on the NPF. It is important to have openness and accountability. Please, let us not have to rely on freedom of information law.

Can the minister outline his thinking on how the framework will be brought before Parliament, if not by resolution?

The Scottish National Party will support the minister's amendments and Patrick Harvie's amendment 97, with which I have every sympathy, as it would be a step further forward. I congratulate the minister on the proposal to make it mandatory for the Scottish ministers to make a statement on the reasons for particular national developments. It also makes sense to have a review of the national planning framework after five years, as that will happen with local development plans. The proposals fit in neatly and will mean that further information is provided to the Parliament and committees when they discuss the national planning framework.

In the light of the response to Scottish National Party amendment S2M-5109.2, which is in my name, by the Deputy Minister for Communities in the debate on violence against women, I seek Parliament's leave to withdraw it.  Amendment, by agreement, withdrawn.

I thank the minister for that clarification. I was not sure how secure the figures were; they were the best that I could obtain. I am obliged to her for the information and for recognising that there is still a huge issue with refuges to address. We are hearing anecdotally about women going elsewhere, for example in Glasgow. What evidence does the minister have that the people  who have applied for places are secure, wherever they are? Does she have information on that on a database, rather than just anecdotal evidence?

I am hoping that Mr Aitken will get to the point of addressing our amendment, which I surmise from his comments the Conservatives will not support. I ask him to comment on the number of refuges in his patch. As I said, there are only four refuges for the whole of Glasgow. I am surprised that he has not commented on that yet.

I intervened as he looked as if he was running out of steam.

I note the terms of the Government's motion and I note the minister's words. We on this side of the chamber will be supporting the motion. The minister did not refer to the Scottish National Party's amendment, but perhaps I can persuade him of its merits during the course of the debate. The debate should be largely non-party political and consensual, but issues will arise to do with funding and figures. I, too, have a great deal of sympathy with the Scottish Socialist Party's amendment. I support some of the issues that it raises—especially the part about low conviction rates. However, I will wait to hear views on effective changes in the criminal justice system. My feeling is that the issue is now more about funding and resources—other types of resources—than the processes themselves. The criminal justice system—whether the work of the police or of the prosecution service—has come a long way in our time in the Parliament. I note what the minister said about a further review of the law. That issue also needs to be addressed. At the outset, I make it plain that when I speak of violence, I mean not only physical violence but violence that is psychological, emotional, threatening and controlling. Despite efforts by members across the Parliament, through ministerial offices and committees, to address the blight of violence against women—both expressed and silent—it remains part of far too many lives. As the minister said, violence against women also extends to the children in a family. Many but not all incidents of violence against women are domestic abuse cases. I will put a few figures into the debate. The most recent figures, in "Domestic Abuse Recorded by the Police in Scotland, 2005-06", show a substantial increase from 43,631 incidents in 2004-05 to 45,795 in 2005-06. I accept that that may be due to the fact that women now feel that they can report cases—87 per cent of cases were reported by women, not men—but we cannot make that presumption. The figures do not enable us to determine how many cases involved violence against women and into what categories the incidents fell.  I have some points for the minister. First, given the figures, what detailed analysis does the Government undertake to inform policy, funding, education and—if necessary, although it should not always be the first resort—legislation? Secondly, I note that the figures are qualified by the phrase: "For those incidents where information was available". The information gap should be plugged. Without relying on a deluge of statistics, I want to explore further the figure of 43,631 cases in 2004-05. Within that total, 8,691 sheriff court referrals for summary trial and 104 High Court referrals were made. Taken together, that leaves some 34,836 reported cases—or 80 per cent of all cases—off the prosecution radar. Again, bare statistics do not give the full answer, but the gap is so wide that it requires to be addressed. Even if we allow for the burden of proof in criminal prosecutions, the percentage of cases that did not come to court is unacceptable. I ask the minister to tell the chamber what research or evidence the Government has on that dramatic fall-off. We must not continue to debate statistics year after year. Two other chilling statistics emerge from the document, which the Executive published this year. First, 55 per cent of cases in 2004-05 involved repeat victims. How can that still happen? Secondly, domestic abuse was a factor in one in four suicide attempts that were made by women. Those are serious issues and they must be addressed. We know that the violence is most likely to be inflicted by a partner or cohabitee. We also know that a substantial percentage of abuse occurs not only around but after separation. A certain kind of determined partner can make the situation post separation much worse. What can be done to assist victims and reduce the incidence of such violence, in so far as the Government can do so, given that societal change is also required? Let us look at Scottish Women's Aid. When I intervened on the minister to check the only figures that I was able to obtain, he could not give me an answer. The only figure that I found was for 2004-05 and showed that there were only 234 refuge places throughout Scotland. From the figures that I have given, we can see that that is a drop in the ocean of what is required. Figures for the same period show that 5,368 requests were made for a refuge place and yet it seems that only 234 places were available. We may never know what on earth the women and children who did not get into a refuge did. I will take a few figures at random from a table on refuge places: Angus, with one refuge, had 112 requests; East Lothian, with one refuge, had 91 requests; Glasgow, with four refuges for its half a  million people, had 828 requests. The figures show that funding is an issue. Funding for Scottish Women's Aid comes from central Government, local authorities, charities, legacies, donations and housing benefit, among other sources. Since 2003, a key source has been the supporting people fund. However, the budget lines show that the fund has been reduced from £408 million in 2003-04 to £399 million in 2006-07. I hope that the minister can tell me—not necessarily during the debate, but perhaps in writing—whether the drop in the fund is related to a reduction in need for the services that Scottish Women's Aid provides, or whether the provision of services is at a standstill. Education is an issue in relation to the reporting and prevention of rape. Some advertising campaigns superficially appeared to be successful, such as the one that showed a cowed woman who looked as though she had been bullied and was anticipating physical violence. However, the budget for advertising campaigns on domestic violence was reduced from £482,000 in 2002-03 to £296,000 in 2005-06. Was that reduction in funding the result of a campaign's success or was it to do with budget cuts or research findings? We need an answer to that question. It seems that the most recent research on the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001 was published in 2003. The researchers asked 32 victims whether they had heard of the 2001 act and 87 per cent had never heard of it. The 18 professionals, such as sheriffs, procurators fiscal, solicitors and police officers, who were asked about the 2001 act had heard of it, but some of them were unclear about the detail. The 2001 act was a crowning glory for the Justice 1 Committee, which had introduced the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Bill, but is the legislation operating? The minister should revisit the 2001 act and ascertain what it has achieved. I move amendment S2M-5109.2, to insert at end: "notes that in 2004-05 there were only 234 refuge places in Scotland and calls on the Executive to provide increased funding to support additional places which will also take into account rurality and remoteness, and further calls on the Executive to review the operation of the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001."

The minister mentions 600 updated spaces since 2000. I want to get my figures right. From the website of Scottish Women's Aid, I have a figure of 234 refuge places. That is the only figure I could get. How many refuge places are there currently in Scotland?

I make it clear to Gordon Jackson that I am a head-and-heart nationalist. I am proud to be one and have been one for 35 years and more. I will speak to the terms of the motion and address whether, without increased financial powers, we can improve social inclusion and reduce poverty in Scotland. We are discussing the matter seven years after the creation of this Parliament, in which good people all round the chamber support the eradication of child poverty and bringing people up to better standards of living. Dealing with health matters is often a poverty issue, dealing with the failure to achieve at school is often a poverty issue and dealing with low-level crime is often a poverty issue. Can the Parliament, whoever is in power, really tackle those issues without greater financial powers? It is probably a truism to say that poverty is a complex, multifaceted problem; the same is true of its solutions. The issue for the Parliament is whether we have the tools to provide those solutions. I will mention some aspects of the problem. I have taken the facts from figures published by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation and the Child Poverty Action Group, which have acted as my databases. Forty per cent of Scottish households have an income of £20,000 or less; 18 per cent have an income between £10,000 and £5,000; and 3 per cent exist on £3,000. As for individuals, three quarters of Scots have an annual income of £20,000 or less; nearly a quarter have an income of £10,000 to £5,000; and 20 per cent live on £5,000 or less. That is the reality for people. Those figures come from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation. What does that mean for Scotland's people and their health? One in four of our children lives in poverty and the figure is three times higher if someone is from a single-parent family. We all want poverty to be eradicated, but how can we achieve that with what we have in our hands now? We have all moved on as MSPs in the past seven years and we know what we are dealing with. I say to Richard Baker that the number of working-age adults without dependant children who are in income poverty in Scotland has increased from 300,000 to 400,000 since the mid-1990s.

We cannot begin to deal with the issues in Scotland while we are not in the position to deal with tax and benefits, which are at the basis of most poverty issues, but we have to deal with the social fallout. Seven of the Child Poverty Action Group's 10 ten steps to a society that is free of child poverty relate to reserved matters. If we listen to people who tell us about the difficulty that they have in moving out of poverty, they inevitably refer to the benefits trap and not having access to education because they do not have funding for transport. We want to deal with all those issues. There is something dishonest in the arguments we hear today that suggest that the SNP's proposal is simply a camouflage for independence. Of course it is not: none of us in the SNP has ever said anything other than that we want independence. I am opening up for consideration the question whether anyone in the chamber seriously believes that we can tackle child poverty and the poverty of low-income families without having our hands on the real tools of tax, benefits and the ability to provide decent, well-paid jobs.

The debate was too much for him.

Mindful of the remit, I will make brief reference at some point to the Scottish Borders. I emphasise, lest I find myself being rebuked, that I will do so to illustrate the principle of the argument. It is important to stress that this is not an anti-wind farm issue. For many people, it is an issue of location within a landscape and of the capacity of that landscape to take the developments, which often, as has happened in Perth and elsewhere, end up being ribbon developments, with one small set of turbines leading to another set and then another, all joined up until the project turns out to be a major development. As other members have said, there is undoubtedly an imbalance of power between the communities and the developers. The imbalance is not only to do with funding; it is to do with expertise and time. I said that I would make a brief reference to the Scottish Borders, where there have been 22 applications for wind farms since 1996. Of those, three have been refused, four have been approved and three are live, but some of them started off a long time ago. One application that is not yet determined was submitted in December 2004. What is the capacity for communities to keep themselves going—in energy, manpower and resources—to follow through the progress of an application for such a development?

The member should ask the Green party to comment on that point; he was rather unfair not to put it to the party's representative here. Sometimes communities have a kind of victory, as they did in the Borders at Fallago rig, where there were to be 62 turbines. However, the developers there have come back with a revised application. Communities can be worn down by developers. I want to link this debate to the new legislation on planning. The usual suspects have been here before, arguing for national guidelines and a much-needed strategy. However, in the Planning (Scotland) Bill and the national planning framework—which will cover major developments such as nuclear power stations, nuclear waste installations and major roads—where do wind farms fit? Will they be treated as part of a local development plan, as they are just now, or will they be treated as national developments— because they link to one another across the network—and so become part of the national planning framework? We need an answer. As the minister and I know, not everyone is following the progress of the Planning (Scotland) Bill blow by blow, as some us are made to, confined as we are in committee rooms with it. The processes of examining national developments in the national planning framework are completely different from the processes in local development plans. Many people in Perthshire and the Borders do not just see one wind farm; they see lots of them all strung together like a string of beads. Developments end up being substantial. I would be happy if the minister would clarify those issues when he sums up. I thank you for your forbearance, Presiding Officer.

Given that the Liberal-Labour Government is determined to press on with the transfer of housing stock from local authorities to housing associations, and following the law of unintended consequences, what consideration has the Government given to extending the Belwin scheme to those housing associations?

The line is wrong.

That is a surprise.

I will focus on the haves and have-nots. I accept the benefits of the limited entitlement to nursery care for three and four-year-olds, but issues arise about parents who do not have much money because they are on benefits or have very low incomes. One parent explained to the Communities Committee that, notwithstanding that she had access to provision, she had to pay the  transport costs for herself and another child to the nursery, which she could not afford. The Deputy Minister for Education and Young People talked about flexibility, but that parent does not have access to such flexibility. When the limited provision was finished, she could not take up a job because she had to look after her child. I will touch on integration of taxes and benefits later, but that is an example of the real issues that affect individuals in vulnerable groups and areas. The Education Committee's report and the speeches so far have been interesting. The report states: "Investment in the 0-3 sector has not increased at the same pace" as elsewhere. That age group is a very vulnerable stage, when it is possible to catch a child and turn his or her fortune around such that a family pattern need not be repeated generation after generation. Accordingly, we should invest far more in family centres, to which the committee report and members have referred. I am grateful to Adam Ingram for advising me that family centres deliver a range of integrated services. People do not work in silos anymore and social work, education and health care can all be accessed in the same place. Family centres provide support for carers of children and families. In addition, nutritious meals are served, so those centres are an excellent development. However, I note that there are only 162 family centres in Scotland, half of which are run by local authorities and the remainder of which are in the voluntary and private sectors. That brings me back to evidence that was given to the Communities Committee on poverty and deprivation. Two single parents advised that committee that they had run such a service. They did not call it a family service, but it was an integrated unit that attracted seedcorn money from the usual suspects—Lloyds TSB and others. When they ran out of that money, however, they had no more funding, so it all ended and crashed around them. People who had begun to build confidence in the family centre lost that and concluded that there was no longer much use in attending the centre because it would not be there a year later. There are problems in respect of continued funding, so I will move on to that issue, which I cannot believe we are still raising. Years ago, the Justice 1 Committee discussed early intervention to prevent people from going to jail, and it discussed the idea that some children who are not given much help between the ages of nought and three will end up on a criminal path partly as a result of that. We went on about simplified funding  streams—not just for local authorities, but in the voluntary sector. Paragraph 133 of the report mentions—yet again— "the complexity of funding arrangements." We are seven years into this Government, yet we still cannot sort out funding for something like the Jeely Piece Club. If the Executive cannot sort out funding for the Jeely Piece Club, it is not going to be doing very much for the Scottish budget. The situation must be dealt with. We cannot have people competing for funding streams, making applications and cross-applications over and over again. Surely that ought to be remedied PDQ. Another terribly important issue is the workforce for early years provision. I am quite surprised that nobody from the Scottish Socialist Party is here for the debate—their members seem always to be banging on about how nursery teachers should get more pay, but have not bothered to contribute to the debate. There we go—they must have other things on their minds. We must value the people who deal with young children. We should not decide that people who deal with children aged from nought to three are worth only £6 an hour, but that is apparently the median pay for child care staff. Cleaners are paid more than £6 per hour, but people are asked to accept lower pay that that for looking after vulnerable children as they develop, for relating to them during the day, for giving them experience of interacting with and reacting to adults, and for developing their social skills with other children. That takes me on to childminders. I am indebted to the Education Committee for this information: "More than 24,000 children ... are currently looked after by ... childminders in Scotland." I presume that that means those who are registered, and that we are not talking about unofficial childminders. One third of those children are under three, yet I read in the report that childminders have "no current requirement for any training prior to an application for registration being made." That is a stone that we should look under. I do not blame childminders, but we should train and support people who look after children, often in the community, and on whom people who have little money often rely for child care. That takes me on to unofficial childminders. I think the current jargon is "kinship carers": the grandparents, aunties, sisters or whoever who look after children. People who are on benefits could be trained and paid to provide child care. I think—I am not sure about this—that people can earn no more than £20 per week before their benefits are affected. Surely it is not beyond the  wit of anyone to increase that level so that people can earn some money and still receive their benefits. Those people could include pensioners, if they were properly employed. Many grandparents provide child care but are not paid to do so, although they have many skills. Wendy Alexander took me back to dim and distant days and, like Fiona Hyslop's child, mine did not sleep. I do not know about 14 hours' care—something more like 24-hour care was needed. Seven years down the line, the matters that I raise are serious. The minister talked in his speech about the "mosaic of provision". I call it a patchwork—which is patchy—rather than a mosaic. We cannot continue to have the figures to which Adam Ingram referred for children who are going into the children's hearings system. Most of those children need care and protection. I do not always blame the parents, who often come from situations in which they needed care and protection. We must break the societal link and give those children a chance. I will use a cliché again—we cannot continue to have Scottish children who are born to fail because our society does not give them the proper support.

I thank Wendy Alexander for a thoughtful speech. For me, this is not a party-political issue. Many of us have been here for seven years and I still have concerns about several things that happen in the chamber, not just about the quality of legislation, although I will come to that, but about accountability to and robustness for members. The committee's report is excellent. I am interested in more radical issues that could have been brought out, but perhaps we will discuss those another time. I will take it a stage at a time, starting with stage 2 amendments. We all know that substantial amendments can be lodged at stage 2 on which the committee cannot take evidence. That is a huge concern. If the amendments are then incorporated in the bill—

I am sorry; my point about stage 2 should have been that although we accept written submissions, we cannot accept oral evidence from witnesses at that stage.

I stand corrected, but my point is that I have never seen a committee stopped in its tracks to take evidence on a substantial stage 2 amendment. That has not happened in committees that I have sat on, so I would say that the measure has not been used. An even worse example can happen at stage 3 when there is no opportunity in our constricted timetable to take evidence when substantial amendments are debated. The huge issue for this place is that that means the end of the matter. We are unicameral, the end chamber; that is it—we are left with the legislation. In the context of Iain Smith's points with which I agreed, we have not even had an opportunity for post-legislative scrutiny. Chickens might come home to roost in due course as a result. We must consider the question of the Parliament's status. I accept that it would not work to leave the debate to pass the motion at the end of stage 3 procedure until another date when the heat has gone out of the matter. However, there is no doubt that the curtailed debates at the end of the stage 3  procedure are just a gesture. Points that are made by members during the debate, responses from ministers and the final vote might form the basis of judicial decisions on interpretation of the law. The act contains just the words on the page, so judges and sheriffs will look to the stage 3 debate for ministerial responses, the purpose behind them and the vote that was cast and say, "That was the edge that was put on the debate; that was the subtlety that made the bill go through." We have to take care at that stage. My opinion digresses from Alasdair Morgan's on the matter of ministerial statements, which can be a farce. Last week, the report on the right to buy was published and we had the minister's statement. I know that the minister was prepared at first to release the report earlier in the day, but established protocols meant that the report and statement were available only in the chamber. It is pretty ridiculous for those of us whose speeches followed the statement to try to ask substantive questions of the minister—questions, not tripwires—when we had just received the report and the statement. I would like that practice to be addressed. The solution might be in the strange procedure of interpellation; I knew nothing about that procedure until today when I read about it in an annex to the report. Running a trial of the procedure is an interesting proposal. I will tie that in with what I believe is the failure of question time. We have tried question time in all kinds of ways. I remember the early days when it was vibrant and interesting. Perhaps things cannot continue like that, but the question times on specific subjects still do not work. No matter who is in power next year, we need to get to grips with substantial issues and follow them through. The Presiding Officer and the Deputy Presiding Officers have been very good—

I will just finish my point. They have been good at allowing supplementaries, but sometimes we are just beginning to get somewhere—

I am prepared to take Iain Smith's intervention.

I could not agree more with Iain Smith. I will keep within my time, Presiding Officer. An issue that is not covered in the Procedures Committee's report is the imbalance between legislation—far too many sausages go into the legislative sausage machine—and the ability of committees to conduct inquiries, including short inquiries on issues such as the delivery of free personal care, in which committees have time to hear from ministers on issues. There is hardly a member who is not aware that we do not have the time that we used to have to conduct inquiries. During my time as a member of the Communities Committee we have conducted only one short inquiry. The imbalance is frustrating for members and does not keep committees fresh. I put those thoughts to members—other ideas might come up. I welcome the debate. It is not an anorak debate; it is important to the vibrancy of the Parliament.

I have lost the pistachio thread.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek your guidance about courtesy to members. The leader of the Conservatives, who led the debate, is not present, nor are any of the speakers from the Conservative benches.   Ms Pauline McNeill, Donald Gorrie and Robin Harper are not here for any of the summing-up speeches. I seek your guidance as to whether that is discourteous to members and whether it will be taken into account when other members are excluded from debates.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the debate. I learn something new every day from Annabel Goldie. I have learned that I am—I think—an emancipated neo-pensioner. I ask Annabel not to judge everyone's age by the colour of their hair.  I want to give an overview of some issues concerning the older generation. I speak as a politician and as one of the voting army of one million pensioners in Scotland, who range from those who fought in the second world war, such as my nonagenarian father who surfs the internet, to those like me, an ex-mod and Beatles, Dylan and Elvis fan who once wore Mary Quant miniskirts. I do not want members to try to picture that now—ah, gone are the days. The position is, of course, that we are assets to the country: assets when we are working—whether here or in B&Q—assets when looking after our grandchildren and assets when we are carers of our partners. Many pensioners are carers of their older partners. Colleagues will be able to deal in more detail with specific topics, but I will simply give an overview, because there is so much to deal with. Let us start with pensioner poverty, which is a phrase that keeps recurring because one in five pensioners lives in poverty. The basic state pension is only £79.50 a week for a single person, and the so-called targeted pension credit has been a complete failure—40 per cent of pensioners who are entitled to it do not claim it. The Scottish National Party would establish a citizens wage of £106 per week for a single pensioner and £161 for a couple, which would be non-means tested. "Ah," it might be said, "you would give money to rich pensioners." No, we would not. Taxation would deal with total income levels, which is a fairer way of dealing with the matter. The crucial phrase is "non-means tested". We would deal with the wealthier pensioners. Council tax breaks a basic rule of taxes, which is that they should be fair. Council tax is palpably unfair. I will leave John Swinney to deal in detail with that tax. However, pensioners are being penalised for having lived for many years in their own homes, which have gained in value through no efforts of their own. They do not have the income to pay the council tax bills that land on their doorsteps and they now have to make serious choices. The next issue—which I am racing to—is fuel poverty, which is now well up the agenda for many people. In 2004-05, the number of excess winter deaths in Scotland was 2,760 and 86 per cent of those were victims over the age of 65. Those deaths were not because of the weather: the winters in Sweden and Germany are far harsher than ours, but there are far fewer deaths there, because of housing and living standards. Ten per cent of admissions to hospitals in Scotland are for cold weather-related illness. The central heating programme is supported universally by members and it is welcome, but the criteria must be extended to deal with the anathema of barring  from the scheme pensioners with older systems because they do not meet the criteria. We must also consider the fact that Scottish Gas administers the programme. I have concerns that a conflict of interest may arise. The jury is out, but Scottish Gas will be watched closely. Given the excessive fuel price rises and the lack of a rise in the pension, the winter fuel allowance is completely scrubbed out by the excessive bills that land on mats. My bill is £30 extra a month, which is £360 extra a year—and I am not at home all day long. The pensioner who is on a fixed state pension, who may not be getting their pension credit and who is at home all day, will need to use their heating, but they will not be able to pay the bills. That is against the background of the enormous profits that the power companies make. This year, Scottish Power made a record profit of £850 million, which is up from last year's profit of £675 million. The minister has told me in parliamentary answers that he has spoken to the power companies on various occasions. However, I do not know what they told him or how far he got in ensuring that Scotland's pensioners do not have to suffer cold conditions. Edwina Currie famously commented that people should wrap up warm and wear a winter hat when sitting in their homes. That is not a joke. Scotland's pensioners will be doing that and moving into one room to keep warm, as they did in the 1950s. Mr McLetchie was quite right about free personal care. I was the first to propose a member's bill in the Parliament on free personal care for the elderly. The Labour Party was taken kicking and screaming to the very last vote to pass the measure. Labour cannot take credit for the policy. No one in the Parliament thought that we would have people waiting in queues to be assessed for free personal care. What I call the tattie-and-tin test is that, if people cannot open a tin or peel a tattie, they should get help with preparing food. There should be no difficulties with that. As I do not have much time, I will simply say in passing that one in nine pensioners is reported as suffering some form of elder abuse. The Parliament would do well to examine that. It sounds grim, but we are a feisty army of grumpy old men and women. I will finish with my favourite poem, which members have heard before: When I am an old woman, I shall wear purple With a red hat that doesn't go, and doesn't suit me. And I shall spend my pension on brandy and summer gloves And satin sandals, and say we've no money for butter. I shall sit down on the pavement when I am tired And gobble up samples in shops and press alarm bells   And run my stick along the public railings And make up for the sobriety of my youth. I shall go out in my slippers in the rain And pick the flowers in other people's gardens And learn to spit. You can wear terrible shirts and grow more fat And eat three pounds of sausages at a go Or only bread and pickles for a week And hoard pens and pencils and beer nuts and things in boxes. When members have a chance, they should take a look at my shoes, which are not so much a fashion statement as a declaration of intent. By the way, I also have a very large red hat at home. I move amendment S2M-4901.3, to leave out from "is therefore" to end and insert: "expresses concern, therefore, that free personal care is not being delivered equitably, with waiting lists being operated in some regions, and believes that the Scottish Executive must take immediate action to eradicate these practices; also believes that pensioner poverty cannot be tackled without the abolition of the council tax and its substitution by the fairer system of a local income tax; is alarmed at the devastating fuel cost increases which must lead to increasing vulnerability of our older people to cold-related illnesses and early mortality, and, while welcoming legislation to end age discrimination, calls on the Executive to inquire into elder abuse."

Does the minister share my concern that the closure of cottage hospitals in places such as the Borders is contrary to the Kerr report and does not allow older people to be treated in the community and provided with the level of care that they need nearer to home?

I congratulate Cathie Craigie on securing the debate on such an important issue. Many more people are living to an old age and increasing numbers of them are becoming partially or totally deaf. Ironically, I have been losing the hearing in my left ear for the past two weeks, so I have had a small taste of what it is like to try to listen to conversations and hear what is going on. I hope that it is a temporary condition, but I shall not know until next week. I am looking forward to it not going on longer than that. The issue is not that one does not hear anything; one hears buzzing the whole time. When people are around, one tries to listen to the conversation, pretending sometimes to hear what is going on, but in fact being completely unaware. There is great isolation in deafness or partial hearing. It is pertinent that the motion includes the phrase "no need to shout". My father is 91 and is increasingly losing his hearing. We are both now yelling at each other, with neither hearing what the other is saying and each of us having independent conversations. That was probably always the  case, but it certainly is the case just now. My experience is minor, but it has taught me many lessons in the past couple of weeks. I want to refer to the isolation that occurs when one is unable to communicate. With members' leave, I will refer to two examples in the context of the charity Hearing Dogs for Deaf People. I will focus on the experience of isolation rather than on the charity. I will quote the words of Adam Wilson, who had severe hearing loss for over 30 years, but found himself alone and isolated only when he retired. He said: "It is hopeless living on your own and not hearing the everyday sounds ... Worse than that, the most critical problem was how easily I was slipping into a reclusive state." That illustrates the importance of signing: it allows communication between those who have their hearing and those who do not, or who have defective hearing. Hearing people cannot understand how confusing it can be for deaf people to be in crowds, in open spaces, or where there is background noise or wind. It was not until Adam Wilson got a dog that he began to communicate again; previously, he had just thought that he would stay at home. I will also cite the example of the young woman who lost her hearing completely overnight after a viral infection. She then found life becoming increasingly difficult. She says: "It took two years for me to realise the goalposts had moved for ever. Then depression set in: I couldn't cope with noise, use a conventional telephone or engage in conversation." Was that the end of her working life? She felt that it was almost the end of her life, because she was not part of society and was not communicating any more. BSL is not just for deaf people and their families; it is for the rest of society, too. If someone does not know what is going on in a room and can only guess, their answer is often either to pretend that they know or simply to shut down. I therefore congratulate Cathie Craigie on her motion. Through the facilities that it can offer, Parliament has gone a long way towards assisting people with partial hearing or deafness. Some of us in the chamber have to use headphones to follow debates; it may be me next week. We must continue to bring this issue to Parliament, especially as so many people in society now have defective hearing. Many people are not letting on that they are in that position.

I apologise for having to leave the debate earlier on other business, which I explained to the Deputy Presiding Officer.  Is there a role for the minister's department in trying to move Parliament towards procuring locally? If we could do that, we would be taking a stand and showing the rest of Scotland what it can do.

I may very well be short of six minutes, Presiding Officer. I want to pick up on four points: the role of supermarkets; procurement; local food economies; and the concept of the food surplus agency, to which Sarah Boyack referred.  The minister is right to say that the food supply chain is a market and that one must intervene in it with caution. However, there is no doubt that supermarkets cause an imbalance in the chain. On page 7 of the committee's report, the word "control" is used to describe the supermarkets' dominance. The report says that supermarkets "control over 70% of food retailing". I was unaware of the fact that anonymous evidence was given on the issue. As Richard Lochhead said, that speaks volumes. I do not think that the report refers to how the supermarkets' control determines what food is grown. I remember many years ago going down to see the Clydesdale tomato co-operatives—unfortunately, only one of them now grows tomatoes—where it was explained to me that a supermarket sent them various test varieties for growing seed plants. When they were grown, the supermarket chose a variety not for the taste but for its appearance. The vine tomatoes that are in the supermarkets look so pretty. They all have the same deep red colour and are all the same size, but that is not how nature grows fruit. However, that is the kind of fruit that supermarkets offer. Supermarkets control varieties of all kinds of fruit and vegetables and we are losing many tasty varieties as a result. The supermarkets also sell standardised meat products, so a bigger issue is involved. It is true that people are voting with their trolleys. However, as Maureen Macmillan said, an educational issue is involved. People need to know about animal welfare—for example, the condition of battery hens. Supermarkets determine what appears on their shelves through what appears on their till rolls. They can see what is being bought in volume. If something is not being bought in sufficient volume, it disappears from the shelves and choice begins to narrow. There is certainly an issue about educating the public. We have all taken advantage of buy-one-get-one-free offers and two for the price of one, although we do not need two. How much of that food is discarded? For example, I might buy two cauliflowers, but I can eat only so much cauliflower in a week. That is particularly the case for people who live alone, compared with other households. There is an issue about false economies. If the price cuts are being borne by producers, that is wrong. We do not need such offers, which are often false promotions. I want to pick up on what Stewart Stevenson said about the National Assembly for Wales with regard to procurement. First, though, I refer the minister to my so far ineffectual efforts to get the Parliament, through the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, to buy local Scottish produce. We keep bumping our head against the European  procurement rules. It is my understanding that health boards—or whatever they are—in Wales have somehow managed to do what I have described previously to the minister as creative contracting. The minister was rather taken aback by that idea and thought that it might be illegal. However, I think that creative contracting should be built into contracts, particularly public sector contracts, so that local produce can be bought. I understand that Orkney Islands Council managed to do some creative contracting by ensuring that what it does promotes remote and rural areas. That means that it does not have to buy imports. In recommendation 46 of its report, the Environment and Rural Development Committee recommends that "the Executive considers how it can use its contacts with supermarkets to influence their contract practices." The committee also requests in the report that "the Executive reports to it on how it can work to secure further emphasis on local sourcing in EU procurement rules". It cannot be beyond the wit of the minister and his team to try to make this Parliament a model that can promote what the committee requests. I want to talk about local food economies. There was a recent members' business debate on farmers markets. They are small beer at the moment, but they are very useful. In an initiative in Peebles—I had to bring the Borders into it—a local restaurant is sourcing everything locally. It gets the meat, vegetables and fruit locally, and it makes the bread. On this side of the chamber, we aim to improve the business rates for small businesses, and I would like to know whether there is another way in which the Scottish Government can assist local businesses to buy locally—especially restaurants that are promoting local produce. I would call a food surplus agency the ugly fruit and vegetable shop. I would be all for it. It is a nonsense that four baking potatoes all have to be the same size and shape, or that all carrots have to look the same, or apples. Often the tastiest ones are the ones that do not look like that. There has been a huge impact on what tomato producers have to bring out, and we are losing taste. I am all for an ugly fruit and vegetable shop, with reduced prices, and I will be there shopping without my supermarket trolley.

First, is the minister surprised, as I am, that paragraph 4.4 of the report shows that Scottish Borders has a surplus of affordable housing, although that is not what my in-tray tells me? Could that figure be distorted by the fact that we had a wholesale stock transfer? Secondly, when the minister says "affordable housing", does he mean affordable rented housing or affordable housing to buy, or both? Thirdly, has he asked those who are on the extensive waiting lists what they think of the right to buy? Fourthly, does he agree with the statement in paragraph 4.9.3 of the report that "No new dwellings were completed by local authorities in 2004 or 2005"?

What about the point about no new dwellings?

She is.

I will come to Jamie Stone's quip shortly. I wish to approach the subject from a social justice point of view by considering the blight in our town centres, referred to by Murdo Fraser, and the impact on communities of boarded-up shops and the expansion of charity shops, which are exempt from rates and some of which sell goods in direct competition with local retailers. That has a knock-on effect: pavements are not maintained, streetlights do not work, shopping trolleys lie  broken and there is graffiti. The impact on the heart of the community is one of disintegration. There can be a domino effect: one shop goes, another shop goes and so on. Communities often feel that there is no way for them to retrieve the situation. There are examples in my constituency, and I will start with Galashiels. Thankfully, it has recovered somewhat in recent years from the body blow of mill closures and the plundering by Viasystems. It is by no means out of the woods yet, however. The small shops adjacent to my office on Bank Street come and go, sometimes within months. The onward and upward expansion of Tesco and the arrival of Sainsbury's will add to the pressure on locally rooted shops providing local jobs. The result of such supermarket sweeps is even more apparent in Penicuik, whose town centre is the despair of many of the town's inhabitants. Buildings are not only boarded up; they are literally falling down. Pavements are unkempt and the square is blossoming with "to let" signs. The town's development trust, crime prevention panel and community council are all trying to do their bit, despite the fact that the local authority appears to have little regard for the community, as witnessed by the closures of leisure centres and so on. Without support, the small businesses that provide jobs in the local economies and communities in which they are rooted will have an uphill struggle. There is no conflict between Jim Mather and me on this—his business rates proposals are practical and crucial to the balance sheet of small businesses. I have in my hand a list of 122 Penicuik businesses—I am also working on various areas of the Borders. Those businesses would save a total of £151,500 under Jim's proposals. Some, I admit, would save as little as £59 per annum, but others could save up to £3,500. That sum alone would give oxygen to businesses on the brink and to those that wish to consolidate or, even better, expand. As for the alleged cost, I will express that from a different perspective. Job creation, health, the well-being of communities and crime prevention are sometimes not easy to cost, yet we know that when a community thrives there are fewer police patrolling the streets, fewer people go to their doctors for depression and fewer people feel isolated and develop illnesses. That is what the impact could be. As we all know, the cure for many ills is a decent, well paid job.

In that regard, no one can do better than someone in a local business. That is why I commend Jim Mather's proposals.

I am sorry, but I have only a minute left. I would have taken the minister's intervention otherwise. Members have mentioned raised taxes. Yes—the tax base would be increased, and more people in the community would pay taxes into the system for everyone else. That is what I mean by it. Any idea of a division between us is not correct. I like Jim Mather's metaphor of bigger cakes—I am for bigger cakes, and we both agree that they shall be more equitably divided. That is Jim's recipe for the economy, and it is my recipe for social justice.

I made it plain that I was talking about the particular project and solution that are before us. The debate is not about whether a rail link should exist between Edinburgh and its airport, but about whether the particular proposed link should proceed. We must have clarity, because we are dealing with public funds.

Yes, but my role with the Borders railway is completely different. I had to sit on the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill Committee as an objective member. Is the member disputing that the conclusions that I quoted—and others—are the committee's unanimous conclusions? Are they not, cumulatively, serious reservations?

I thank my colleagues on the private bill committee, which turned out to be not so bad after all, and Scott Barrie for his light chairing. I make it plain that I speak as a member of that committee, which, as Scott Barrie said, is quasi-judicial. I am therefore constrained to consider and take a view on the specific proposal in the bill and not to compare the required investment with that required for other rail or other transport projects. That is a policy matter for the current Minister for Transport and the next one—it is not for me.  I will try to bring a little more light to the matter and a little less heat by referring to the committee's report. The evidence to the committee led me to conclude that the project is a bad one that is ill thought out, with funding that is not guaranteed and a lot of ifs and buts. The committee shared those concerns. We really must go back and think again, because public money cannot go into the project as it stands. I will quote some terribly important comments that the committee made. The committee commented on the importance of the timetable to the delivery of the project. However, the report states: "Given the confidence of the promoter that the proposed timetable could be delivered it was with some alarm that the Committee heard from Network Rail that it was 'reasonably confident that it might be a possibility'." Damned by faint praise. On the economic benefits, paragraph 32 states: "The Committee therefore remains at present uncertain as to whether the potential economic benefits will be distributed across the whole of Scotland at the scale indicated by the promoter." Other paragraphs of the report deserve to be quoted. On the fares policy, the committee found many contradictions on whether there is to be a premium fare and that issue is still not resolved. Such a fare would hit on the head the social inclusion aim, among others. One key point about the Edinburgh airport rail link—I agree with Sarah Boyack that the name is strange—is whether the trains will run early in the morning and late at night. Paragraph 68 states: "The Committee expressed concern regarding the way in which EARL will meet the needs of those business tourists travelling either early in the morning or late at night, particularly given some trains do not begin operating until 7 am". What did Network Rail say about that? The committee's report tells us that it said that any extension of these operating hours would prove to be "extremely challenging". I think that that means that it cannot do it. When the committee has such views in front of it, it has an obligation to be straightforward. I am interested not in policies, but in what was put before me as a member of the committee that was taking the evidence. I will give you further examples from the report. Paragraph 72 says: "The Committee agreed that it had some concerns about the ability of the EARL scheme to deliver each of the components of reliability, journey time and quality identified by the promoter as benefits of EARL." On rolling stock, paragraph 78 says: "the Committee is extremely concerned that the best intentions of the promoter may be undermined by decisions on rolling stock made with other considerations in mind."  Paragraph 81 says: "The Committee is disappointed that key decisions on the rolling stock for EARL are still some way off ... In addition, the Committee has serious concerns as to whether, given the number of decisions to be made prior to procuring rolling stock, the timescales for decision taking can be achieved." Those are not light words and they are the unanimous view of the committee. Serious concerns have been expressed by the committee.

That is an extremely insulting intervention. I sat as an objective member of the committee. The statements that I am reading out are from the report and are supported unanimously by the committee; they are not my words. If we add up the statements, we can see that substantial concerns are being expressed. The submission by VisitScotland was slight; to call it tepid would be too kind. The report says that VisitScotland declined to give oral evidence, which meant that we could not even question it about its evidence. Paragraph 84 says: "The Committee is astonished at the lack of engagement by VisitScotland in what, the promoter contends, is a rail link which would bring tourism benefits to the whole of Scotland" and paragraph 85 continues: "In considering the promoter's assertion that EARL will assist in tourism growth across Scotland, the Committee remains unconvinced whether this policy objective will be achieved."

Having heard the evidence and listened carefully to the questions of members who know much more about railways than I do, I am of the opinion that the problems that I have mentioned, particularly those relating to rolling stock, cannot be remedied. The flaws are so substantial and fundamental that, on behalf of the Parliament and the public purse—remember, the projected cost is £608 million—I believe that the project should not proceed. We have to be straight about this. [ Interruption. ] If Labour members think that I have no integrity on that committee, they should report me to the Standards and Public Appointments Committee. I assure them that I sat and listened to the evidence—which they did not  do—and I came to an objective view. I am expressing my view, for what it is worth. If they are not listening, that is not my problem. Further, if the project goes ahead, that is not my problem either and it is not my party's problem. The issue is whether this particular bill represents the appropriate way in which to proceed. That is what I have to consider. My impression, based on the concerns that I have mentioned—which were extreme and unanimous—is that the bill should proceed no further.

Is the First Minister aware of correspondence dated 30 June 2006 between Scottish Children's Reporter Administration principal reporter Margaret Cox and Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland spokeswoman  Assistant Chief Constable Maureen Brown in which Ms Cox states: "Earlier this year, SCRA sought a funding increase of approximately £20M over 3 years to enable the Reporter service to cope with the anticipated increases in referrals. ... However the Scottish Executive has taken the view that limited resources available have to be directed to referral reduction"? Does that not represent a fundamental shift in ethos and policy that places at risk children who would otherwise have been picked up by the children's hearings system? Does that not run contrary to the advice of experts in the field who have repeatedly said that early intervention is the key to reducing the number of referrals and that, by trying to get the statistics right, the Executive is not getting it right for every child?

I ask the minister again to consider rucksacking—if I may use that term—which is a solution that I have proposed before. It would mean that the care package and funding would follow the child, although they might have to be tweaked in another local authority. That would eradicate the conflicts between local authorities and would be a far simpler solution. Will he kindly investigate that?

Many of my points have already been made by others so I will try not to repeat them. The Health Committee elicited responses from local authorities on funding, which make interesting reading. Scottish Borders Council says that the funding that it received for free personal care was £3.5 million but the amount required was £7 million. That is an enormous difference and it must be impacting on the 28-day waiting list. However, the situation in the Borders is not the worst. I think that Midlothian Council receives less than £2 million for free personal care but is looking for more than £5 million. The financing has to be addressed. A party colleague has already said that the £40 million that was clawed back by the Treasury should of course have been allocated to this Parliament. The Parliament will hardly be inspired to implement policies that save the Treasury money if the Parliament then finds that it is not entitled to reapply the savings to those very policies. If we could reapply those savings, we might not have the funding gap. On the issue of guidance on the preparation of food, I remember in 1999 being rather naive, but bold, and meeting Sir Stewart Sutherland after I had read his report and introduced my member's bill—which was the first time the Parliament had considered free personal care. Sir Stewart made it plain that free personal care included assistance with the preparation of food. The matter is as plain as a pikestaff and should be made clear in the guidance, as Help the Aged in Scotland says. There should be no room for creative interpretation by local authorities. I was interested—that is an understatement—to hear that more than half the local authorities have waiting lists for assessment and I am concerned that some individuals who have been assessed might end up back on the list, waiting to be reassessed. In a case that was brought to my attention recently by geriatricians in the Borders, an elderly person had been assessed and was ready for discharge from hospital. The buck passed to social work services and the housing association, which had to consider the person's housing needs and provide aids and adaptations. However, there was a delay in finding the funding for the adaptations, during which time the elderly person remained consigned to a hospital bed.  Eventually the person's condition deteriorated and they had to be reassessed. There might be a hidden queue of people who are on the list for a second time because their condition has got worse while they waited in hospital. People can easily become physically and psychologically debilitated if they feel that they have nowhere to go. That is why we should have retained cottage hospitals—I slip that comment in for the minister. A person who had been assessed could have gone to a cottage hospital in the community—in Coldstream or Jedburgh, for example—where they belonged and could recover their confidence before moving back into their home. It is plain daft to close down cottage hospitals; they are a proper part of the system. I mentioned the conflict between health boards, local authorities and housing associations. We all understand that such organisations want to protect their funding. However, as a result, people are left in hospital and cannot be supplied with the aids and adaptations that they need. The housing association cannot get aids and adaptations from the social work department and we go round and round, recycling public money—as Shona Robison said—and paying lots of pen pushers. Funding needs to be streamlined. I understand that there is also a waiting list for the production of aids and adaptations. I know of a person who is stuck in hospital because the special bed that they need at home cannot be obtained. The care commission's role bears examination. As I said, the commission should not be self-financing. It was brought to my attention when I was convener of the Health Committee that inspectors were most unhappy about using care home fees to fund the system. That is overwhelmingly the view among local authorities, too. Irene Oldfather, who has left the chamber, made an important point about how people access care commission reports. The system seems shady; people have to dig around to find a report. Reports should be much more easily available. I applaud the use of direct payments. When direct payments were pioneered years ago in the Borders, users were pleased with them. They felt more independent; they had a stake and instead of being told who should look after them and what should be done for them they were making such decisions for themselves. However, I add a note of caution. Direct payments should be encouraged, but some people do not want them, as disabled people have told me. We should bear in mind that some people want assistance.

Does the minister share my concern about the fact that many of the costs are engendered by the care commission's being self financing? That concern was expressed to me many years ago by the social work services inspectorate. Will the minister consider the matter again, as the burden on small providers is onerous?

I congratulate John Scott on securing the debate and express regret at the fact that no Labour members are present. Maureen Watt was a bit rough on John Scott—I saw that he was upset—so I will be gentle with him. I know that he frequently meets my sister—who is worse than I am—down in Ayr when he is on his stall at the farmers market. I am sorry that Alex Johnstone, who tells me that he is on the tomato diet, has left. Although he is eating lots of tomatoes, he is starving. I hope that they are the tomatoes from Clydesdale that Rosemary Byrne enjoyed at the farmers market stalls earlier this week. I thank her for mentioning the EatScotland event, which I hosted. Although she was unable to come, I know that she is fully committed to the scheme. The Scottish Parliament has an opportunity to do more than just hold the Scottish food fortnight. Along with other members, through the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, I have been urging the members dining room to commit itself to serving Scottish produce and Scottish recipes. I know that there are issues to do with Sodexho and European procurement rules, but those rules can be met. Surely creative contracting could take place. I cannot believe that the French Parliament in Paris bothers its boot about buying produce from other nations. I bet it buys French produce and waits for someone to challenge it. If anyone challenged the Scottish Parliament about serving properly priced Scottish produce in the members dining room, for once the Scottish people would be on our side for successfully defying the regulations. I have no idea how much time I have left because the speaking-time clock is not working. There is now a campaign to eat Peebles—not literally, of course. There is a wonderful lady called Val Brunton who runs the Sunflower Restaurant there. Everything she uses is local—the bread is  baked locally, the meat comes from the local butcher's and the fish and vegetables are local, too. I do not have shares in the restaurant, but the food is wonderful. A group of traders in Peebles are getting together to have the town put on a food trail, to promote its many independent shops and the good food that is available there. I could not agree more that food miles are a waste. Who on earth wants to eat strawberries in January? There are children in Scotland who think that strawberries grow in January and who have no idea how much it costs to bring them over here. Let us eat Scottish strawberries and Scottish raspberries at the right time of year. In the winter, we can have turnips along with our haggis.

Mince is also a staple of this Parliament.

Former solicitors are popping out of the woodwork in vast numbers on this side of the chamber, for which I apologise. It is trite to say that reform of any criminal justice system requires the treading of a difficult path in order to get the right balance between the accused—and we must remember that people on bail or on remand have not been convicted—and the victim, who is often the prime witness among any other witnesses. There is a balance between justice itself and the protection of the public. It is not an easy path, and that is recognised in the very worthy report by the Justice 1 Committee.  I want to pick up on some particular issues as I try to deal with all the checks and balances. I think that Margaret Mitchell has mentioned the bail provision issues that are covered in paragraph 50 of the committee's report. It is important that parties who get out on bail are given clear details of what that means, when they will have to come back and whether there will be a follow-up. Unfortunately, many people who appear before the courts at this level—like their victims and the witnesses—come from the same areas of social deprivation. They may lead very chaotic lives—as the report acknowledges—because of alcohol abuse, drug abuse or just their general lifestyle. I am not excusing breach of bail in any instance, but we have to acknowledge the reality of people's lives. The liberation on undertaking provisions have been mentioned. I have concerns about those provisions, and I know that the committee does, too. ACPOS's attitude is important, and I feel that senior officers are required to make decisions about this area. To ask a police officer to decide whether someone can be liberated on an undertaking will place quite a burden on that police officer. What will happen to a junior police officer if things go wrong? The committee is to be commended for acknowledging that, although liberation on undertaking is a good idea in principle, the police are "in the dark"—I think that those were the exact words—as to how the provisions will work. I understand that regulations will come into force after the bill has been enacted. Parliament has often picked up on the fact that regulations resulting from an enabling act have not been before the relevant committee when it had to take a position on the general principles of a bill. I also have concerns about the provisions on proceedings in absence of accused. I heard what Mike Pringle said about people using the system, and I have seen that happen. However, I do not think that we should cast away the right to a fair hearing for someone who remains innocent until proven guilty beyond reasonable doubt. That person remains an accused. We have to be terribly careful in our use of language. Sometimes in this chamber, members have spoken about people who are simply the accused as if they have already been tried and convicted. The kind of people with chaotic lives who might not turn up to a trial diet or an intermediate diet are the very people who might need a solicitor—no wonder the legal profession is concerned about these issues—to give them legal advice and to make representations on their behalf because they are not articulate enough to do that for themselves. There may be something on the summary charge that is brought that the Crown  cannot establish, that is inaccurate and that needs to be corrected. Plea bargaining is sometimes seen as a dirty term, but it can be important to clarify exactly what the accused is being charged with. I have huge problems with the issue, which is not exactly resolved in the bill. The issue—in principle and in process—has been raised by JPs and those in the legal profession, including advocates.

I come with no simple solutions—it is a complex area. However, we should interfere with the principles of justice because of certain cases only with great care. Once we begin to erode the principles of the right to a fair hearing, the right to be represented and the presumption of innocence—that someone is not guilty until proven to be so beyond reasonable doubt—we are creating a frayed edge that will continue to fray and eat into the principles of justice. There will be cases that require to be abandoned, but that may have to be the case in the interests of the greater issue of justice at large. On alternatives to prosecution, Scottish Women's Aid raised the legitimate concern that those should not apply to serious offences, and the minister has taken that on board. However, there are issues to do with people in deprived areas or who live in poverty, particularly that of the discounting of fines. It was brought to our attention by some of the senior legal profession that a fine to be paid by someone who is on benefits cannot be discounted, which means that we will be offering a discount to people who have the money anyway. The minister must address that issue. Finally, there is the issue of an investigation into why people breach bail. We are all saying that, anecdotally, that seems to be due to people's chaotic lives. What is behind it? We must ask why people cannot pay their fines, so that we do justice not just to the well-off but to people who are poor.

Is the minister aware that the Margaret Blackwood Foundation is removing its sheltered housing officers from its complexes in places such as Tweed Bridge Court in Peebles, which is causing great distress and anxiety to vulnerable residents? The foundation claims that that is a direct consequence of the effect on funding of legislation on care in the community. I am sure that the minister shares my concerns. Will he meet me to discuss the foundation's interpretation?

For clarity, the proposals for the town hall were produced subsequent to my lodging the motion.

For the record, is not it the case that the Liberal Democrat councillors on Midlothian Council voted for the budget that has led to the closures?

I accept what Mr Brownlee says about local government accountability and the decision that Labour, Liberal and Conservative members of Midlothian Council took, although some of them may have been unaware of the implications of the decision. Heaven forfend that I should defend Midlothian Council, but if the matter is genuinely one of local government funding being squeezed, then central Government must ensure that local authorities generally have the funding to deliver the policies that the Government promotes.

I thank the Deputy Minister for Finance, Public Service Reform and Parliamentary Business in anticipation of his response to the debate, which I believe is the first in seven years to deal specifically with Penicuik. The town is in the invidious position of being under the control of Midlothian Council while also being part of the Scottish Parliament constituency of Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale, and I sympathise with the many Penicuikians who feel that it tends to fall between two stools. It is taken as read that the Parliament hesitates to interfere with local authorities' remit and responsibilities. That said, many communities have been thrown into turmoil and many individuals left distressed by the way in which the closure of certain facilities in Penicuik has been decided; by the failure to consult members of the public who will be affected; by the local authority's failure to inform itself of the diverse and distinct social and recreational facilities provided at Jackson Street, Ladywood, Queensway and Penicuik town hall; and by the telling requirements with regard to the capacity of the proposed facilities at Penicuik high school. Some campaigners are in the public gallery tonight, each of them representing tens of other people. All those people, who number in their thousands, have signed a petition that will come before the Public Petitions Committee on 27  September. I also thank in advance the members from many parties who will no doubt add their comments of support. How did the situation come about? After years of promises, Midlothian Council took the welcome decision to develop a swimming pool, library and leisure complex adjacent to Penicuik high school. However, at the same time—that is, in February or March—it was virtually decided that Jackson Street adult learning centre, Ladywood community centre and Queensway leisure centre would be closed to ensure that the revenue savings could be used to meet the running costs of the new facilities. People in Penicuik were first made aware of what was happening by an announcement in the local press that the centres would be closed and it was only after making inquiries that they learned that the new leisure development would be predicated on those closures. Quite apart from the failure to consult on the matter, another issue is the inadequacy of the new facilities. Will they be fit for purpose? Will they have the required capacity, bearing in mind not just how much the current facilities are used but the fact that the population of Penicuik, which at the moment stands at 18,000, is expanding? For example, what about Ladywood leisure centre? Situated at the heart of Ladywood, it is actually more of a community centre than a leisure centre. Opened in 1984, it is thriving and used to capacity not only by 32 user groups that cover all manner of social activities and sports such as badminton, basketball, table tennis and carpet bowls but by a wide range of organisations such as the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service. It is also used to hold MSP and councillor surgeries, disability sports training, stroke clubs and so on. In one 12-month period, 110 party events have been booked. More than 1,000 people use the leisure centres at Ladywood and Queensway, and the figures for Jackson Street are the same. Indeed, the Jackson Street centre, in the heart of Penicuik, provides diverse facilities for a wide range of people, both young and old. The litany of events that it hosts shows that it is quite different from Ladywood—and, indeed, is quite distinctive. It provides facilities for outreach learning; picture-framing groups, who do not know where they will be able to put their frames after they are moved; arts groups; yoga groups; belly-dancing groups—I might join one of those; French and Spanish classes; creative writing groups; numeracy groups; the John Chant centre; and various community groups. A few months ago, people at the packed meetings held at Jackson Street and Ladywood said loud and clear that Penicuik wants to keep the existing facilities in their own right. After all,  they are accessible by transport and on foot. Moreover, the same facilities, capacity and accessibility will simply not be available at the new development. The development was scheduled to open in December at the latest, but I believe that even that deadline will not be met. In the meantime, groups and individuals are left in hiatus. I quote from some members of the user groups who use the facilities, who cannot speak for themselves in the Parliament but whose words are extremely important. Sheena and Graeme say: "Penicuik needs these Community centres for all ages but especially for the young people of Penicuik. Penicuik has more than its fair share of youth problems. To close these centres will only increase what is an ever growing problem." Isabel says: "No consideration has been given to the user groups of all the centres, with no consultation until after the decision had been made. I feel very let down by Midlothian Council."

I understand that those proposals are currently still not resolved. There were such proposals, but they are still in hiatus and are by no means wholly acceptable. I expect other members to focus on other issues. Mr Purvis will accept that there are several issues to be discussed, and I cannot touch on the town hall as well at present. I continue with some more quotations, which I am sure Mr Purvis will agree are important. Ali says: "A couple of years down the line when you realise that this was a huge mistake we can never get these buildings back." That is important. I know that it is proper to say that these are local authority decisions, that we should not interfere and that people can vote their councillors out at the next election, but that is not good enough. The problem is that the deed will have been done by then, and we must do more than that. Jean says: "Decision makers have no idea of user groups' requirements." In my brief contribution, I have touched on some of the issues. I have not dealt with them all in detail. For instance, I have not dwelt on the impact when facilities are removed and energetic young people are left with only the street corner to socialise on, the elderly become isolated from comfortable social interaction and young mothers can no longer just sit with other young mothers— or indeed young fathers—to share the challenges of parenting. It is difficult to put a price on those things, but we all know that they have value. Colleagues will no doubt develop what I have said and I welcome that, because this is not a party-political issue but a people issue. When we see that so many lack opportunities to exercise and when communities are finding that they have no focal point to engage all sections of the population—as Penicuik has—the actions of Midlothian Council seem bizarre. They are undemocratic not only in process but in principle, and they fly in the face of the Liberal-Labour Government's worthy ambition for healthy, socially inclusive communities. Therefore, I invite the minister and his colleagues, in his response and later, to give weight to interceding on behalf of the community council and other concerned groups and individuals. Funding is required and if we sweep aside the cavalier methods of Midlothian Council, the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform and his deputy may be able, in the interests of individuals and communities in Penicuik, and in fulfilment of their policies, to make funding sources available to stop the closures. [ Applause. ]

On the question of statistics, will the minister advise me how often antisocial behaviour orders have been used to deal with boy and girl-racers, who cause such distress in communities such as Hawick, Penicuik and others? If he does not have the figures today, will he provide them? I do not think that antisocial behaviour orders are being used sufficiently.

Notwithstanding what the First Minister had to say about those pleasant young people, is he aware of the concerns that Citizens Advice Scotland raised in June about the working conditions of migrant workers? They often live in poorly maintained caravans, work excessive hours and are exploited by employers who make illegal deductions. I think that the First Minister recognises Scotland's low population base and its very different requirements from England, but after seven years of Liberal-Labour coalition Government, where is the population strategy that balances fairness to migrant workers and also helps us to keep Scotland's young people here? They are so burdened with student debts that they often migrate to escape them.

To ask the First Minister what concerns the Scottish Executive has regarding increases in referrals to the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration on non-offence grounds and what the reasons are for these increases. (S2F-2401)

Why has the additional funding that was sought by the SCRA recently to help it to deal with the significant increase in the number of referrals not been granted? Does not the First Minister agree that, given that increase, now is not the time to postpone review of the children's hearings system? Is it not the case that the review has been postponed because only two of the Government's 4,400 civil servants have been working on the review of the children's hearings system, which is now seeing upwards of 54,000 referrals a year?

Much of the debate has been technical in nature. With your leave, Presiding Officer, I wish to make a more tangential speech about the significance of the tourism industry to the economy—especially the economy of the Scottish  Borders. I note that VisitScotland's target is to grow tourism revenues by 50 per cent by 2015. If that can flow down to the Borders, it will be extremely important, given the significance of tourism over the past decade and the continuing decrease in the number of jobs in textiles and electronics. Tourism brings £100 million into the Scottish Borders economy and employs more than 4,000 people—8 per cent of the population. More than 900 tourism businesses work together to form that tourism industry. Members have talked about local contributions. Scottish Borders Council provides £270,000 per annum to the VisitScotland Borders network office. The topography of the Borders, which made the area ideal for wool production, is what makes it ideal for holidays. I am not going to do a big trailer for the Borders, but I mention the possibilities for walking, cycling and riding. Of special significance are the common ridings, such as the one that I attended recently at Selkirk, which offer the most moving experience. They are attended mainly by people who live in the Borders or who return to see them. The casting of the colours to commemorate the battle of Flodden—

I said that my speech would be slightly tangential. I will get back to the subject, but all of that is important in drawing people to the Borders. I draw the minister's attention to the flaws in VisitScotland's website, which have been referred to. When I was researching for the debate, the latest figures that I could get for tourism in the Scottish Borders from the website were for 2002. A name change is one thing, but it is not much good if there is a flawed website behind it. According to those figures, the majority of visitors to the Borders are from the United Kingdom, mostly from England. That adds significance to the Waverley line that is now being developed—we hope. It is essential that, at some point, that line is continued all the way to Carlisle to draw tourists from England in greater numbers.

I was talking about the Scottish Borders Tourist Board.

In response to Brian Adam's earlier intervention I was going to say that, notwithstanding the centralisation of VisitScotland, which has been referred to, there is still a significant role for local structures. That exists in the Borders in the Scottish Borders tourism business forum, which links into VisitScotland. It is more functional than the old area tourist board and is comprised of organisations such as Careers Scotland, Historic Scotland, Scottish Borders Council and others who feed into the system. That is extremely important. As the debate is about a short bill that deals with a technical matter of tidying up what already exists, I have nothing further to add. I repeat my point to the minister that a name change is not sufficient; VisitScotland's website needs to be greatly improved or people will be deterred from using it.

Does Bill Aitken concede that the population pressures south of the border are completely different from those in Scotland, which has a falling population and shrinking skills base? We need more people—to give just one reason—to provide the pensions for our pensioners in the future. Should we not have a different policy in Scotland to suit Scottish needs?

I will speak to the Scottish National Party amendment and my colleague Sandra White will address some of the specific initiatives that are referred to in the Government's motion, which we support. We will not support the Conservative amendment, because it would add nothing and is therefore unnecessary. My speech will have three interwoven strands: the prejudice that some asylum seekers endure; the failure to allow asylum seekers to take up employment while their cases are being considered; and the deportation of valued immigrants, which may conform to the requirements of England, but not to those of Scotland, neither in principle nor in the context of the fresh talent initiative. An article in The Scotsman yesterday described the experience of one asylum seeker, Ahlam Souidi, who is 43 and was a legal adviser in Algeria, but who fled after receiving threats from elements there who did not like her law work. She said: "We had very bad ideas about Glasgow ... People said the weather was horrible, which wasn't a big problem for us, but they also said while the Glasgow people were friendly, they were also very racist." The article continued: "Sadly, their initial experience of the city did nothing to dispel that image ... The racial harassment started the night they moved in—verbal abuse, condoms through the letterbox and on the door handles, graffiti on their door referring to the numbers killed in the 9/11 atrocity ... While she can't excuse the racist behaviour she experienced in Nitshill, she does feel that the people there should have been better briefed before the immigrants started arriving". I shall address that later. Five years on, and despite the fact that her children are well integrated, regard Glaswegian as their first language and are doing well at school, the Home Office is still to make a decision over their case. Such racial harassment was corroborated in recent evidence to the Communities Committee on social inclusion. Anne-Marie Smith, a single parent, said in evidence: "An incident happened a fortnight ago in my area of Pollok. The forum was trying to get people—teenagers—to mix with refugees. The situation ended up with the refugees and the workers having to get a police escort out of the area. There was a misunderstanding. This goes back to the relationships between the younger ones and the older generation. Nothing is put on for them but, all of a sudden, things are put on for the refugees. People ask, 'What are they getting when we're not getting anything?' That issue will come up a lot."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 31 May 2006; c 3608.] That was recounted not to blame, but to explain. It is as plain as a pikestaff that if we simply plant asylum seekers in deprived areas, those attitudes,  by some but not all—I will come to that in my concluding remarks—are predictable and therefore avoidable. Of course, there is always Dungavel, where—on Scottish soil—the Home Office even imprisoned children. Between 150 and 200 people are there today, some of whom were ferried in from Northern Ireland. There has been criticism of Dungavel by Northern Ireland's human rights commission. After a recent visit to Dungavel, the chief commissioner, Professor McWilliams, said that the delegation was not impressed with the conditions. She said: "The accommodation for men is in dormitories, with six to eight beds—that quite shocked me to see it in this day and age." She went on to say: "Women are in a separate centre. Families are located there as well." Will the minister advise whether there are children at Dungavel? That quotation suggests that there are. That is despite Scotland's commissioner for children and young people challenging not only the detention of children but the manner in which they were deported: dragged from their beds in the small hours, in a country that was perhaps all they knew and which they regarded as home, their parents handcuffed by uniformed police officers. She challenged that with the withering words: "Children are not a reserved matter." All that—the racism; the humiliation; the forced unemployment, sometimes of consultants and doctors whom we desperately need—happens under a Westminster writ that runs here. According to Frank Field, former Minister for Welfare Reform, the United Kingdom is becoming a "global traffic station" for migrants. He continued: "There will be economic gains"— from immigration— "but I am just raising whether any country can sustain the rate of immigration we are now suffering." Frankly, Frank, the answer is yes. Scotland's needs are not those of the UK; in fact, quite the contrary is true. To name but two examples, our Minister for Health and Community Care takes poaching trips abroad for health professionals and we rely on foreign construction workers. The First Minister launched the fresh talent initiative, the success of which the Executive is very coy about. Although there have been only 586 applications since the scheme was launched in 2005, the initiative is laudable. However, it is grimly ironic, given that we allow Westminster to deport mature and young talent from Scotland. With a falling population, Scotland needs immigrants. The Minister for Health and  Community Care and the First Minister have demonstrated that. What could be plainer than that we should not deport families who have lived here for years? What could be plainer than letting those who seek asylum work while they are here and be assessed for residency? What could be plainer than the fact that introducing asylum seekers into areas in which communities are already struggling daily to get by can be a recipe for racist revenge? What could be plainer than the fact that we need our own immigration policies that are tailored to Scottish needs? I shall finish with a heartening quotation from Maureen West, who gave evidence to the Communities Committee. We were talking about food, and she said: "It is true; a lot of people do not know how to cook food. I got involved with some of the refugees in our area—I must have a friendly face—and they were asking, 'What's this?' They had come from villages and been dumped in the middle of Castlemilk. They did not know where the post office was and what the food was in the supermarket. They had never seen that stuff in their lives before because the food in their country is different. We tried to organise classes to show them how to do mince and potatoes. We had a cross-cultural event where they brought all their African food and we brought mince and potatoes, haggis and turnip, potato scones and tea cakes, and it all went like snow off a dyke; it was brilliant."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 31 May 2006; c 3625.] That is the authentic voice of Scotland. This is a migrant nation—80 million of our descendants live in foreign countries. We migrated and, in most cases, were made welcome. That is a voice that should be heard more loudly with our own policies, for our own people, for our own needs. I move amendment S2M-4601.1, to insert at end: ", condemns however the treatment of asylum seekers who after years in Scotland, often with children born in Scotland, can still be deported and while living here are prevented from seeking employment despite their wish to do so, and considers that this situation completely contradicts the Fresh Talent initiative and the culture of an inclusive Scotland which the Executive quite rightly seeks to promote."

The minister said that he would deal with asylum seekers and refugees. Will he address the asylum seeker issue later in his speech?

I share the minister's view: I am keen to get going and I hope that we do so. I pay tribute to all those who have campaigned since the closure of the line almost 40 years ago who have never given up hope that they will have their railway link restored. I mention in particular Madge Elliot, who I know will keep campaigning because she wants the line to go to Hawick and beyond. She is a feisty woman who is not to be trifled with. We got here because of people; because 20,000 petitioners came to the Parliament in 1999 and because the Public Petitions Committee went to Galashiels and had 250 people at the meeting  make the case to include them in rail links throughout Scotland. From there, because the petition was seen to be all-embracing, it went to four committees of the Parliament—the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee; the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee; the Transport and the Environment Committee; and the Rural Affairs Committee. The Rural Affairs Committee lodged the motion that we debated when the Parliament sat in Glasgow on 1 June 2000, when we voted unanimously for restoration of the line all the way from Edinburgh to Carlisle, which I hope will be realised one day. The journey has been arduous and not always easy. The battle for a station at Stow kept having to be won, mainly by the people of Stow. At pretty well the last minute, they convinced the committee of the importance of including a station. There has been a long battle to have the tourism aspects of the railway considered. Parliamentary questions going back to 2000 asked for an extension of the then Scott Wilson report to consider tourism aspects. The then minister, Sarah Boyack, said that the issue was addressed fully in the feasibility study and that the Executive was not interested in doing more. That changed, but it took time. I asked 32 parliamentary questions to push for the railway line. The Scottish National Party has shown firm commitment to the line. I set up the cross-party group on Borders rail, because the first thing that I realised down in the Borders in 1992 was how essential the line was for the economy and social inclusion of the Borderers. The Borders has been left by the wayside. A witness told the committee: "We are in great danger of being seen as stuck down at the bottom of Scotland, and we want to be part of a whole Scotland. We have a new Parliament and we want to be part of the new Scotland, but unless we have proper transport links, we cannot be."—[ Official Report , Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill Committee , 28 February 2005; c 92.] When the line was closed, the Borders area was promised better roadways. However, except for a few improvements on the A68 and even fewer on the A7, that did not happen. Anyone who drives on those roads regularly knows the disadvantages that have been caused to the economy and to simple social movement in the Borders. With the possibility of an Edinburgh airport rail link, it is even more important that the Borders be connected to Edinburgh by rail. Over the years, the 2,000 jobs that have been lost in textile manufacturing have not been replaced and the Borders has been left with the lowest weekly income in Scotland. That should change with the coming of the railway line. I want the minister to start building the line as soon as possible—that is, if the minister is still in  the job at that point; if he is not, we will be quite happy to do it and, to show our commitment, we will start the track at Tweedbank. Now that the battle dust has settled, I would be delighted to share a glass of wine with the minister to cheer the bill on its way.

The delay is, of course, of the Liberal-Labour coalition's own making. I endorse the comments that have been made about the uncertainty hanging over people's lives in relation to whether their house is to be demolished and so on. However, let us consider the matter. The line was at first to be constructed by 2008, but that has now slipped to 2012. The minister's amendment 3 would mean that it would not be constructed until 10 years after the bill received royal assent, which would be 2016. We have had seven years of a Liberal-Labour Government and we have a Liberal Minister for Transport. It does not seem to me that there is any political will to accelerate construction of the Waverly line, but there has certainly been a political deal.  As for the minister's amendments—I am not surprised that Bristow Muldoon did not move his amendments—I smell a compromise agreement, following the minister's long meeting with his colleagues in the Labour group, so that we can kick the Waverley project into the long grass past the coming election and perhaps the next election. However, they will not be in power then. It is long-distance sabotage of the Waverley line. If that is not so, why were the minister's suggestions not made earlier? Why did he leave them so late? I hear what the minister says about bringing in the project on time and on budget, but he proposes to extend the project to 2018. As for on budget, what are the prospects of railway costs 10 years down the line not being far in excess of what they are now? That gives plenty of scope to the Bristow Muldoons of this world to say, "It doesn't wash its face." I do not think that what the minister suggests is in the interests of the Borders people, but it might be in the interests of the Liberal Democrats saving face again.

Does the member not accept the finding that 100 passengers a day would use Stow station, not the 10 that he quoted from the committee report?

I welcome the Liberal Democrats' support for a station at Stow. They did not always support it. Mr Purvis's predecessor, Ian Jenkins, did not, on the basis that it would prejudice the building of the line. I know that he is sitting in the public gallery, so I thought that I would mention him. I want to deal with Bristow Muldoon's claim that the station would serve only 10 passengers a day.

No—I want to address some pertinent points. It is a bizarre notion that only 10 passengers a day would use the station. I understand that the  promoter got that information by selecting an inconvenient station site three quarters of a mile south of Stow—in the wrong direction—on a narrow back road. That was never divulged and came to light only last year. When challenged by the Waverley Route Trust, Scottish Borders Council did not respond. The figure of 10 passengers provides a misleading indication of usage from Stow. I will give an example from East Lothian. Drem, on the North Berwick line, with an immediate population one fifth of that of Stow, is used by more than 200 passengers a day. That illustrates the danger of applying a rigid population-based formula. I ask members to take on board the point that my colleague made about uplift in Clovenfords and Lauder.

I understand that. I am simply making the point that estimates should not be based simply on the population of an area. The day and place that were selected to arrive at the figure for usage must also be taken into account. We all know about the problem of journey times, which has been compounded by introducing four stops in Midlothian. I have nothing against trains going to Midlothian, but we are trying to build a railway line to serve twa maisters. We want an express line from the Borders to Edinburgh and from Edinburgh to the Borders that will be fast and convenient, and we want a commuter line in Midlothian. The solution is to twin-track the line to Midlothian, to allow an express train to come through from the Borders. That would deal with the impact on the turnaround time of stopping at Stow. The line as envisaged at the moment will serve neither purpose well. I understand that postponing the construction of the station and building it next to a live line would multiply costs 10 times, although I think that that would never be done.

rose—

rose—

As Jeremy Purvis reminded the Parliament, on 1 June 2000 the entire Parliament unanimously voted for reinstatement of the Borders railway line, not only  to Gorebridge, Galashiels or Tweedbank, but to Carlisle. It was remitted to four committees of the Parliament to examine the necessity for this transport link through the Borders to address economic issues, social inclusion and the other issues that arise in a much-deprived area. The area has the lowest wages in Scotland. People earn £150 per week less if they live in Galashiels than they do if they live in Edinburgh. The railway line is essential. Bristow Muldoon's argument is ridiculous. This is the only line that has to pass every single test in the book. No other transport project—let alone the Scottish Parliament building project—has had to pass such tests: the project must come in exactly on budget and it must be done in a certain way. Why has this project gone through more hoops than any other? Because there is not the political will on the Labour benches for the line to proceed. Labour members are happy for it to go to Midlothian, which has a Labour MSP, but they will ditch their Liberal Democrat partners now as they are not happy with them. They will leave them swinging in the wind. They are making a political decision in advance of an election year.

I said that I was not conceding that point. The Waverley project would be the only transport project to be put through the kind of test for which Bristow Muldoon argues. Of course his argument means having only a Midlothian line—dot the i's and cross the t's—it has always meant trying to get the project done as a staged process. If it was a staged process, not a single bit of track would be laid past Gorebridge into the Borders, which would be an insult to the 20,000 Borderers whose signatures brought the Waverley proposal from the streets of the Borders to the Parliament.

Mr Purvis must sit down; he has had his bit. Those Borderers brought the proposal to the Parliament on the basis of having a line to the Borders. How can it be a Borders line if it does not go to Gala, Tweedbank or Stow, but has four stops in Midlothian? In that case, it becomes a Midlothian line. The arguments of Bristow Muldoon and others point towards a single issue: the election next year. The Liberal Democrats have been making hay, saying that they are getting all  the good things for their people. The Labour Party is being left with all the bad things, so it has decided that it is time for the reckoning: ditch the Liberal Democrats on the Waverley proposal. That will ultimately sacrifice a Borders rail line that is worth more than the two Executive parties put together.

Without accepting the premise of his argument, I ask Bristow Muldoon to name a transport project that has not gone over budget. I am now involved in considering the Edinburgh airport rail link, whose cost is so far estimated at £650 million, well over what was projected.

At paragraph 95 of its report, the Finance Committee makes the point: "Moreover, only one of the ten Closing the Opportunity Gap targets directly measure whether the gap is closing." I cannot see the point in having targets if we cannot measure whether the gap is closing. That is the committee's point, not mine.

Does the member, who has been here as long as I have, share my dismay that we were saying exactly those things about short-term funding as early as 2000?

Andrew Arbuckle agrees with the establishment of a single deprivation fund to be accessed directly by local authorities, but does he think that there is a role for Communities Scotland or could we simply get rid of it and let the minister take responsibility for the fund, rather than pass it to another agency?

I am not jaded.

I commend the Finance Committee for a unanimous, robust and uncompromising report. I acknowledge Des McNulty's sincerity; nevertheless, there is depressingly familiar to read again that what is required in the committee's overall conclusions and recommendations has been discussed in Parliament for nearly seven years. I am disappointed that my amendment to that end was not accepted. Paragraph 179 of the report is about simplifying funding streams. That issue has been raised time and again during the seven years of the Lib-Lab coalition; to be quite frank, it is a disgraceful squandering of resources that should go to front-line services. The Executive has five departments and agencies that are responsible for 10 different funding streams, with a wide variety of eligibility criteria—that is from the committee report—and it is, to put it mildly, a bit of a bureaucratic quagmire. For example, there is the bureaucracy that is related to the community regeneration fund; the report refers to it as "massively disproportionate". I accept what the minister said about that being interesting—he should take it up immediately. Ten different funding streams could be amalgamated into one simplified fund. Again, there is the familiar issue of short-term funding. I quote from a Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee report from 2000: "the Committee has concluded that, in the longer term, significant and sustained investment will be required which specifically sets out to tackle poverty and social exclusion." I have another quote from a Justice 1 Committee report from 2003.  "The Committee recommends that funding arrangements should ensure that service providers receive the funding they require on a long term basis without the requirement to submit a large number of bids every year". I have no doubt that those recommendations have been made elsewhere. Over the years, many of us have harped on about how the Scottish index of multiple deprivation fails remote and rural areas, which was raised by Mike Rumbles. It is important to note that the majority of deprived individuals and families live in the 85 per cent of communities that do not get touched by that index and so are deprived of funding. Paragraph 95 of the report also notes that "only one of the ten Closing the Opportunity Gap targets directly measure whether the gap is closing." That one target is target J; what is the point of the others? What is the point in a target that cannot be measured? Let us look at the crux of the matter, which is Communities Scotland. What does it cost, what does it do and do we need it? Communities Scotland's mission statement is "to work with others to ensure decent housing and strong communities across Scotland." In 2002-03, Communities Scotland cost £343.8 million and in the current year, it will cost £736 million. It has cost a total over the period of £2.2 billion. How much of that actually has trickled down to front-line services? The report also raises the conflict of interests in Communities Scotland, which the report says is "simultaneously strategic partner, project sponsor and adjudicator." Why does the minister not do away with it altogether and take back responsibility for what will be delivered from the proposed single deprivation fund. I wanted to leave time to quote from Anne-Marie Smith, who is a single parent, and Maureen West, both of whom gave compelling evidence to the Communities Committee last week. Although it has not yet been published, I have listened to the recording of the evidence and will reproduce it here to the best of my ability. It is people like them to whom the minister must answer. Maureen West said, "We can start projects up, such as after-school care for low-income families and people trying to get back into education, and what happens? We got it up and running and got initial funding so that the places were free, then we got less and less, so the cost went up and now it's only workers who have children who can afford the scheme. The rest are left high and dry. The community gets jaded, and I think that's what's  happening in our area. The community planning partnerships are changing and it seems to me that every so many years, we take this notice down off the wall, we put another one up and the same people have to start all over again, so communities are losing faith in the Executive and their local representatives, because they are in the fallout area of this." I am sure that everyone on the Communities Committee will agree that even more compelling was Anne-Marie Smith's frank evidence on the poverty trap. She said, "I've got all the skills and no one's listening. Do they think I'm stupid? If I've felt like that, how do other people feel?" On income support, she said, "That extra £20 per week more money to survive on because the Government is not listening—we're not sick, and we don't want to be classed as sick, but some people feel it's the only way they can survive just now." In some areas of Glasgow, two in five adults are claiming incapacity benefit. That is 191,000 Scots. Anne-Marie went on, "They are throwing them pills, not looking at the deeper problem. They need education and a bit more understanding. Even if they go to the doctor, they are being thrown tablets but they need more education and understanding to become part of society. By the time your children get older you've lost your skills. There's a lot of anger in my community as well about the haves and the have-nots. I feel it is a shame." Anne-Marie also spoke about child care. Despite lottery funding, they still have to pay for the rooms. That is a crucial issue for people who are literally on the breadline. Even for mothers and toddlers groups, mothers need to chip in for the toy fund. She spoke of her daughter, who left school at 16, jobless. She thought through her options for her daughter and decided to commit benefit fraud so that she could pay the bus fare for her daughter to go to the Prince's Trust. Therefore, she kept claiming her family allowance, which she is now honestly paying back. "Am I to be punished?" she asked. "What was I to do?" Later, she described the anger of the young, especially when they perceive asylum seekers as receiving unfair assistance. "They get bus passes. Why do we need to pay fares to school?" She continued, "You can feel the young ones. It is building up and building up and there are no resources for them to say, 'You might get it.'" She said, "It is a case of them getting angry. We are breeding angry children who will become angry adults. This is something that we need to watch. I've got two children and I can see it in them. They're growing up thinking that they've got nothing." She has told herself that she has grown  up to teach her children how to learn to be poor. She says "We need to sort it out. We need to listen." My advice to the minister is that he should, as well as reading the Finance Committee's report and taking on board its many valuable recommendations and my own recommendation on Communities Scotland, read the Official Report of last week's Communities Committee meeting. I suggest that he also listen to that young woman and then ask himself whether his deprivation policies are delivering.

This is very romantic.

As the minister said, we are not just talking about bricks and mortar in this debate because buildings and the built environment have overt and covert impacts on all our lives. There are  buildings, spaces and places that uplift, that are friendly and that inspire, which are at the heart of local and national history, and which are cherished by communities. However, there are also buildings and spaces that depress our spirits, where our footfall becomes slower and wearier as we pass through them—as we hope we will. There are grandiose buildings, such as the Museum of Scotland in Edinburgh; quirky and idiosyncratic buildings, such as Sir Walter Scott's Abbotsford; imposing and impressive designs, such as the new town in Edinburgh; and, in fairness to Glasgow, there are wonderful buildings that arose from Glasgow's commercial prosperity. There are lovely places in Scotland. There are villages such as Earlston in the Borders, which has the 1700s feel and layout that many small Scottish towns have. There are places such as Penicuik, which was once industrial and which has its original square anchored to its town hall. I shall refer to both places later. Someone once referred to a building as "a carbuncle"; we have, as I have alluded to, many such buildings in Scotland. There are wastelands of housing schemes, in which the design of the houses and the scheme was destined to fail the people who struggle to this day to make the best of their environment. In addition, bland and identikit private-housing estates that are in no way sensitive to local design and materials have been built throughout Scotland. Buildings are living and breathing things. Penicuik once thrived because of mining and paper mills, but it is now fighting to retain its individuality by means of its local development trust. Its town centre, like many town centres, is under threat from a large supermarket development. Many buildings are closed, but there is still the town hall, which anchors the community. I will give members a little bit of the history of that building, because it is typical of many buildings in Scotland that are connected to beneficiaries. Alexander Cowan, the paper maker, instructed his wife and family that on his death they should use what was left of his fortune for the benefit of the people of Penicuik. As a result, the town hall was built. Its features match many of those of Moray House—Moray House was once the Cowans' long-term residence—and the Canongate Tolbooth on the Royal Mile in Edinburgh. What was the town hall used for? It was used for the community. It was built using stone brought on carts from the Moat quarry and the foundation stone was laid in 1893. The building had—it still has—a large hall that can hold 600 people. It had a library—in those days people had no other way of educating themselves. It had reading rooms, a gymnasium and rooms for other recreational purposes.  In 1900, when many homes in Penicuik did not have their own baths, three baths were installed in the town hall. It is interesting to note that they were reserved for women on Mondays and Thursdays and for men on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays. One must presume that the men were working in the pits—if not, they were the pits. The cost was tuppence for those who brought their own towel, and thruppence for those who did not. Over the years, the building has evolved; it has been a living building. It has been a venue for concerts, dances, flower shows and so on, and it has been the scene of meetings, romances, marriages and—no doubt—impending divorces. The building grew and is still growing. However, like many town halls, it is now under threat. It has passed from the people to the local authority, and the local authority says, "We're making cutbacks and we're going to close it." The people are fighting for their town hall, just as so many others are fighting for their town centres. Across the constituency is another wee place: Earlston, which I have already mentioned. Earlston has a reading room—what a term from the past that is—which was built in the 1800s for obvious purposes. Members will not know—as somebody else once said, "Not a lot of people know that"— that Earlston was the heart of gingham production in Scotland.

I knew that that would catch members' interest. There is no gingham production any more, but the point is that that building, too, is in disrepair. Again, the community is pulling together to try to do something about it. The people want to set up a museum containing local artefacts, including those relating to gingham production, in order to bring life and heart back to the town. The building would be the centre of a heritage trail. I have given two examples. Members who are not in the chamber today—and are probably not even listening to the debate—could give examples from all over their constituencies. I come back to my point: grand buildings matter—I take Michael Matheson's point about the number of buildings that are under threat, which is a cause for great concern—but a lot of wee buildings are under threat too, as are a lot of village and town centres. Communities are fighting on their own—often not knowing what tools to use in the battle. I fully support the amendment in my colleague Michael Matheson's name. We must get local authorities to develop architectural policies so that we do not have modern carbuncles. I have no  doubt that I will now get bad letters from some builders, but some buildings are horrendous. At the same time as we are fighting off the bland buildings, we have to protect the interesting and quirky buildings—often given by benefactors—that people consider precious and want to keep. Local authorities have to do something about them. Whoever becomes the minister for culture after the election next year—I turn to Michael Matheson—he alone will not be able to protect all the buildings that are under threat.

Does the minister share my concern that, all over Scotland, identical estates are being built with identical brickwork and that identical fences are being put up around them, thereby losing the individual qualities that villages and towns used to have? How does that fit in with better design and better architecture?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. We have not voted on the other amendments in group 11.

We go from the modernity of the internet to the old-fashioned pet shop. I am pleased to say that many pet shops no longer sell puppies and kittens. Many parts of amendment 52 refer to "a dog" because there is no definition of "a puppy" in the bill, but I am talking about puppies, because very few adult dogs are sold in pet shops. I am seeking  an outright ban on pet shops selling puppies. Subsection (2) of the section that amendment 52 would introduce says: "A person who, in the course of a business, sells a dog which is less than eight weeks old commits an offence." The arguments for both amendments are along the same lines. Puppies that are sold in pet shops are taken away from their mothers before they are eight weeks old and have learned the dog rules, as it were. Some of those puppies become psychological wrecks because they do not know how to behave. Also, pet shops do not have staff there 24 hours a day to look after the animals. Anyone who has had a young animal knows that it is just like a baby; it has to be cared for. Puppy farmers who sell puppies to pet shops do not undertake the same duties as they do with responsible breeders who sell them. I hope that all members feel sympathy with all those issues. Pet shops should no longer be able to sell puppies, especially those that are less than eight weeks old. The other issues in the amendments are concerned with the Breeding and Sale of Dogs (Welfare) Act 1999. If members do not agree with amendment 52, their fallback position could be amendment 53, which proposes that if, in the course of a business, anyone sells a dog that is less than eight weeks old, they must provide certain information "as the Scottish Ministers may by regulations specify." To some extent, that would bring the bill in line with my Transportation and Sale of Puppies (Scotland) Bill. I hope that the days remembered in the old song "How much is that doggy in the window?" are going to be dead and buried.

Will the minister give way? I will be brief.

Will the minister give way?

I simply want to ask a question. If the minister cannot answer it, his colleague the Minister for Justice might be able to. How many successful prosecutions have been made under section 22 of the 2003 act, which the Minister for Communities mentioned? That is an important fact to determine.

Does the member share my concerns about companies that advertise consolidated loans on afternoon television? Although such loans seem like an easy way of resolving debts to the very vulnerable people at whom they are targeted, they are most certainly not.

I commend the member for continuing his speech while a ringing mobile  phone is being located. The last thing that he had to suffer was a beam almost falling on his head.

I commend the Enterprise and Culture Committee for its sharply focused report. By my reckoning, there are six former lawyers in the chamber, three on the Conservative benches and three on the Scottish National Party benches. Despite the fact that 30 per cent of the members present have been involved in the legal profession, we have so far managed to keep the language of the debate simple. I hope that things stay like that. I should also tell Christine May that although I have not yet arrested a ship, I have poinded a flock of sheep. That was a lot of fun.  The minister and other members are quite right to point out that the balance in the legislation is between the debtor in the red corner and the creditor in the blue corner. However, not all creditors are heavyweight loan sharks. As Kenny MacAskill said, they could well be tradesmen, whose own houses might well be in danger of repossession if they do not get their payments. Moreover, not all debtors are goodies. Some are simply reckless; others work the system rather well. The bill has to tread a fine line, particularly given the current culture of buy now, pay later. After all, as Alex Neil said, average personal debt in Scotland is running at a staggering £13,000. However, I accept the minister's comment that he is aiming at the won't pays, not the can't pays. Although much has been said about land attachments, I am interested in Citizens Advice Scotland's point that this provision will turn "an unsecured debt into a secured loan". When people take on a debt, they enter into a contract. For example, if the debt is secured against their property, the interest rate might be very different from that for an unsecured loan. Someone might well take out an unsecured 10-year loan that has a higher interest rate. However, because their debt might subsequently take a form that could be subject to a land attachment, they could lose their house despite the fact that they have paid over the odds for a certain type of loan. I believe that that highlights a conflict between contractual and statute law.

That is the very point. There is a de minimis use of the current law, whereas the provisions in the bill could be used quite easily. The committee has quite reasonably recommended that, instead of having a £1,500 threshold for sequestrating debtors, the threshold should be a percentage of the debt. However, we must address the issue of people who enter into a contract thinking that it is one thing when in fact it is something completely different. The Law Society said: "Once people hear how land attachment is going to work, there will be a queue."—[ Official Report, Enterprise and Culture Committee , 21 March 2006; c 2853.] Subject to any amendments that are lodged, I accept the minister's comment that it may be that not many sales of attached land will go ahead. However, land attachments might be used in the same way that poindings were used. Indeed, when  I was a practising lawyer, I used the threat of a poinding to put the fear of God into a debtor to pay up. Tommy Sheridan was right to say that many poindings were carried out, particularly by public bodies, but not many progressed to warrant sales. For example, in 2002, 13,500 poindings were carried out, but only 420 continued to warrant sales. With the caveat that I do not know what amendments might be lodged at stages 2 and 3, I believe that land attachments might be used in the same way.

I have accepted all the comments on this matter, including the fact that the presumption in the legislation is that the sole family home will be protected. Of course, what happens to the second family home is another matter. However, with all the caveats that I have set out, I simply seek to make a couple of interesting points to reinforce the point that we need to get this diligence right. Concern about bank arrestments has been brought to my attention by Citizens Advice Scotland. Existing social security benefits and tax credits are meant to be unarrestable, but in practice, because of the way in which banking procedures operate, they can be frozen. There are ways round that, and Citizens Advice Scotland has put forward proposals that I hope the minister will consider. To put the matter into the context of my area, I am indebted to the profile prepared by the CABx for May 2006, which shows that total debt cases in the south of Scotland amounted to £24 million of personal debt. I urge the minister to provide for more education about debt in Scotland's schools. I am deeply concerned about the swipe cards that children are being given. They are not handling real money but are simply using plastic, so they are not made aware what money actually is. Finally, of the 300 people who trained for the debt arrangement schemes programme, only 21 were certificated, because of cuts to CABx. That must be addressed.

Will the minister give way?

To ask the First Minister what plans the Scottish Executive has to improve parental education in light of recently published figures on the number of underage pregnancies. (S2F-2310)

I thank the First Minister for that answer. I have obtained recent figures that reveal that six children in Scotland had conceived at the age of 12. Is the First Minister aware of that? I speak as one former school teacher and current politician to another. I think that we agree that teachers, educators and politicians cannot undertake change on their own. I think that the First Minister has also said that good parenting provides an important role model to children learning personal responsibility. Will he therefore advise the chamber whether he agrees that teaching parenting skills should be a priority in social education and integral to sex education, so that Scottish children do not continue to have children? Will he also take the opportunity to make it clear to me that he has not endorsed Duncan McNeil's proposal—I think that  he called it a radical proposal—for the chemical sterilisation of methadone users? I find that proposal both crass and sexist.

At what point in the debate did anybody say that?

This has been an interesting debate. My remarks will jump around a bit because I want to deal with what several members have said. I could not agree more with what Margo MacDonald said about people taking more responsibility for their fitness and health. However, in Penicuik, for example, the leisure centre is under threat of closure. That example links into what has been said about silo mentalities. Last night, a meeting was attended by 150 people—young and elderly—who were desperate to keep the centre open. The centre helps to keep them fit, keep them out of trouble and keep their minds alert. Such things are happening on the ground as a result of local authority cuts. The Parliament provides substantial budgets to local authorities, so members must consider such matters. Local authorities are making cuts, leisure centres are being closed and there will be an impact on the health programme. Cross-cutting work is therefore not happening. I will deal with John Swinney's interesting remarks later. I will visit the Tayside model—I wish that I had done so before—and take Borders NHS Board representatives with me. The ethos at Hay Lodge hospital in Peebles is to combine a GP unit, nursing beds and a cottage hospital, but it is a pity that such an approach is not taken elsewhere. I will touch on what is happening in Jedburgh and Coldstream later. Euan Robson, Margo MacDonald, David Davidson, Helen Eadie and others mentioned issues to do with silo mentalities. I do not know how the cycle can be broken, although we have all said that doing so would be common sense. Social work departments, health boards and local authorities defend their budgets, but people who have been assessed as being able to return to their communities are stuck in hospital beds that they cannot leave because social work departments do not have enough money to allow them to do so. By the time those departments have money, people become more  institutionalised, have to be reassessed and end up back at the end of a queue. Human misery and costs result. We have been saying that for seven years.

I welcome progress that is made anywhere. I cannot speak about what happens in the Lothians, but that approach is not being taken elsewhere—it is certainly not being taken in the Borders, where there is still competition for budgets. There is a patchy approach. I am sorry that I got lost with John Swinburne's remarks on septuagenarians. I do not know whether he was directing them at me, although I do not think that he was. I agree with Eleanor Scott. There are issues to do with having a target-driven approach, which distorts requirements on the ground—health professionals, too, are conceding that. I got lost with Mary Mulligan's images of babies in the lotus position. I thought that they could adopt that position anyway. Sandra White referred to an important point that the Kerr report makes. The report states that we must "develop options for change with people, not for them, starting from the patient experience and engaging the public early on to develop solutions rather than have them respond to pre-determined plans conceived by the professionals." I am afraid that the experience of many people who have gone to NHS board meetings is that the latter approach has been taken. They get the feeling that decisions have been made, that consultation is cosmetic and that people are not going with the grain of public feeling.

That is another issue. However, in respect of the Borders, I knew ages ago that the hospitals in Jedburgh and Coldstream were set for closure and that the NHS board was simply working out how to present the case. That is the reality. People are not silly—everyone else  involved knew that too. Such an approach is not in the spirit of the Kerr report and does not deliver what people want. I agree that people cannot have everything that they want, but if we go with the grain and listen to people, we will find that they sometimes have jolly good ideas about what should happen in their communities. Duncan McNeil rightly talked about issues that have impacted on costs to the health service. Contractual and legal imperatives, whether we like them or not, have had an impact on costs. However, I say to him that the changes to health delivery in Scotland across the various levels should be clinically driven and driven by the various levels of treatment that are required and not by costs. That is a huge issue, as we are designing an NHS service for the next decade and more. I completely agree with what Adam Ingram said about the poor performance of health boards, and I will knock Borders NHS Board again in that context. Adam Ingram picked up on the location of accident and emergency services. We agree with David Davidson that time is the issue. I refer to the golden hour. A person who is travelling to Ayr hospital for accident and emergency treatment may have to travel a long way. If the accident and emergency department is moved somewhere else, another half hour could be added to that person's journey. The critical golden hour in which lives can be saved represents the test for accident and emergency services.

I have no difficulty with first responders, but the issue is having the appropriate level of treatment at the local level. It is not an either/or situation. I want to compare the Tayside model with what has happened in the Borders. As Euan Robson and I know, 700 people marched in Jedburgh and 700 people marched in Coldstream, not necessarily to save a building but to save an appropriate service, particularly for elderly people in respite care or convalescing or people with chronic conditions such as asthma—I see that Euan Robson agrees with me. Those communities have made a proposal to have combined services, which will be on the minister's desk. In fact, GPs in Jedburgh had a model built up years ago in which  there were social services and housing all within the GP complex and a cottage hospital. In England, 100 cottage hospitals have been reprieved because people see the value of the level of treatment that they involve at the local level. People can travel to such hospitals, which can be right beside their houses. In areas such as the Borders, people, including elderly people, will have to get buses that do not yet exist—travel issues have not been resolved—or drive in their cars to visit elderly relatives. No wonder people feel how they do. It would be common sense to retain such hospitals. England—God bless it—has led the way in keeping cottage hospitals open, keeping people out of general hospitals and keeping beds free so that people are treated at the appropriate level. I hope that when the proposal in question lands on the minister's desk, he will reject Borders NHS Board's proposals on closing cottage hospitals.

In my speech, I made reference to the numbers of planners. One member this afternoon mentioned the use of a golden handcuffs scheme for people embarking on planning training. What is the Executive putting in place in that regard? I hope that the minister will also deal with the issue of planning gain, given the serious issues that the councillors who gave evidence to the committee raised about the impact on affordable housing, about which we are all concerned.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

I begin by adopting Patrick Harvie's opening remarks on the work of the Communities Committee, the clerks and the witnesses who gave evidence. I have less time than the minister had, so I will not be able to touch on as many issues; I hope that my colleagues will pick up on them. I agree with the minister that reform of the planning system—from a householder's application to install a Velux window or conservatory, to the urgent requirement for affordable housing, which I have no doubt my colleague Tricia Marwick will explore, to a new Forth road bridge—is long overdue. The method of reforming the system by means of what is essentially a substantial amendment to the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 is clumsy. I think that the minister has accepted that, and I understand that a consolidated version will be introduced without delay. I wish that that had been done in the first place. Like the curate's egg, the bill is good in parts. I shall start with a good part. The Scottish National Party welcomes endeavours to make planning more accessible and participatory—that was picked up by some of our witnesses. Planning is the core of properly functioning communities and a vibrant economy. It also determines where motorways will be built, how supermarkets will impact on the local economy and, indeed, where  Blair nuclear power stations will be located—but perhaps more on that later. Planning turns out not to be the dull creature that it appeared to be; it is powerful and it shapes not just our landscape but our lives for generations. I hear what the minister said about community involvement and his planning advice note. Like Patrick Harvie, I have issues about early consultation and engaging people and communities in planning. That is a noble aspiration, but it is only that—an aspiration. The public's experience of local hospital closures following the Kerr report has left them with a bad taste in their mouth—otherwise known as consultation. Evidence from community groups made it plain that whatever the minister claims, they wish to have a limited community third-party right of appeal, not as a backstop to the planning process but integral to it. Indeed, where TPRA has been introduced it has not opened the floodgates; it has reinforced the requirements on developers and planners to go with the grain of the community. I stress the words limited and community. As the Communities Committee's report shows, I argued that when there is a variation of a planning consent and it is agreed between the planner and the developer that it is not substantial, the development can go ahead without involving the community. However, there is a case for having a community right of appeal there. There are also European convention on human rights issues, which I think was conceded by the bill team. There are issues for communities about access to advice via Planning Aid for Scotland, which is a funding issue. I shall just touch on that, though if I can I shall address resources later. There is much more to the bill. Another good part of this curate's egg is the hierarchy of developments, from national, major developments to local, minor developments. That is pragmatic although, as usual—and as is the case with so much of this bill—the flesh is in the subordinate legislation. The subordinate legislation will be subject to the affirmative procedure, and the Communities Committee will have no opportunity to amend it—that issue must be dealt with by the Procedures Committee. I share Patrick Harvie's concerns about having a level playing field throughout Scotland. The requirement for local development plans to be updated on a five-yearly cycle is excellent. Many plans are in disrepute because they are so outdated, but the requirement will put stress on planning departments in local authorities, which are already overstretched. A recent parliamentary answer disclosed that the total number of people qualifying in planning subjects had fallen from 265 in 1999-2000 to 205 in 2003-04, which is the last  year for which we have figures. Planners neither grow on trees nor come into being overnight, so there are huge issues about developing the human resources that we need to deliver the bill. That issue—together with funding issues—was highlighted by local authorities, among other witnesses, and by the Finance Committee. My colleague Stewart Stevenson will develop that point. I make passing reference to the consultation between the Treasury and the Government here on the planning gain supplement that it is proposed to levy on development land value increases, which is to be remitted to Gordon Brown and is to be funnelled back to Scotland somehow. Its impact on section 75 agreements remains undetermined, but it was of such concern to the councillors who gave evidence to the Communities Committee that Councillor Davies described them all as being "deeply unhappy and worried about the Treasury's proposal for a planning gain supplement". Councillor Dunn said: "the planning gain supplement—the system that is proposed in the Westminster bill—would be a complete and utter nightmare. If it were introduced, we would be left with a £150 million gap in our delivery of schools, road infrastructure and park-and-ride facilities, all of which we are getting as a result of section 75 agreements with developers." Councillor Davies then said: "It would be disastrous for affordable housing policy."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 22 March 2006; c 3333.] We still do not know where the proposal is going. COSLA said that it tried to get more information but that the information it received was "suitably vague". It is a bit like saying in here that things will happen soon, although I am delighted that the minister has defined how soon. The bill's ECHR compliance is an issue. The Executive has taken the line that certain sections might not be ECHR compliant but that the bill as a whole is, which cures any ills in it. Like various people, I do not agree with that position. The Communities Committee report notes that a minority of the committee, including Euan Robson, was concerned about the proposal to give Scottish ministers the power to decide the format of appeals, and states: "The Committee notes the view of some witnesses that these provisions may be challenged on the basis that they are not compatible with the European Convention on Human Rights." There are other ECHR issues. Quite a few of the measures in the bill are not ECHR compliant and, even if the bill overall does comply with ECHR, the spirit of the bill does not. The loss of the right to  decide the appeal procedure, the balance in that process going to ministers, and the loss of a community right of appeal, even in limited circumstances, might all be challengeable. I know that the minister will say that it is always possible to take a case to the courts, but little communities cannot always go to the courts.

No, the community right of appeal—which I will allow Sandra White to develop—would bring people back into the process. For instance, the example that I gave of a decision about whether a change was substantial would be highly challengeable in the courts.

I have one minute.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. To return to the curate's egg, I will focus on the most concerning issue in the bill—the national planning framework and the processes by which the Parliament may scrutinise and influence it. The committee rightly did not agree with a 40-day period for parliamentary consideration of the framework. Some members wanted 60 days, but I and others wanted the Parliamentary Bureau to determine the timetable for parliamentary scrutiny if the Parliament scrutinises the framework—we do not even know whether it will. The matter is even more urgent because of what we read in today's edition of The Herald , which is that according to Blair the future is nuclear.

John Home Robertson agrees. The Herald  says: "the prime minister challenged his opponents to embrace nuclear energy in the long-term interests of the country". I have news for Mr Blair: Al Capone was toppled by rather dull tax laws, and Jack McConnell might just be toppled, if Mr Blair goes down that route, by rather dull planning laws. The solution for the Scottish people is to vote for the Scottish National Party at the next election. We will have no nuclear power stations in Scotland, and I know that the Liberal Democrats will support us in that.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I will not make it now.

This is a speech.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will speak slowly; I thought I was going to get only five minutes.

I will try. I wish I had not said that, now. It is a great shame that the fire alarm—which will, no doubt, be the butt of many jokes in columns and perhaps newspaper headlines tomorrow—will overtake what has been a serious debate about pensioner poverty and the complete failure of the Liberal-Labour coalition, over seven years, to do something that we have the power to do in Scotland, which is to get rid of the council tax and put in its place a fair local income tax. The basic rule of tax is that it should be fair and collectable. None of us likes paying tax, but we accept that basing taxes on income is the fairest way to tax people. I will move on to the collectability of tax shortly. The background to the debate is the shame of pensioner poverty in Scotland. Some 190,000 pensioners in Scotland live in relative poverty even though Scotland is an oil, gas and energy-rich nation. There is a failure in the targeting of benefits. I find it astonishing, after my many years here, that Labour is still defending the targeting of benefits. As Labour members know, there has been a 10 per cent decrease in claims for council tax benefit in the past five years. We also know that one third of pensioners who are eligible for the pension credit do not claim it. In a debate many months ago, I produced the pension credit application form—all 60-odd pages of it—and another booklet about how to fill it in. There are many reasons why people do not claim pension  credit, including the complexity of making a claim, the fact that they do not know that they are entitled to it, and the shame of asking for it. During the same period, the Labour Government at Westminster has had the shameful record of keeping the basic state pension at the same level—currently, it is only £82 for a single pensioner. Many single pensioners do not even get that, particularly women who do not have enough credits to their name. Again, many of them do not claim pension credit. Against that background, what could the Scottish Parliament have done for the 1 million Scottish pensioners? What does it have the power to do? It has the power to introduce a fair tax, but the Labour and Liberal coalition has singularly failed to do that. No matter what members from the Labour benches say, if one speaks to individual pensioners in the supermarket or to pensioners organisations, the two things that they say they want are a decent pension and a local income tax. Of course, with independence we could also deliver, as my party would, a decent citizens wage. That would take all the means testing out of the system. Despite pensioner poverty in Scotland, pensioners pay their council tax bills, their rent and whatever else they have to pay. Where are the cuts made? They are made on eating and heating. If we go to the supermarket and look in pensioners' trolleys, we see they do not contain a Sainsbury's crate of six bottles of wine, or instant meals. Pensioners buy small amounts and individual bits of food that they can use up and they look for things that are reduced. Many of Scotland's pensioners buy their clothes in charity shops. The central heating programme is welcome, but what is its point if people cannot afford to switch on the heating? In 2004-05, there were 2,760 excess winter deaths in Scotland.

I will come to Tommy Sheridan's bill shortly. I wanted to set out the background because we should remember the canvas against which we work.  I turn to the points that were raised by other members. Tommy Sheridan's bill was fundamentally flawed. Ten of the 11 sections in the bill would have punished people and would have done nothing to alleviate pensioner poverty. Not only that, the bill would have taken away local accountability. Frankly, the Parliament has taken too much away from local government. I want local government to be responsible for raising some of the money that provides the services. We would still provide some of the money from here. People want that to happen. We cannot expect people in the Borders to pay the same local income tax as people in Glasgow because they have different needs and requirements. Karen Whitefield's claim that she was my star pupil astounded me. I have to say that my pupil has not been paying attention and that she must speak to teacher after class. She has lessons to learn. Free personal care was lauded, but the coalition had to be dragged kicking and screaming to deliver the initiative, which was driven by the Scottish National Party. The SNP took the lead on the issue—I was the first person in the Parliament to lodge a member's bill on free personal care. The SNP drove forward the proposal, against the wishes of the then Minister for Health and Community Care, Susan Deacon. The point about the cost of collecting local income tax was a red herring. Consider the money that is wasted at present: £30 million-worth of council tax benefit is not collected and £78 million is spent on collection. The system would be simple to administer. We all have national insurance numbers, income tax codes and postcodes, so it would not be beyond our wit to administer the system. Sylvia Jackson talked about working families, but Labour's record on the shambles of the working families tax credit system is shameful. My in-tray is full of letters about that. Pensioners will not be reading tomorrow's paper to read about a fire. Pensioners will want to know what members have said in the chamber. I will use extracts from Labour members' speeches in my election campaign next year. Votes are running away from the Labour Party. The 1 million pensioners in Scotland are listening to the fact that the SNP would deliver a local income tax and a decent pension. The Liberals have had seven years to deliver that and they have not done so, but they swan around as if they have achievements. Were we in their position, we would now have a local income tax. The voters are waking up fast to the Liberals, who have no proposals. I am also delighted that it has been put on the record that a revaluation will not take place.

rose—

What a spiteful madam.

The phrase "ideological obsession" will come back to haunt the member.

Here is another one.

He agrees with you.

How many people are not aware of credit unions? Given that people are inundated in the afternoons by advertisements for consolidated loan companies that offer high rates, does the Government have a role, or should credit unions be supported, to run advertisements at the same time as those companies purvey consolidated loans, which can take people further into debt?

I, too, congratulate Christine May. At the risk of upsetting Donald Gorrie, with whom I agreed during his members' business debate last week, I point out that I, too, became a member of Capital Credit Union, to put my money where my mouth was as a member of the Parliament. Incidentally, I have learned to save again, which I have never been terribly good at. Credit union members are encouraged to save their money in the union to build up a pool of funds for other members, which, I am happy to say, is what I have done since I joined the credit union. There are myths about the membership of credit unions. In late 2004, the Executive carried out research on credit unions, which found out some interesting information. In the survey, 1,591 credit union members responded from 29 Scottish credit unions. The typical member is middle-aged or older, female, white Scottish in ethnic origin, an owner-occupier and in work. That sounds like me and I am not what people think of as the typical credit union member. The survey found that very few members are under 30, from ethnic minority backgrounds, unemployed or permanently sick or disabled. The idea that credit unions are a poor person's bank, besides being derogatory, is simply not borne out in the statistics. Only 14 per cent of respondents were in receipt of a means-tested benefit. That is one myth about credit unions. Another issue that came out of the survey was that members wanted their unions to offer more ways in which to use the bank, which, of course, is the focus of today's debate. It is a consensual debate and I intend it to remain so, but there are  issues about how much is known about credit unions by the public at large. I am a practical politician, and I like to do what I call the Asda-Tesco test, which is when I ask people what they know about an issue. If I were to go up to Asda or Tesco shoppers and ask them what they know about the Royal Bank of Scotland, HBOS, the Clydesdale Bank, Lloyds TSB or any of the other big banks, they could tell me something. If I were to ask them, "What is a credit union?", I would find that many people simply do not know. Credit unions may be common in Bill Butler's neck of the woods, but there are parts of Scotland where, if one was to do the supermarket test and ask people, "What is a credit union?", people would be unable to answer. That is a great pity, because the people who would benefit from being in a credit union are the very people who are shopping about. There is an issue there about publicising exactly what a credit union is, what it is not, what it can do and why it is different from the conglomerate of banking services to which Mark Ballard referred. One of the recommendations of the survey was that credit unions should modify and extend their office opening hours and provide pay points for electronic banking. To the best of my knowledge, such services are not available.

I commend Donald Gorrie for his motion, for the tenacity with which he has pursued the matter, and for his comprehensive sweep of the issues. At the risk of giving him a sleepless night, I endorse everything that he has said. He knows perfectly well that I have said a lot of that stuff myself in previous debates. Much that Donald Gorrie has said is self-evident. From our days on the Justice 1 Committee, I remember when we went round looking at alternatives to custody and diversions from prosecution. Many of the good examples that we saw of various voluntary sector interventions were undermined by exactly the issues that Donald has raised. He called it a jigsaw of funding, with different funding streams and different timescales, in which if someone has a new idea, they seem to be at the top of the queue and if they have been around for a while, they are jettisoned. All those issues have been around for seven years. It is not a party-political issue; it is a commonsense issue. It is not like trying to solve the Iran-Iraq war; the issue could be resolved simply by considering how we fund our voluntary sector.  Often, we come across an organisation that has secured funding for three years from, for example, LloydsTSB, only for the plug to be pulled on it because the company says that it expects the Government to supply the core funding. If that does not happen, the organisation and the work that is done come to an end. The people who were dependent on that voluntary organisation are left with nowhere to go—they are left in the lurch. The voluntary sector is not, frankly, the icing on the cake; quite often, it is the cake—it is the sector that provides direct on-street help to various people who need help. Whether they are citizens advice bureaux, specialist services for single mothers who are having difficulty, services for the elderly, or whatever, big or small, voluntary sector organisations have found a niche that they serve. If they are serving that niche well, the burden of trying to get funding should be taken off their management. When we visit them, that is what we are told needs to happen. Small organisations spend big swathes of their time working out how to get funding, while big organisations employ somebody to do that for them—all of which seems to be a complete waste of time. Let us get things into perspective. There are 50,000 voluntary organisations in Scotland, which employ 1.2 million volunteers. In 2004, the voluntary sector's annual income was £2.4 billion. This is a big issue that requires to be dealt with properly. I do not want to repeat much of what Donald Gorrie said about the unnecessary red tape and the reapplications. I commend him for keeping going and I hope that he succeeds before he leaves the Parliament. That would be an achievement. When local authorities have to find savings, the first thing that they cut is their voluntary sector contributions. In the Borders, CAB services are being cut even in the vulnerable areas, which I have mentioned in debates before—they are being cut in places such as Hawick, which has areas of great deprivation. The people of Hawick have a collective debt of £9 million, yet the town is losing its CAB services. That is not spending to save; that is making cuts that will cause greater problems down the line. I hope that, along with her team, the minister can find a resolution to the problem. I am sure that that would get cross-party support in the Parliament. No one is blaming anyone in particular. The problem is not insoluble, and the solution is worth delivering. I commend Donald Gorrie once again and hope that he sleeps well tonight—this consensus might not happen again. My final point is that Donald Gorrie referred to the word "innovative". Can someone tell me what "old innovative" is? I keep hearing people use the term "new innovative". Something is either  innovative or it is not, so could we just scrap the term "new innovative"?

I congratulate my colleague Alasdair Morgan on securing the debate, although I take issue with his stating that the minister had to endure this debate after enduring the previous one. I thought that we made the previous debate relatively chirpy and stimulating. Mr Morgan can read the Official Report afterwards and see whether that description fits the bill. I first encountered Wanlockhead completely by accident. I used to commute to Edinburgh from my home in Galloway. Once, on my way back down the road, I took the turn to the lead hills too fast—the first turn goes to Wanlockhead and the next to Elvanfoot. I made my way, on what can be described only as a helter-skelter road, up the hill to Wanlockhead, which I did not expect to find—it is an astonishing wee place—only to take the helter-skelter road back down again. I did not stop that day; I was in a very bad mood, because I had taken the wrong road and it was pouring with rain. However, I did return thereafter—I will come to that. Wanlockhead is a strange place which, as far I understand it, has its roots way back in Roman times, when it was likely that the Romans mined lead there for their plumbing. After that, the monks came. Finally, in the 18 th century, the London (Quaker) Lead Company started to mine in the area on a commercial basis. Although it mined lead primarily, I understand that the silver and gold for the mace in the Parliament came from the lead hills. Wanlockhead is a mystic little place in its own way.  In the 19 th century, the Rev Porteous coined the phrase "God's Treasure House" to describe the area, because it was so rich in minerals. In 1876 he wrote that there were 274 men and boys employed in mining in Wanlockhead. In addition, there were shops, butchers, tailors and cloggers. There was even a doctor, who was paid for half by the Duke of Buccleuch and half through a levy, which I suppose was like our national insurance contributions. The first miners were gold prospectors who lived in tents, from which a community developed. The population of the village in 2001, which I am sure has risen—I hope that it has—was 158. There were not many children, as the population was mainly elderly, and some of the houses were used as holiday homes. The notes that I have state: "Wanlockhead is still considered very rural and occasionally in winter, snow can still close the roads, completely isolating the village from the rest of Scotland and the World!" That takes me to my last encounter with Wanlockhead, when I went to speak to a Burns supper. I set off, not in my Mini this time, but in a Ford Ka, on a snowy January night, with the snow piled up at the sides of the road. I think that Alasdair Morgan was there that night, too. There were stars in the sky and the moon was out. There was something unreal about driving up the helter-skelter road to the remote, rather romantic and dramatic village at the top. When I got there, there was not a soul in sight. I am known for taking the wrong road frequently, but I knew that I could not have done so this time, because I had been there before, in the rain. I got out of the car and walked about, but heard nothing and saw nobody—there was no sign of man, woman nor beast. Finally, I located the village hall and opened the door. There were banners everywhere and I heard the clinking of glasses. Everybody was happy and chattering away. It was as if I had wandered into a Guinness advert—although I think that it is Tennants lager that reaches the parts that other beers cannot reach. The whole community was present, as it would have been on such occasions in the centuries when there was mining there. Even today, after taking the city bypass and the motorway, when we get to Wanlockhead it seems as if we are in a different, dramatic and rather striking place. I take slight issue with Elaine Murray's saying that if the museum was not there, there would not be an awful lot to bring visitors there. I think that Wanlockhead village should be visited in its own right, given that it is Scotland's highest village and given its history, which of course includes that shown in the museum. People should visit that strange place that is balanced all on its own on the top of the lead hills.  I remember it being a striking little place and I will help the local tourist board with its adverts. I hope that, after having endured—to use the words of my colleague—the previous debate, the minister will add Wanlockhead to her list of places to visit, if she has not visited it already. I hope that she will consider the issues that members have raised about the funding of its museum.

I congratulate Dave Petrie on his maiden speech, particularly as he gave me a name check. I advise him that that was no baptism of fire—that awaits him—but me being nice. I love gardens—large, small or old. I particularly love the gardens at Benmore on the Dunoon peninsula; for information, I advise Robin Harper and Donald Gorrie that there are many spectacular trees there. The fine art degree that I acquired in the past has given me a love of ancient buildings. I very  much subscribe to the statement in paragraph 3.1 of SHEP 1: "People want to see the historic environment protected, cared for and used sustainably". I am interested in the phrase "used sustainably". Against the backcloth of the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill that is before Parliament, I shall give three examples in which sustainable use could be, but is not, being implemented. In the Borders, there is the old government building in Galashiels. It is not the most spectacularly bonnie of buildings, but it has a history. It is under threat of demolition for the expansion of Tesco—I will not begin Tesco-beating in the chamber. The building is on the site of an old mill and the first Scottish College of Textiles was situated there. There is potential for the building to be adapted into a tourist information centre. It is close to the Galashiels bus station and it will hopefully be close to a stop for the railway line. There is room for compromise with Tesco on that site—I believe that the council is endeavouring to come to such a compromise. That is an example of what Elaine Murray referred to as sympathetic adaptation, for which some buildings are suitable and some are not. It has happened in other parts of the Borders. Along the River Tweed, what once were mills are now occupied enterprise areas. I hope that the minister will consider those aspects. I understand that the issue is a legal one. At one time, that building could have been listed, although whether it would have been listed is another matter. That opportunity was missed and now, as the subject of a live planning application, the building can no longer be listed. It is my understanding that in England an application can be made for listing, irrespective of whether there is a live planning application. Will the minister consider that? I would not call it a lacuna in the law, but there is a discrepancy and England is ahead of us in that regard. That is an issue to be taken up. Secondly, my colleague Michael Matheson referred to Abbotsford House, although it was not him who said that the situation with that building is "critical". That word was used by the current administrator, Jacquie Wright—I believe that she is seconded from the National Trust for Scotland—who said: "If we don't find a partner and the money, I am afraid that the money will gradually run out. It is critical." What we do not want to see happening to Abbotsford House is what happened to Burns cottage in Alloway, which I visited many years ago. It was pouring with rain and I saw historic manuscripts by Robert Burns that were exposed to damp conditions.  Alarm bells went off and that situation has been dealt with; however, I do not want to see that happening to Abbotsford House, which is quirky, eclectic and personal, and therefore very moving. It belonged to a man who, I am delighted to say, loved clutter as much as I do, although his clutter—from the library that the Faculty of Advocates has resting there to all those armoury artefacts—is much more valuable. In the quasi-medieval hall, I was delighted to see the Grahame coat of arms—spelled properly with an "e" at the end—right next to the Scott coat of arms. Perhaps that was portentous: a unionist and a nationalist who recognise a common cause. I do not wish to make light of Abbotsford, because it is an example of a building that is not just of Borders importance or Scottish importance but of international importance, as was Burns cottage. We have been very casual about the history of our buildings, our writers and our dramatists because we have so many of them. Were we American, no doubt our approach would be different. Finally, I want to mention the racecourse at Musselburgh, which, as the minister is aware, is wrapped around one of our earliest golf courses. Given my history with regard to sport, I am not sure that I should be talking about golf in the chamber, but I can point out that there was a links in that place in 1672. Indeed, it is alleged that Mary Queen of Scots played golf there. There is an old pub on the site—I think that it is called Mrs Foreman's inn—that used to pass drinks to golfers out of its side window. However, this strange little place that has evolved over time—along with the wildlife lagoon right next to it—is now to have floodlights and a multipurpose sports stadium. Good grief—the heart sinks at the proposal. A community campaign has been launched to prevent the development and a petition was presented to the Scottish Parliament. As usual, the petition wended its way to a committee of the Parliament—in this case, the Communities Committee—and was parked. I believe that the application might have been called in by the minister, but the point is that too many such things are going on in Scotland. Communities are forming groups all over the place to wage little fights to protect historical sites and buildings that are self-evidently worth while. We must start to be tougher in our support for those sites and buildings. I take on board the point that Ted Brocklebank and Roseanna Cunningham made about the fact that, often, the buildings that we are concerned about are in the hands of private families who will not do anything or cannot afford to do anything. Of course, the Burns cottage and Abbotsford are in the hands of trusts. I do not want to criticise those trusts or those owners, but  time is of the essence in those situations and urgent action is needed before we reach the point at which we are merely making buildings wind and watertight. Abbotsford has not yet reached that stage—some money has been secured to deal with immediate issues—but it is time for a greater sense of urgency. The minister has lots of places to go to, so I will not invite her to make any further visits. If she would just name one or two places that she intends to visit, I would be grateful.

Oh!

Has she missed anything?

No fun there.

I congratulate Des McNulty on securing this sombre but necessary debate, 20 years after Chernobyl. The account of that fateful day and of the unfolding of events is chilling. There was a two-day delay in making the accident public and it was seven days before radioactivity stopped leaking out. Twenty years later, even parts of Scotland are still affected by the radioactive fallout. The tragedy impinged on all the unfortunate people in Belarus, hundreds of thousands of whom had to leave their homes. Hundreds of thousands died as a consequence of radioactive fallout. The effects also made their way to the north, so most countries of northern and western Europe were touched. As Des McNulty said, in the south of Scotland—my area—10 farms are still affected by the radioactive fallout, 20 years on. The sheep from those farms cannot be sold into the food chain because they have high levels of radioactivity. If good has come from ill, the good is that marker for us, particularly as some people consider using nuclear energy. I will not develop my speech into a debate about energy. I do not oppose nuclear energy in principle, if it is safe, but there is the rub. The catastrophe at Chernobyl taught us that nuclear energy is not safe. It continues to be unsafe and the waste that is produced will be unsafe for hundreds of generations. That is a serious issue for the Parliament, which has limited planning powers over moving towards new nuclear power stations. We must consider our responsibilities, not only to our children and grandchildren, but to the many people beyond them. Des McNulty referred to health impacts, about which there has been controversy. I asked a parliamentary question about the health impact in Scotland of the radioactive fallout from the Chernobyl incident. The Minister for Health and Community Care replied only last month that the only traceable effect of the Chernobyl incident would be "an increase in the incidence of some forms of cancer such as thyroid cancer in children."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 22 March 2006; S2W-24295.]  My understanding from substantial and useful briefings is that such cancers are the first things to  occur—they result within days of the fallout—but other substantial cancers also result, such as leukaemia, which Des McNulty mentioned. I asked whether there had been any specific investigation "into the health impact on the population of areas affected by the Chernobyl incident", to which the minister replied: "No specific investigation into the health impact ... has ... been made."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 22 March 2006; S2W-24295.]  It is appalling that, 20 years after the incident, the health impacts in Scotland are not being considered. I am referring not only to cancers, bad as they are, but to genetic deformities that are now built into the system. As we know, some animals have genetic deformities as a direct result of the fallout. I thank Des McNulty for lodging the motion and securing what I described as a sombre debate. I heard what he said about nuclear power and hope that the Parliament will not see an erosion of our important obligation not to have more nuclear power stations in Scotland while nuclear energy is unsafe and we do not know how to contain the waste that is produced.

I hear clearly what the minister is saying and I believe in democratic local government. However, in this instance, when we are trying to take a broad view of the justice system and accessibility to it, I would like the minister to consider regarding CABx as an integral  part of the justice system and have them funded by the Justice Department. I ask the minister to consider that, at least.

Although I no longer practise, I should declare an interest as a member of the Law Society of Scotland. Also, as I have said in previous debates, I am a former legal aid practitioner and citizens advice bureau volunteer. I wish to focus on CABx, because they are at street level, where members of the public—often those who are most vulnerable and least able to articulate for themselves—endeavour to access justice, in the broadest definition of the term. I shall focus on the role of the CABx throughout Scotland and then focus on what is happening on the ground, where, for example in the Scottish Borders, there are service reductions. The Citizens Advice Scotland briefing paper to which  Patrick Harvie referred is extremely useful. A particular issue that CAS raises—it is a spend-to-save message—is the need for preventive measures as well as crisis intervention. In my days as a CAB volunteer, the work nearly always involved crisis intervention. People had got to a desperate stage by the time they came in. It is extremely important that we make CABx more accessible and that we fund them. I shall say more on that later. CABx have a role in tackling social exclusion. The cases that CABx deal with are not usually the kind of cases that a civil practitioner takes on. They are housing issues, debt issues, consumer issues, employment issues and, most often, issues to do with the benefits system, which is a quagmire for most civil legal aid practitioners—people working in CABx are usually experts on the benefits system. In a year when the Scottish Legal Aid Board funded only 118 employment tribunal cases, CAS represented clients in 650 employment tribunal cases, 404 of which were settled out of the hearing, gaining £1.2 million for their clients. CABx are an irreplaceable service. The same applies to benefits appeals tribunals, where legal aid is not currently available. CAS represented clients in more than 3,500 cases in such tribunals, 680 of which were settled in advance of a hearing. For the vulnerable in society, CABx fulfil a vital role. In the Highlands and Islands, there is a pilot project that integrates the role of CABx with the legal aid system. Hugh Henry is quoted as saying that the project is "an imaginative and effective method of delivering legal advice in the north of Scotland." I hope that that will be extended throughout Scotland, particularly to rural areas. I wish to give examples of what is happening not only in the Borders but elsewhere. I have had letters from throughout Scotland about the closure of CABx. In the Scottish Borders, four offices are to close: Jedburgh, Innerleithen, Coldstream and Chirnside. People there will have to get up the steam to travel considerable distances to access citizens advice information elsewhere. However, "elsewhere" is also experiencing cuts. There are cuts in the major towns of the Borders—Peebles, Hawick and Galashiels—where opening times are being reduced by 13 hours. People from the smaller towns will find that even the offices that remain open are overstretched. The money involved—some £50,000 from the council—is not substantial. I will go on to say where the funding stream for CABx should come from. Another extremely important point that is made by CAS is about the precarious nature of the funding. That is true for CABx throughout Scotland. As an example of the impact that funding cuts will have on a deprived area, I note  that unemployment in Hawick has increased by 16 per cent in one year, due mainly to losses in the textile industry. Figures from Hawick CAB show that there has been a 400 per cent increase in debt cases in the past six years. Every single one of those cases no doubt involves an individual or family at crisis point. The total debt in the Hawick area, which Hawick staff are dealing with, is more than £5 million, yet Hawick CAB's hours are being cut. I would like the ministerial team to take a good look at that level of civil justice. Maureen Bennett, who is the manager of the CAB in Hawick, has said that the figures are the tip of the iceberg. There is no doubt that the collective debt could rise. The CAB in Hawick deals with more debt cases than do CABx in some inner-city areas. I urge the minister to spend to save and I ask him to consider central funding for citizens advice offices, similar to the funding that is provided for legal aid. There could be accountability and an audit trail. CAB offices could provide information, just as every office of solicitors has to provide information to the Scottish Legal Aid Board on every legal aid case. At a time when local authorities are having to make cuts elsewhere, I suggest to the minister that the present system of funding by local authorities is making the most vulnerable people even more vulnerable.

Does the member agree that there is a tendency in the broadcast media to treat English law, systems and processes as though they apply to the United Kingdom, which further confuses the public about what happens in Scotland?

I, too, want to refer to the splendid report by the Finance Committee on funding for areas of deprivation. Paragraph 5 states: "The bureaucracy involved in the allocation of Community Regeneration Fund (CRF) monies is massively disproportionate, especially for those local authority areas which receive small sums from the Fund". Does the minister agree?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it considers that the proposed closure of Jedburgh and Coldstream cottage hospitals complies with the spirit of the Kerr report. (S2O-9579)

I refer the minister to the key messages in the Kerr report that underpin the recommendations. Three out of seven key messages contain the word "local": "ensure sustainable and safe local services ... view the NHS as service delivered predominantly in local communities rather than in hospitals ... develop new skills to support local services." The final key message is: "develop options for change WITH people, not FOR them, starting from the patient experience and engaging the public early on to develop solutions rather than have them respond to pre-determined plans conceived by the professionals." Against the background of those key messages, I repeat my question. Does the minister think that the proposed closure of Jedburgh and Coldstream cottage hospitals complies with those underpinning key messages?

Inevitably, at this stage of the debate, I may replicate points that have already been made, although I do not want to do so. What strikes me first is that the vulnerable and less well-off people in our communities are given so few choices in life, and another is being withdrawn from them. Indeed, as I think Richard Lochhead said, 12 per cent of Scots do not have a bank account. Some people do not have one because they have difficulties in opening one. Someone else said that the great asset of the Post Office card account system is that someone cannot get into debt through using it. As Stewart Stevenson said, the people who use the card account system are those who are expected to manage their finances far better than, for example,  MSPs manage theirs—I speak for myself. Do members know that there are more sub-post offices in Scotland than there are bank branches and that they are in places that bank branches never reach? However, the sub-post offices are often being removed from such places now. There are some 1,400 sub-postmasters—that is a generic term; I know that there are sub-postmistresses—in Scotland and about 1,100 of their sub-post offices are simply not profitable to operate. The withdrawal of card accounts will obviously have a negative impact on key community businesses that are already fragile. They are also social talking shops—more of that later. As I understand it, Lloyds TSB and the Clydesdale Bank currently have arrangements with the Post Office to allow clients to access their accounts at Post Office branches. It would be a good move to require the Bank of Scotland and the Royal Bank of Scotland, which I understand have about three quarters of personal banking business in Scotland, to make the same arrangement with the Post Office card account. That would allow us to support the cards further, rather than withdraw the current support. Furthermore, there is a prospect that Government funding to the Post Office Ltd will cease in 2008. In Scotland, that funding represents a payment of some £15 million for delivery in rural areas of services that would otherwise be uneconomical. That would be a double whammy. As members said, the small local shop that is attached to a sub-post office might be the only shop in the village. I have used such shops. They are the places where people meet. They are the places where people find out who is pregnant, by whom, or whether it is all just a rumour. They are the places where people find out who is unwell: if an elderly person does not turn up at the post office, people become curious and check on them. Those things happen. A sub-post office is more than just a place where people collect their money; it is a place where people meet and gossip. It would be a triple whammy if such places were lost to communities. It therefore seems ironic that the Post Office card account system is to be phased out at a time when the Minister for Communities is talking about regeneration and the Minister for Environment and Rural Development is talking about rural regeneration. The loss of the card system will lead to rural degeneration. I will not take up more time. I support Richard Lochhead's motion and I hope that the minister will take the issue to Westminster and make our wishes come true.

We seem to be running a confessional tonight, so I will make a confession that will not surprise members: I never took part in the Duke of Edinburgh's award scheme, although it was available in my youth as it started in the 1950s. I think it was the physical activity aspect that put me off. However, I must also confess—although nobody will believe this and I have lost the evidence—that when I was in the girl guides I got a badge for athletics, despite my genetic antipathy to sport. To be serious, I congratulate Karen Whitefield on securing the debate. I also congratulate the Duke of Edinburgh's award scheme for its success and for standing the test of time, which cannot be said of many things. The important aspects are that the scheme is voluntary, fun and—as I was delighted to hear Karen Whitefield say—it reaches  parts that other voluntary projects do not reach, where there are more disadvantaged children. The award has something of an image as an award that exists so that middle-class children at posh schools can get badges, so I am delighted to hear that it has moved beyond that. The operating authorities, who must engage with the award for it to succeed, cover a wide range, including national youth organisations, local and national government authorities, industrial and commercial firms, independent schools and, most important, special schools. As Karen Whitefield said, about 20,000 children in Scotland have benefited from the award. As we also heard from her, it creates self-confidence that is earned rather than just given, so it is the best kind of self-confidence. The award is practical. So many activities disenfranchise children, who feel that they must have academic skills to take part in them. The award is adventurous, as we can tell from Karen Whitefield's little adventure. She is no worse at orienteering than I am—I can get lost finding Kelso. Although I have been to Kelso many times, I always come out of the town a different way from the way I came in. I do not know why—Kelso is not special. I had better not say that or I will be sued by the people of Kelso. In gaining awards, it is important that young people learn the importance of commitment. One of the important lines on the award's website says that the award is a "Marathon, not a sprint". In this age of instant rewards—instant rewards for what one eats or for what one buys—a reward for a slow-burning achievement has greater depth. I know that that is not why people strive for the award, but I hope that, at the end of the day, it helps people not just in their personal lives but in their careers thereafter. I congratulate Karen Whitefield on securing the debate and trust that the scheme will continue to thrive.

I am following Jackie Baillie closely, but I am curious to know how many bagpipes it takes to make a noise, as distinct from a sound.

I have said it before.

I congratulate Euan Robson on securing the debate. As he knows, we both submitted motions in almost identical terms. There is cross-party consensus on the need to retain the cottage hospitals in Coldstream and Jedburgh. I thank members of all parties who signed both motions. Recent marches through the towns were attended by more than 700 people in Coldstream and more than 700 people in Jedburgh. That indicates the strength of feeling and emotion about retaining the cottage hospitals. People want the  hospitals to be retained not for sentimental reasons but for practical reasons. The general practitioners, the community councils and the churches fully back both campaigns. Statements from the churches make it plain how much the hospitals are required. For example, a letter from the minister at Jedburgh Old & Edgerston parish church states: "As a Parish minister let me say that the quality of life in Jedburgh is partly reflected in how we care for the elderly, the sick and the dying within our own community. The Cottage Hospital more than fulfils the community's expectations." Similar letters from Coldstream state that its hospital is integral to care in the community and care for elderly people. Euan Robson mentioned the pressure that might be put on Kelso community hospital. The pressure that might be put on Borders general hospital by the need for beds for the elderly is equally obvious. When I was at the hospital very recently, some elderly people could not be discharged because the support services provided by social work and so on that are necessary for care in the community were not in place. The elderly people were therefore parked in the hospital—yet the health board is looking at taking away facilities in their communities. As Euan Robson said, transport is a huge issue. Many people do not have transport that enables them to visit their friends and relatives. The Kerr report made it plain that the first priority was "Maintaining high quality services locally". The executive summary in the Kerr report states: " ensure sustainable and safe local services; redesign where possible". Jedburgh and Coldstream have both put forward thorough plans. They accept that the buildings may not be suitable, but another facility could be developed. In Jedburgh, the facilities could be developed to extend to other services such as social work and benefits. The services provided from the facilities in Coldstream could also be extended. The Kerr report states: "redesign where possible to meet local needs and expectations". What could be clearer than the local needs and expectations of the 700 people who marched through Coldstream and the 700 people who marched through Jedburgh? They said, "This is what we want. We are showing you what your consultation means. This is our response to your consultation. Will somebody please listen?" A fairly recent newspaper headline stated: "Reprieve for 100 cottage hospitals in ... U-turn". The article states: "In a significant reversal of the trend requiring patients and their relatives to travel long distances to larger district general hospitals ... the Health Secretary said she wanted more facilities to be provided in the community." And it includes the following quotations: "'a service fitted round the patient, not the patient fitted round the service'" and: "community facilities should not be lost in response to 'short-term budgetary pressures'" Those quotations come from Patricia Hewitt and Tony Blair. They have seen the value of retaining cottage and community hospitals in the community and representing local people. I share with Euan Robson and others who will speak the hope that if Borders NHS Board says on 30 March that it wants to close the Coldstream and Jedburgh hospitals, the minister will simply reject that, consider the other proposals that are on the table, be imaginative and, in this instance, follow England's lead—because sometimes they get it right.

Who are the older people about whom we have been talking? I have found out in the debate that we are between 50 and 95, but my afternoon has not been entirely wasted because I lost 10 years thanks to Helen Eadie—that was very kind of her. Are we all the same? Of course we are not. Members need only look at Donald Gorrie, John Farquhar Munro, me and John Swinburne, who borrowed my walking stick earlier this week, to see what we are like. Some of us are not curmudgeonly—I will not point any fingers. The debate has been wide ranging, so I will not be able to remark on every speech. I will start with some facts, because we cannot sidestep the issues. One pensioner in five in Scotland lives in relative poverty. Excess winter mortality in Scotland is three times greater than in Germany and Sweden, where the weather is much colder. Only 12 per cent of buses and coaches in Scotland have low floors or a powered lift or ramp. For the reasons that Helen Eadie explained, 17.5 per cent of single women are not entitled to the  basic state pension. Four out of 10 pensioners who are entitled to claim council tax benefits do not claim it. Those are facts. Efforts have been made to make older people claim benefits and they have not worked. I hold up—for the last time, I hope—the pension credit forms that pensioners are required to fill it. Given the size of the forms, it is no wonder that they give up trying to get their pension credit. I say to Mr Davidson that the reason for the Scottish National Party amendment is that one cannot walk away from the fact that, until we have a decent basic state pension and control of the benefits system in Scotland, ministers with good will, such as Malcolm Chisholm, have one hand tied behind their backs; they have limited resources and are often firefighting. I applaud the contribution of elderly carers, as Donald Gorrie did. It is important because there is benefit not only to the person who is being cared for but to the carer. One-to-one interaction is good; it lifts people out of isolation and sometimes gives them something literally to get out of bed for. Linda Fabiani made a heartfelt speech about the support that elderly carers need. Members should remember that we now have two generations of pensioners—as I have said before, I am collecting my pension and my dad is collecting his at 91—so generations of pensioners are looking after each other. We must remove age-related barriers. Let us start with the press, who insist on putting a person's age in brackets after their name. They do that particularly with women—I mean nothing personal to you, Deputy Presiding Officer—and it is absolutely irrelevant. I thank Patrick Harvie for acknowledging pensioner poverty and supporting the SNP amendment. Council tax has been mentioned. I must correct Mr Davidson: the one-off payment to which he referred was money to help with the council tax. The Scottish Parliament could get a move on with a local income tax, which is supported by many members and would stop penalising elderly people who simply stay in their family homes and do not have the income to pay their council tax. Older people pay their bills and more elderly people in Scotland are in council tax poverty because one tenth of their income goes on paying council tax. I commend Roseanna Cunningham for reminding us about Margaret Ewing's work on fuel poverty. When Margaret talked about cold-weather payments in the 1970s, I—just like everybody else—wondered what she was talking about. She pioneered the cold-weather payment, which has at last moved a step on. However, it is not good enough because, with every 5 per cent increase in fuel costs, another 30,000 people get thrown back  into fuel poverty. Therefore, with the recent 30 per cent increase, 180,000 people have been thrown back into fuel poverty. That demonstrates why it is difficult for any Minister for Communities to keep promises about eradicating fuel poverty by whatever date when we are not in charge of energy policy. The central heating programme is to be welcomed, but it needs to be extended not only to more kinds of systems but to low-income families. Free personal care, which the Parliament pushed through, is not operating in the way in which we thought it would. Having read the Sutherland report, which was quite clear about food preparation forming part of free personal care for people who cannot do it for themselves, we never thought, when we were voting on the policy, that they would be charged for it—and charged depending on where they lived. That must change. There have been council cutbacks. In the Borders, frozen meals are now given to people instead of meals on wheels, which had more of a personal touch. There is now home shopping, whereas it used to be delivered. Alternatively, someone would come and take people shopping or would get them their messages and then have a wee chat with them. That is gone, and it is now a matter of ordering two weeks in advance. Members have raised issues around care homes. There is great concern about the standards in some of them. We must look into the care commission, which is self-funding. I do not think that that is good enough. We need some independent funding to let the care commission do its job properly. There are some care homes that I would never want to be put near, frankly. I would rather put a gun to my head and end it than be put in them. We have seen some things on documentaries. That situation cannot be right in a caring society. The concessionary fares scheme is excellent. However, we return to the fact that people might not have a low-rise bus service that they can use, or might be able to use a low-rise bus for part of their journey but not for the rest of it, as a result of which people can get stuck in places. There are people in Scotland who are disfranchised from transport and movement, and that is a big issue when it comes to keeping elderly people hale and hearty. I heard the minister speak about housing design and new technology. Roseanna Cunningham made a substantive contribution, which would be well worth following through. Many people cannot get aids and adaptations. I say to Nanette Milne that we have been banging on in here for years about having one funding stream, so that social work does not compete with the health boards over which budget is used—we have been here  for seven years. At least the consultation document is here now. I will be filling in my response, but I suspect that the space allowed for experience will be too small for me. Roseanna Cunningham said to rejoice in age. Bits of me are but, to be honest, bits of me are not—and modesty prevents me from disclosing those. However, I have a Malacca walking stick with a silver band, and it is on offer to anyone else who goes out and plays football with their grandson. I will end on the fact that I now have a shiny new bike.

I have lost 10 years—just like that.

The minister will be aware that, although the national travel scheme is welcomed by all members, many people who live in rural communities will find it difficult to use their free national travel pass, because there are no buses or no low-rise buses. Will that be addressed in the strategy?

Will Des McNulty take an intervention?

I endorse and adopt Dennis Canavan's fine words. Alongside the G8 summit, the W8 was set up in the Scottish Parliament early last year to offer practical assistance to African women, one in 13 of whom is likely to die in childbirth or pregnancy. We had a presentation on that yesterday, which was extremely emotional, and I am sure that women in the Parliament will take that issue forward in practical terms. My colleagues will deal with international aspects of poverty. If the independents will forgive me, I will focus on poverty that is close to home, among Scottish pensioners. The minister this  week launched a consultation on our aging population. That is welcome, but I wonder what effect it will have had seven years down the road. If any pensioner in Scotland is asked what their concerns are, they raise three main concerns: the state pension, council tax and fuel bills, about which the minister will do nothing. The basic state pension is currently £82.05 a week. Only 17 per cent of women qualify for it, because most of them have not made sufficient contributions. The minimum income guarantee is just under £110, and many people could live on that in Scotland today. However, targeting the pension credit has been a complete failure, as some 40 per cent of pensioners who are entitled to pension credit simply do not claim it. It is reckoned that, United Kingdom-wide, £1 billion in pension credit is not collected. There is a simple solution. The Government should give people a decent state pension—which would mean that those with small occupational pensions would not subsidise the state pension—and should tax people at the top, such as me. I claim my state pension and I am taxed; that is how it should be. That is what should happen for pensioners in Scotland, and it would immediately release them from some of the poverty that they face. There is no pensioner in Scotland who would not put that at the top of their list. The second issue is council tax. Just because the house that someone has lived in for years has now become valuable, they face a swingeing council tax. Again, there are targeted benefits, but they simply do not work, with 40 per cent of those who are entitled to claim council tax benefit not claiming it. That is not the Scottish National Party's figure; it is the figure from Age Concern Scotland. I cannot understand why we are not moving towards a local income tax, a service tax or something that is based on ability to pay. What we hear from the Labour Party are the words of revaluation—words that may come back to haunt it. With an election in the near future, the Government is reviewing the situation while pensioners are worried sick about paying their council tax bills—and pensioners pay up; they pay their bills timeously. The third issue is fuel costs. I do not need to remind members that we have recently experienced an increase of nearly 30 per cent in fuel costs. It is reckoned that, for every 5 per cent increase in the cost of fuel, 30,000 people return to fuel poverty. Many of them are single pensioners living in their own homes, who choose between eating and heating. The warm deal central heating programme has its faults, but it is welcome; nevertheless, there is no point in someone having central heating if they cannot switch it on. It is reckoned that many pensioners  sit in one room with a fire and do not put their radiators on because they cannot afford the bills. In Scotland, we have one of the highest rates of excess winter deaths—deaths from hypothermia; let us give it its name. It is reckoned that there were 3,500 excess winter deaths in Scotland last year. Other countries that are much colder, such as Sweden and Germany, do not have so many excess winter deaths, yet we live in an oil-rich country.

Margo MacDonald will get no resistance from me on that point. I fully recognise the dreadful picture that Dennis Canavan has painted of poverty throughout the world, to which I realise that the poverty here does not compare. Nevertheless, I believe that, although we have a duty to those abroad, which we must recognise here—I hope that, one day, when the Scottish Parliament is independent, we will be able to play our full part in that—we must not forget the poverty that exists on our own doorstep.

Will the minister give way?

I am pleased to tell the minister that I have already applied for my nationwide concessionary bus pass. I do not know whether I will get it on time. A parliamentary question about that is on the way to the minister, not on my personal behalf but on that of all the other people who have applied.

That is a personal assurance, is it? I will speak to the second part of the motion, which focuses on rural transport problems—which,  obviously, arise in the Scottish Borders as they do in the Highlands and elsewhere. There might be no bus services after 5 o'clock in the evening, and there are certainly no buses in certain places on Sundays. The connections between bus services will sometimes not be available. I would like the minister to consider, in particular, the possibility of buses that have low-rise access being starred on the timetables—if the minister would listen—so that travellers know that they can transfer between low-rise buses. That is relatively important for people in wheelchairs. I have asked several times whether the concessionary fares scheme will be extended to the carers of entitled people. There is not much point in a disabled person having a concessionary bus pass if the person who is helping them on to buses with their wheelchair does not have one. The present minister's predecessor was sympathetic on that point. I hope that there will be some movement on it. I occasionally eavesdrop on the Local Government and Transport Committee—not very often, but sometimes, when its discussions are relevant to my portfolio. I listened to the evidence that was given on this issue. It spawned a series of written questions, which the minister answered last week. We need to make progress, so I will perhaps ask the minister the supplementary questions now, to save me lodging any more. I asked about demand-responsive travel schemes. According to the minister's answer, they are part of the concessionary fares scheme only if they are  "registered as a local bus service". I would like that situation to move forward. The minister does not hold information centrally on figures "detailing demand responsive transport services available in each local authority."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 6 March 2006; S2W-23391.]  We are now in the computer age. I think that the minister could get his hands on that information. We learn that community transport schemes are not available under the concessionary fares scheme unless they are "local registered services." I would like the minister to address that, too. I asked the minister about "the numbers and location of people entitled to the national concessionary fares scheme who will be unable to access transport." His answer was that "the Partnership Agreement commitment to assess improved concessions for people with disabilities ... aims to identify the latent demand for transport".  He continues: "This research ... is now nearing conclusion and we aim to publish in April 2006."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 6 March 2006; S2W-23380.]  We have been talking about a national concessionary fares scheme for five or six years. I am not in a churlish mood tonight, but the minister is dragging his heels, trying to find out now who will be excluded. I hope that we will have that information by April at the very latest. I am delighted to have the minister's assurance that all of us who have applied for our national concessionary pass will get it in time.

I am not quite sure why it takes moral courage to raise the issue of play, but I will take Lord James's word for it. I find myself agreeing with Donald Gorrie—today must be my agree-with-Donald-Gorrie day—as I, too, do not like the word "strategy". The word is cumbersome and strategies tend not to go anywhere. I ask that we find another word. I also agree with Ken Macintosh—I congratulate him on securing the debate—that there is a clear distinction between PE and play. I loathed PE and would not go near it, but I loved play and could not be taken away from it. Play is spontaneous exercise of both mind and body. It involves imagination. Regrettably, children nowadays do not have the fun that we had at that age. When there were no parked cars, the street was our playground. I do not believe that parks provide a cure-all. Children tend not to like parks, not just because they can be the province of thugs, but because they offer more structured play. Children want to play, there and then, outside the door. Perhaps we should start by getting the parked cars off the road. I recognise that we must protect our children, but I agree with Rosemary Byrne that our society must have a more balanced approach to stranger danger. The main danger to children comes from the kent family friend, the stepfather or other member of the family rather than from the stranger. That needs to be addressed. Another issue that needs to be examined is litigation. I find it extraordinary that children in some primary schools are not allowed to play on the playground tarmac for fear that they will fall  and hurt themselves and the school will be sued. What crazy world are we in? When I was a child, it was a badge of honour to have a skint knee, a grazed arm or a bloody nose. Once indoors, one got a cuddle and a cup of tea—or milk or lemonade or something—but such injuries were part of life. It seems that we do not let our children have minor injuries any more. However, perhaps my biggest bugbear is the commercialisation of play. Why is so much money pitched at making people think that their child can be happy only if it has the most expensive toy or play frame in the garden? The best play is usually free and shared with other people spontaneously on the street. I am interested in the list that Play Scotland kindly provided to us. One consequence of the increase in childhood obesity is that type II diabetes is becoming an epidemic among children. Play can teach children to socialise and negotiate. As I said earlier to Adam Ingram, the children on my street always used to have a fight with the children in a nearby avenue about who would have a bonfire on 5 November. It was nearly war, but we knew that the issue would have to be resolved at the end of the day, a bit like the United Nations. After a bit of posturing, we used to put the two bonfires together and have a big combined one. Those were important lessons for children to learn. Lessons about bullying can also be learned when children play. I draw attention to the confidence that children get from play, particularly if it is dangerous play. I point out to Ken Macintosh that there must sometimes be an element of danger for children in play. I remember walking along beams on rooftops—if my mother had known about it she would have gone white. That was daredevil stuff, but it was about challenging ourselves physically and mentally. Of course there are limits, but an element of danger is needed in unstructured play. Another element is imagination. Children do not need expensive toys—they can invent it all for themselves. If they have enough imagination, they might end up being politicians—goodness help the world.

Would it be appropriate, as part of the partnership with Parliament, to publish with a substantive stage 3 amendment a reason for that amendment so that members can consider it before going into the debate? Would the minister consider doing that?

I agree with various points by various members. I share Bill Aitken's view that too much legislation has been introduced. I did not know that 95 acts had been passed—it feels like more. That has had an impact on our scrutiny of bills. Another issue is whether we needed legislation in the first place or whether aims could have been achieved under the existing law or through policy changes. Members are right that, in general, stage 1 has been reasonable. I say that as a member of committees and as a former convener of the Justice 1 Committee and the Health Committee. However, stage 2 and stage 3 need to be  revisited. Committees have very little time to consider some stage 2 amendments. The number of substantive stage 3 amendments to the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Bill, on which no evidence could be taken and which could not even be discussed, brought the Parliament into disrepute. However, there have been high moments at stage 3. I remember stage 3 of the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Bill when we debated the proposed section on hydration and artificial nutrition. That was a serious moral debate in which—Carolyn Leckie will be glad to know—whips were not in operation and parties allowed members to vote according to their personal view. That was one of the high moments in the Parliament's debates. Post-legislative scrutiny must be carried out, but I will come to that issue when I deal with the role of regulations. Other good measures that the Parliament has introduced include free personal care, the issue of consent in the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 and the important asset of the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. Although some members might wish that freedom of information legislation had not been used by the press, many of us make use of the act. Another important measure is the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill, which might not be the sexiest or most interesting bill but is terribly worthy. However, a problem with the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill is that the bill amends existing legislation rather than provide for things in its own right. That just makes a mess of things. The bill is cumbersome and has been approached in the wrong way. I think that ministers and their legislative staff could have found a better way to draft that legislation. The real issue, as I mentioned previously, is the impact of regulations. The meat of the legislation is often to be found in regulations, yet substantive draft regulations have frequently not been available at stage 2. As every lawyer knows—and as everyone who has been on the end of the law will be aware—the devil is in the detail. That is what lead committees want most of all. I will move on to other issues because I want to pick up on points that have been made. Ministers could extend our freedom of information regime by using the provision in the act that enables them to extend the legislation to other agreed agencies. Freedom of information should be extended to housing associations, which are currently exempt despite the substantial role that they play in housing. An interesting point is that, under the equivalent legislation in South Africa, any private company that has a contract for services that are  wholly publicly funded is subject to freedom of information legislation, which extends to the terms of the contract. In Scotland, information on public-private partnership/private finance initiative deals is denied to MSPs because we are told that commercially sensitive information belongs to the private company. That makes something of a farce of openness and scrutiny. At the moment, the Communities Committee is like a sausage machine for legislation. It is not good for the well-being of committee members to be continually given legislation. They need to be kept flexible by having the opportunity to conduct inquiries and have a balance in their work. Some inquiries could even relate to the legislation that comes before the committee. There is a danger that some committees will become standing committees and lose the scrutiny function that they perform in inquiries. That is certainly what has happened to the Communities Committee. Another issue is that members' bills seem to get hijacked these days. Very few members' bills have been passed. For example, Stewart Maxwell's Prohibition of Smoking in Regulated Areas (Scotland) Bill was taken over by the Executive. The Executive also took over my proposed member's bill, which was taken into regulations. Members wonder whether there is any point in introducing a member's bill because any good idea will get nicked and the member will usually not get the credit. Presiding Officer, I am not sure how much time I have remaining because of the funny clock.

Let me make my final point. Many members of different parties are frustrated that the Parliament can deal only with devolved issues but the reserved issues impact greatly on what we are trying to do. I know that the minister sincerely wants to eradicate fuel poverty, child poverty and poverty amongst our pensioners—

However, until we can deal with housing benefit, pensions and macro-economics, the Executive's hands are tied. If the SNP came into Government under the same rules—although they will not remain the same—our hands would be tied. A huge issue is how we can turn Scotland round in things that matter while this Parliament does not have powers over those major issues. I remind the minister, in addition to all the procedural points that I have made, that devolution is a process rather than an end in itself.

I will focus not on the cures, but on the causes. Other members will debate the rights and wrongs of methadone; I agree that there is not a one-size-fits-all solution. I want to look back on an inquiry that the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee conducted in 1999 and 2000—the report was published in 2000. Unfortunately, much of what was said in that report pertains today. The report began by saying that the committee "had the impression, which was subsequently confirmed, that deprived communities, with poor housing, poor amenities and high levels of unemployment were the most seriously affected areas." I heard what Charlie Gordon said about Glasgow. One welcomes initiatives that work, but the reality is that because of the deprivation in some council wards in Glasgow, people are 200 times more likely to be admitted to hospital with a drug-related problem in those areas than in the most affluent parts of Scotland. Such deprivation is no longer located only in our urban conurbations; it exists in our small towns and rural areas, too. The minister referred to the Scottish drug misuse database, which is very useful. The most recent information reveals that last year in the Scottish Borders 31 young people under the age of 16 were reported to the database. That figure is an increase of 72 per cent on the previous year. As we know, deprivation exists not only in urban areas. There are particular difficulties for rural areas because young people there do not usually access either heroin or cocaine, but take what comes down in a suitcase from the urban areas. Members of drug action teams in the Borders have told me that such young people take a cocktail of drugs, which makes their problems more difficult. Access to support and treatment is difficult in rural areas because people do not want to be identified, but in a small community it is easy for people to know who they are. If treatment is available anywhere, the person is likely to have to make a long journey for which they might not have the bus fare because they have a chaotic lifestyle. The problems are compounded in rural areas. Deprivation has a knock-on effect on the family and when the system breaks down, the family can become a drug-using family. There are no simple answers. What the First Minister said was well meaning, but we must be careful, in certain circumstances, about removing children from parents who are drug users. The law of unintended consequences might mean that women and men who have children will not admit to using drugs because they fear that their children  will be removed. I appreciate that the issue is delicate and difficult, but it must be addressed. We must always remember that drug users are themselves victims. In the unfortunate case in East Lothian, we must remember that there is a mother whose child has died as a result of her drug addiction. That point must always be taken into account and we should not play the blame game. Such people are often deprived, they are often homeless and they are often put into prostitution. There are issues about the role of Cornton Vale, because most of the women are in there for committing acquisitive crimes to pay for drugs. When they come out of Cornton Vale, they find that support systems are not in place. It is all very well to say that we support the families, but 35 per cent of all social work posts have been vacant for more than six months and The Herald reveals today that there is a damaging shortage of foster carers. I know from speaking to people in the Borders that children are brought to foster carers in the Borders because there is nobody in Glasgow to provide that service. Those are serious issues. I know why we are pushed for time—I understand the Conservatives' point—but we should have a long debate on the issue. I would like the Communities Committee to go back to the 2000 report and investigate what has changed.

I think that that was a shot across my bows, Presiding Officer.  My speech is a game of two halves: it addresses inequalities at home and abroad. Many members have rightly referred to the fact that glass ceilings remain for women, although I shall end with an account of a woman who did break through a glass ceiling. Regrettably, women are still stereotyped in their work opportunities. Unlike MSPs, even when women do the same job as a man, they do not always get the same pay. The jobs that women do are often undervalued, not just in pay but by society. Inequalities and injustices that start in someone's working life continue into old age. In the Parliament, the Scottish Conservatives, the Greens, the independents and the Scottish National Party all have female leaders, which is to be commended. I look forward to the day when Margaret Curran joins those ranks.

It is only a rumour. Single women are also penalised throughout their lives. Twenty per cent of single elderly women live in poverty, because they rarely had continuous work to enable them to access the basic state pension. Only 16 per cent of them qualify for a full basic state pension, compared to almost 80 per cent of men. That problem is compounded by the fact that such women often do not have company pensions, either because of the nature of the work that they did or because of their other obligations in life. Figures from 2003 show that life expectancy is nearly 80 years for women and 73 for men. It is projected that by 2031, life expectancy will have increased to 83 years for women—despite all our turmoil and strife—and 79 for men. That will make poverty among very elderly women a real issue. It is right to refer to domestic abuse, although it is probably misnamed as domestic. Many older women live alone. Three quarters of the victims of bogus callers are women, and 90 per cent of them live alone, so they are victims again. Because it is international women's day, I will refer to our sisters abroad. First of all, I refer to Nayele Jekete, an extraordinary women. She is a midwife in Malawi, where women face a one in 13 chance of dying in pregnancy or childbirth. That is an horrific statistic. I will read a little quote that illustrates how she has to work: "Behind her workplace/home, it's hard to miss the dirty well shared with animals where Jekete draws water. Every day girls scrape a layer of scum from the surface to get to the fresher liquid below and Jekete boils the water over an open fire before using it. Her 'labour ward' is a two-roomed dilapidated house. The 'theatre' holds one wooden bed with a thin mattress. Most of her patients and newly born babies sleep on reed mats."  How many of us who have had children can imagine those circumstances and compare them to the places where we gave birth to our children? To compound that situation, one person in 10 in Malawi is infected with AIDS. Women are often the victims of husbands' promiscuity, as it is a sign of machismo to be promiscuous and not to use contraception. The knock-on effect is that women who want to breastfeed their babies cannot do so for fear of infecting them but, because the alternative is to use dirty water from dirty wells to give them mixed and artificial feeds, the babies die anyway, so the victim chain goes on. We had the W8 summit, which was the alterative to the G8 summit. There was hardly a woman in sight at the grand G8 summit—it was nearly all suits—but the W8 are eight wonderful women who came to the Hub and gave presentations. As a consequence of that conference, we have set up a group of W8 women in the Parliament. Each one of us from the different political parties, including the independents, shadows a different woman. I will mention a couple of those women. The one I shadow is a lady called Hauwa Ibrahim, who made a startling speech here in the Hub—it was breathtaking, quietly delivered and meaningful. She started her life in poverty and had to walk miles and miles every day to get clean water for her brother, because the priority in the family was that the brother would wash and eat first; the girls were the workhorses. However, Hauwa Ibrahim managed to train to be a lawyer and is now a major lawyer in northern Nigeria. Using Sharia law, she defends women who face being stoned for alleged adultery. She has to tread carefully, and she takes not a penny from the west for fear that she is accused of being corrupted by it. She has had to work carefully within Sharia law—I stress that point—to prevent young men from having their hands cut off for stealing loaves of bread because they were starving. She is an extraordinary woman indeed. Another extraordinary woman is Lornah Kiplagat. She is a world-class runner, but she did not have any fancy training. She ran miles and miles four times a day, backwards and forwards to school, and back home at lunch time to feed the cattle and back to school again. Quite through accident, it made her a world-class runner. At the first major meeting that she went to, in Nairobi, she slept in the public toilets, because there was nowhere for a female runner to sleep, and that was safer than sleeping on the streets. Now, she raises funds for young women in Africa to run. Those are two magnificent women. I commend the W8 group. We will work for simple things: wells for clean water; mobile phones, which are essential forms of communication in emergencies, rather than for  calling or texting pals to ask, "Where are you?"; and mobile radio stations. The tools are education and communication. One of the women in the W8 group is involved in that work. I will conclude with something that happened last night, which warmed the cockles of my heart. I was attending the Standard Life event at the Parliament, and a rather grand, stately lady approached us. I asked, "Who are you?" She replied, "I'm Ann. I run the bank." I thought, "I like the sound of that." I might be ahead of myself, but I quite like the sound of "I'm Christine. I run Scotland."

We have all been there. He has been on the wrong trains.

Stop digging.

I gave the example of the Norwegian economy and what it had done. That is where Scotland ought to be today, not where it is now.

Is the minister aware that in one Labour ward in Glasgow, life expectancy for a male is 54 years?

I am minded to ask whether, after the little  stramash that we have witnessed, the coalition is off to regenerate in some dark corner. I have a few preliminary comments to make with regard to the document. I advise the minister that it is not sufficient to intimate to my colleagues only 24 hours before a document is launched that it will be launched. That practice is becoming more prevalent and should be completely discouraged. The practice of issuing policy documents only 24 hours before a debate is unacceptable and makes a farce of any commitment from the coalition to open, accountable and transparent government. Given our other commitments, 24 hours is not sufficient time for us to consider a document. Either it is my imagination or the Executive's documents are getting glossier. Today's document contains lots of shiny pictures that pad out the text and, frankly, one loses the will to continue to page 64. Buried in the document, however, are some unfortunate gems. The document praises Glasgow Housing Association, which has told the Executive that it is short of millions of pounds that it needs to devolve its functions downwards. It praises Scottish Borders Housing Association, which is suing Scottish Borders Council because, it claims, it was overcharged on the sale of houses. It praises Scottish Water, whose chairman has just resigned, saying that he cannot meet the Executive's targets. On top of all that, the document maintains a commitment to keeping the right to buy, despite evidence from many housing providers that that policy must end. I mention those points to let the minister know that I have actually read the document. What of the cost of the document? Heaven knows. By the middle of last year, the Executive had spent £7 million on producing such documents, but when I ask parliamentary questions to find out who reads them and distributes them, it cannot tell me because it does not know. There has been a gestation period of two years since the setting up of a working group and, after seven years of Labour and the Liberal Democrats being in power, they are now taking stock. I think that they are looking at the failure of the past seven years. I know that because I read in The Herald that the plan comes two years after the First Minister was warned by business leaders that some of Scotland's poorest communities were being hobbled by bureaucratic confusion—I was here when he was told that. Further, a Scottish Executive spokesperson says: "Through the 1990s, there was big progress and England jumped ahead of us on this. This is us getting our act together." What has the Executive been doing for the past seven years? The spokesperson continues:  "Ministers are keen to be sharper, more innovative and fleet of foot." I say to Malcolm Chisholm that I cannot bear the sight of it. Fleet of foot? If I were being charitable, I would say that it was better late than never. However, it is not my job to be charitable with regard to the failures of those who are sitting opposite me. Millions of pounds have been poured into schemes, yet the deprived remain deprived. One in four children in Scotland still lives in poverty. The Executive is not on course to meet its target to eradicate child poverty by 2020. One in five pensioners lives in poverty but, of course, there is no target for that. Tens of thousands of young people are not in education, employment or training and some 39,000 manufacturing jobs were lost to Scotland in the first three years of the Liberal and Labour coalition. In 2003, a report by Cardiff University said that manufacturing in Scotland was in meltdown. In place, we have the ubiquitous call centre jobs, which offer low pay, no job security and no prospects. The many part-time jobs mask the actual unemployment rate.

In a moment. Low pay and—

I did not insult the member's constituents. I have constituents who work in call centres and they tell me these things.

I defend the workers in call centres because they are given low pay and no protection. As an ex-trade unionist, Duncan McNeil should be aware of the call centre in the Borders that will not allow trade unions in to enable the workers to have proper working conditions. That is my point. I remain a socialist. Duncan McNeil is not one. Scotland is energy rich. It is the fourth largest producer of gas in the world, yet we have the highest cold-related death figures in western Europe. Age Concern estimates that, in the past five years, 14,000 Scots died as a direct result of cold-related illness in the winter months. That is 23 Scots every winter day, but Mr McNeil turns his back on that because it is not important. With  every 5 per cent increase in fuel costs, 30,000 Scots are plummeted back into fuel poverty. If members count up the recent price rises—including the rises that Powergen announced today—they will find that more than 120,000 Scots have been put back into fuel poverty. That is the truth in the real world of real people, rather than the stuff of pretty pictures in glossy brochures. Members should consider Norway and the lies that we were told about Scotland and independence. We were told that the oil would run out and that we would be poor. The trouble is that we would not be poor. We would have been rich enough to spread the money around our people. In Norway—

I do not have time. Between 1997 and 2004, Norway built up a fund of money to invest in infrastructure, to give to its people and to build up resources. If we had such an oil fund, we would have £30.77 billion to build roads, bridges, railways and schools. We would not have the nonsense of public-private partnerships and the private finance initiative, which are costly and precarious. That money would build regeneration. The Executive proposes cosmetic things such as dealing with three parts of the country that are, incidentally, Labour strongholds. We wonder why. There is an election next year. Perhaps the Executive is tossing out its first election bribe, but the people know better. I move amendment S2M-4024.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes that after some seven years of this Labour/Liberal Democrat coalition and the launch of yet another glossy brochure littered with self-evident axioms, one in four Scottish children and one in five pensioners remain in poverty; further notes that tens of thousands of young people remain not in education, training or employment and that 39,000 manufacturing jobs have been lost in the first three years of this government and that, according to a report in The Herald on 28 February 2006, a spokesman for the First Minister stated regarding regeneration, "England has jumped ahead of us on this. This is us getting our act together"; therefore welcomes the Finance Committee's inquiry on deprivation spending, to report at the end of March, and recognises that, had the Scottish people not been deliberately misled about the impact of the energy reserves in the 1970s and the economic and social prospects of independence, poverty in Scotland would have been made history."

How ungallant.

I hope that Mary Scanlon is not going to ask a technical question.

Does Rob Gibson agree that the downgrading of the air ambulance service compounds the position on Flotta, where there is no longer a resident GP, as it does on all the outer islands? The people on Flotta are even more  disadvantaged by the downgrading and my sister, who is the head teacher there, has raised that issue at one of Jim Wallace's surgeries. We must not think that everybody in Orkney is in Kirkwall.

Will the member take an intervention?

As the minister knows, the Scottish National Party is fully supportive of the principle of the central heating programme; indeed, we wish the programme to be extended to low-income families, which is an issue that I have raised before. Given the punitive increases in fuel costs in the past few years, has the minister made representations to Westminster about increasing the £200 winter fuel allowance and extending that scheme to low-income families so that they can switch on any central heating that they have?

I declare my interest as a paid-up member of the SSPCA. I welcome the bill, which is wide ranging and places on individuals a duty of care towards their animals. I will confine my remarks to companion animals. I welcome the fact that the bill deals with animal sanctuaries, although it is not only the largest 50 sanctuaries that need to be addressed. As members may know from their constituencies, well-meaning people sometimes set up so-called sanctuaries that let down the animals, regardless of their intentions. I sometimes wonder whether I have an animal sanctuary. I have three cats of my own, but a few more are making a big effort to move in by nestling into the kitchen sofa. One of them is black with white paws. At some point, in spite of my wishes, I might find my house turning into an animal sanctuary. There is an issue about definition. When does the home of someone who takes in a few cats, willingly or otherwise, become an animal sanctuary? I welcome the important provision that only someone who is aged 16 or over will be allowed to own an animal. We should educate our young people on the purchase of animals and the time that needs to be dedicated to them, whether the animal in question is a hamster or a dog. I welcome, too, the sections in the bill that deal with the sale of animals—especially exotic animals—on the internet, which is a serious issue.  I will mention tail docking briefly. My instinct is to agree with the minister's position because it is difficult to define when a dog becomes a working dog. We should not offer a huge loophole for the docking of dogs, which is done, in the main, for purely cosmetic purposes. I will listen carefully to the arguments that are made at stage 2 and stage 3; I am open to persuasion. I see that a farmer is rising to his feet.

I hear what the member says. That is why I remain open to listening to the arguments. However, I will have to be fully persuaded that providing an exemption for working dogs would not create a loophole that would allow dog owners to continue to get their dogs' tails docked purely because they think that their dogs look better that way, which is the reason for the majority of the docking that takes place. I like to see dogs wagging their tails.

I hear what the member is saying. The issue is difficult. I have entered the debate on the bill only at this stage and I want to hear fully the arguments on either side. If—and it is a huge if—I am persuaded that, on balance, it is in the interests of a particular working dog for its tail to be docked to save it pain and suffering, and if the mechanism of tail docking is such that there is no pain and suffering to the dog and tail docking can be defined, I may be persuaded of the argument. I know that there were a lot of ifs and buts in what I have just said, but I need to be persuaded on the arguments. I remain open on the issue. Tail docking is not SSPCA policy. I am not in the chamber to argue its case but, if the questions that I have posed are answered, I can be persuaded. However, if I am to support the measure, those issues would first require to be addressed. I turn to an issue that the minister knows is close to my heart, which is the transportation of puppies to Scotland for sale in this country. The minister has undertaken to introduce measures with regard to that in the regulations that will follow on from the bill. We cannot regulate the trade, because it originates in the south of Ireland and comes into Scotland through ports in the south of the country via Northern Ireland, but I want to make the scale of the issue plain. We are not talking peanuts: the  dealers who bring the puppies into the country make hundreds of thousands of pounds. They charge £500 per puppy and yet bring them into the country in horrendous conditions. Five or six puppies of different breeds are often packed into carriers—small and large puppies squeezed in together—and yet we cannot prevent that from happening because the trade originates in another country. However, we can regulate for what happens in Scotland. I welcome the fact that the minister has undertaken to introduce measures by way of regulations. When the puppies arrive in this country, they are often very ill. Puppies have been found to be suffering from conditions and diseases including fleas, lice, diarrhoea, dehydration and urine scald; some have been found to have the deadly parvovirus. People buy them nonetheless; they look pretty—I have a picture of one with me—and people always love pretty puppies. People buy a puppy only to find that it is ill and, despite large veterinary bills, they often keep the animals and are heartbroken at their situation. People are trapped into supporting the trade. Anyone in Scotland who acquires a puppy for resale, either as an individual or as a trader, should have a record of the animal's life history. They should know where it started out, how it was transported, who its dam was and so on. The animal should have a microchip and veterinary checks should be done on arrival at the establishments where the puppies can be bought. Again, on arrival, the puppy should be vaccinated unless there is documentary evidence that that has been done in the country of origin. Perhaps, by regulating the trade in that way in Scotland, we can prevent the horrendous breeding of these animals in the south of Ireland. We have many issues to debate at stage 2 and stage 3. As usual, given that much of what is proposed will be introduced by way of regulation, the devil will be in the detail. I hope that we do not end up with a debate that focuses on tail docking, serious though that issue is, and that all the other issues are debated fully. My speech focused on animal welfare and did not touch on animal health, but that issue, too, is important, given that it impinges on animal welfare. I welcome the bill.

I have been truncated again. The bill is well meaning, although I think that it is misnamed. I agree with the points that Robin Harper and Rosemary Byrne made. Given that we know that many children's family structures do not involve parents, "Parental Involvement" smacks of another century. Unfortunately, we cannot change a bill's title. The minister says that the aim of the bill is to provide a stronger voice for parents, but I wonder whether it will. Perhaps the bill is just an exercise in rebranding. I never thought that I would defend a Conservative policy, but mercifully—thanks to Scottish parents—school boards were allowed to evolve. I was a member of the first school board at  Portobello high school, which adapted to what the school required. School boards throughout Scotland have adapted to suit the culture of their schools and to reflect the different cultures in primary and secondary education. I do not know where we are going with the bill. I do not think that by legislating we will ensure that more of those parents who do not take part in the education process, even when it affects their own children, will become involved in it. I speak as someone who taught for 12 years. I assure the minister that I could guarantee that the very parents whom I wanted to see on parents night were the ones who did not turn up. I knew which parents would come; they always did and we could have a love-in about their child. For a variety of reasons, the parents of children from disadvantaged backgrounds did not come. Building other structures will not change that, whether parents are from an ethnic minority, have a deprived background or are a single parent who cannot get out at night to go to the supermarket never mind attend any kind of meeting because they have young children to look after. The bill will not change those things. An issue that was reflected in evidence to the committee is the different cultures that prevail in primary and secondary schools. The parents of primary school children are invariably involved in all aspects of school life. They become involved in the PTA, help to raise funds and act on the school board. However, the culture in secondary schools is very different. That issue has to be addressed. My final point is on the selection process for senior staff. I have an idea to float—I realise that I should have done so more timeously and I point out that I am speaking personally. I am concerned about the fact that the casting vote for the appointment of a head teacher or a deputy head may not lie with a professional. There should be parental and local authority involvement in the process but, if I were being judged for the position of head teacher or deputy head of a school, I would want to be judged not by my peers but by those who have superior expertise and experience and who know the requirements of the post. I would not want to be put in the position of choosing my general practitioner, for example. A candidate may have a good bedside manner but be useless medically. The selection process is an issue; I hope that it will be addressed before the bill progresses any further. I understand why my colleagues have said that they will abstain in the vote on the motion and why Lord James Douglas-Hamilton has said that he will vote against it.

I wish to raise two points with the minister. First, I welcome the idea of a consolidation bill. Certainly, the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill, which we are considering, is not such a bill and, in my view, is a bit of a mess. Secondly, I raised the issue of regulations in my speech. Is the minister contemplating regulations that will define the role of a social worker, their duties and obligations, with separate regulations defining those of a paraprofessional?

Along with others, I recognise and want to address the complexity of the issues that face our social workers in an increasingly fragmented and tense society. Who could have known 20 years ago what social workers would have to deal with today? Although I agree with much of what Susan Deacon said about moving away from the difficult cases, we must realise that they are why we are here. It would not have been difficult to prevent some of those bad and tragic cases. I was closely involved in scrutinising the case of Miss X, a vulnerable adult in the Borders, and I had access to some of the files. The errors that occurred over a period of 20 to 30 years were heartbreaking. The background reasons were the social workers' very heavy case loads. Organisation of the material was difficult and the social workers were unable to prioritise. There were also interagency failures. Two or three people were involved in what happened to that woman and they all had separate files, but no one shared the information in them. There were failures in other agencies and the case reviews also failed because they did not happen. As the minister will know, all the warning signs were there all along and were obvious even to someone completely unskilled, such as me. There was a failure even to speak to the vulnerable woman herself. Most of all, there was a failure of senior management. Through that case, I now have a particular interest in the security of vulnerable adults, and vulnerable children become vulnerable adults very quickly, at 17 or 18.  I and my party are pleased that we are coming to grips with an issue that is not easy, and we hope that "Changing Lives" will help us to provide a social work service that is fit for this century. However, there are problems that are terribly difficult to solve, including boundary disputes, the silo mentality and cross-cutting issues. I hear what Susan Deacon says, but I am afraid that my experience is that the national health service protects its budget, social work departments protect their budgets and the criminal justice system protects its budgets. Let us consider the simple example of secure accommodation. Secure accommodation for children at risk would be funded by the social work department. Secure accommodation for children who are subject to a criminal investigation would be funded by the criminal justice system. I remember cases that we examined when I was a member of the Justice 1 Committee in which the social work department was having children moved over to the criminal justice system simply to get them a place. At that stage, members—to a man and woman—wanted single funding for secure accommodation. There are some simple tweaks along the way that could deliver for children, because the child who is at risk today may be the child who offends tomorrow while absconding from an unhappy home. I remember a case in Dalkeith in which the police had no option but to send a child back to the mother from whom he was running because there was nowhere to put him. For three days, he was at large in Edinburgh. Nobody knows what he was doing during that time, but he managed to eat, so he must have been stealing. There are clearly problems to resolve. Early intervention is commendable, but I listened carefully to the words of an experienced retired social worker who said on the radio that many social workers find that they are firefighting. Notwithstanding the good intentions of the minister and many members of the Parliament, I think that they will continue to firefight because of the shortage of social workers. I heard what Euan Robson had to say about increasing numbers, but the reality is that there is a 40 per cent shortage in greater Glasgow for a start. There are increasing demands on social work services that we cannot keep up with. The Executive's own "Changing Lives" document states: "Social workers are a relatively scarce specialist resource, making up only around 5% of the total social service workforce." I pick up on what Patrick Harvie and other members have said about paraprofessionals. We need to get to the meat of the argument. We need to know exactly what a paraprofessional can and cannot do. It is my understanding that the social  work service already employs people to do paraprofessional work—they are called social work assistants or resource workers. We need clear defining lines between what social workers do and what paraprofessionals do, and I welcome references to protection of title. I have had the opportunity to examine the information that makes clear the issues that front-line social workers must deal with. I suggest to the minister that that should act as the foundation for regulations, as recommended by the ADSW. We may even need guidance for social workers on exactly where they can go with work that could be done further down the line, because there seems to be a conflict between their involvement in early intervention and perhaps having paraprofessionals working at that level. We need answers to the questions that arise in that area. My colleague, Adam Ingram, raised another issue that I would like the minister to address: continuing professional development. In my former profession, law, one was not allowed to practise unless one got 18 of what I called brownie points each year. We had to upgrade our skills continually, and the same happens in many professions. The world changes fast under our feet and lawyers and other professionals cannot practise unless they upgrade their skills. What Euan Robson said about social workers valuing themselves was worthy, but they should also be appraised, they should upgrade their skills and they should be remunerated for that and be given status accordingly. I welcome structural change but, as Susan Deacon said, the huge issue for the minister is to achieve cultural change among the various agencies, which often protect one other and, to an extent, themselves. They must be prepared to share information, because what matters is not professional reputations or taking risks: it is the vulnerable adult or the vulnerable child, who is at the centre of everything. The agencies had best err on their side.

The minister will be aware that similar problems exist in the Scottish Borders, where there are very few low-rise buses. Commendable though concessionary free travel is, it is not much use to many borderers. Will the minister remind me of the date by when buses must be compliant with disabled access requirements? I think it is somewhere around 2020. Will he also advise  whether Scottish Borders Council has applied for quality contracts? I understand that those requirements can be written into contracts with FirstBus when it is providing bus routes because, as the previous question indicated, FirstBus tends to cherry-pick routes.

I remind the minister of the 5,000 children who live in fuel-poor households with no central heating. Is the Executive considering including those households in the central heating programme that is currently under review at a cost, I understand, of £1.9 million?

There is no focus.

The minister will not take an intervention.

Surely the minister accepts that we acknowledge the movement on Disclosure Scotland and are delighted with it, although it has  taken a bit longer than we hoped. The question that I asked earlier was about what has happened to the strategic funding review, for which we have waited for six years. That was a straightforward point for the minister to address, but she has not done so.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer—

I have three preliminary points. Members on this side of the chamber also commend all the people who work in the voluntary sector—especially the unpaid, the young and the old—from the person who serves in the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals shop in their local high street, to the people who work in the big beasts of the voluntary sector such as Age Concern, Help the Aged and Citizens Advice Scotland, which provide us with so much data in briefings that are essential to our work as MSPs. There are also the people who care for neighbours and friends and who might not realise that they are seen as being part of the voluntary sector, although they are. The quality of life of those neighbours and friends would be much lower without their volunteer carers. My second preliminary point is that I am not a fan of this kind of debate. It has no focus, so one wonders what its point is. The last thing we need is another volunteering debate that is all motherhood and apple pie. In May last year, the Deputy Minister for Communities said: "The challenge of the debate on the voluntary sector is that it poses a question for us all: How do we debate the voluntary sector without being cosy, precious or patronising ... ?"— [ Official Report , 19 May 2005; c 17075.]  Well, I was waiting for some meat from the minister—an announcement of some kind—but it did not come. Last night, I read the Official Report of the debate from May last year; parts of the minister's speech this morning were a rehash that could have been cut and pasted from that debate. My third preliminary point is about parliamentary time. In the Shirley McKie case there has been a £750,000 settlement, but the Minister for Justice cannot come to the chamber to make a statement. There was a slot available this morning. Worthy  though the voluntary sector is, we could have debated it at another time. I now want to move to the real meat of the debate, as raised by the minister last year. The main issue then was funding. Donald Gorrie, I and others pointed out the problems that were arising when projects did not receive continuous funding. The minister acknowledged our points and said: "We want to make it easier for voluntary organisations to do what they do best by focusing on service delivery. The Executive is committed to providing a rolling programme of three-year funding."— [ Official Report , 19 May 2005; c 17115.]  We therefore look to the strategic funding review. Where is it? It was announced in November 2000 but it has still not delivered. Five years on, charitable organisations, which are delivering more and more front-line services, still do not have secure funding. The Borders young carers service in my constituency supports 180 young people and has another 300 on its waiting list. Despite that, the service has had to scramble around for funding to keep its essential work going. More and more often, because of cuts in local government funding, the need to provide front-line services for vulnerable people is landing in the laps of voluntary organisations, but the funding streams of those organisations are insecure—not only the stream that comes directly from the coalition Government but the stream that comes from local authorities. No wonder, therefore, that I am aggrieved and cross about the way we are talking about the voluntary sector. Everything the minister said was true. The voluntary sector, as well as providing something altruistic for people to do, is a gateway that can help young people to improve their employment prospects. The voluntary sector also allows elderly people to contribute and to be valued, but we all know that. Let us talk about the nitty-gritty. The supporting people fund is at a standstill and in some areas it has been cut, which affects vulnerable people who may now have to rely on the voluntary sector—but the minister did not talk about that. Some things have improved. Following the Bichard report, the Minister for Education and Young People announced changes in respect of disclosure, which has been a huge burden on the voluntary sector; at last it has been acknowledged that the forms are too complicated. Many forms were being returned because people had put the wrong thing in a box, or had done it in the wrong colour of ink, or because there were multiple applications. What nonsense. Fathers who wanted to volunteer to help the local school with rugby training had to get disclosure forms. At last, it has been acknowledged that the disclosure form is  valid only on the day on which it is issued. Those are crucial issues that should be debated in Parliament. The minister is a good man at heart, but let us have a debate on the voluntary sector that touches on funding, Disclosure Scotland, and how the voluntary sector is being relied on more and more to deliver front-line services that social workers and allied professionals in the health service used to deliver. Let us debate those issues for a change.

I am glad that work is being done across departments. What interaction does the minister have with the Minister for Communities on the issue, given that poverty and deprivation are strongly linked to childhood obesity?

I do not want to go down the nostalgia route, but sometimes it is not necessary to reinvent the wheel. Does Robin Harper recall that children at primary school used to go on school camps? The teacher would take the pupils away for a week and give them various vigorous activities. That was good for the children physically, emotionally and psychologically.

In the first half of the 20 th century, obesity and severe obesity were rare. They were more commonly associated with the affluent classes, whereas today, regrettably, they are more likely to be found in socially deprived areas. In the past 50 years, obesity has increased so rapidly that, in many developed countries, it is normal to be obese and abnormal to be underweight. When the United States of America sneezes, we catch a cold tomorrow. In America, it is estimated that 61 per cent of adults are overweight. As Elaine Smith pointed out, the concern in Scotland is childhood obesity. When I look for the origins of the problem, I look back even further than breastfeeding—as I understand it, breastfed children cannot become overweight because the nature of breastfeeding will not allow that to happen—to pregnancy. If a mother eats badly, we might start even at that stage to have a child who will eat badly and become obese. The proportion of children in Scotland who are obese is double the United Kingdom average. The concomitant effects include the risk of type 2 diabetes, which is now common. Indeed, even type 1 diabetes is on the increase. As well as the physical dangers—fat children often turn out to be fat adults—there are social and psychological consequences such as stigmatisation, discrimination and prejudice, although sometimes there is an "it's fun to be fat" approach and people proudly display it. That is an understandable reaction, but we have to address it because of the illnesses that are linked to obesity. It would be fun to be fat if it were not for all the illnesses that follow as a consequence. I have to say that, in my childhood, we ate well. After the war, we ate simple food. We ate vegetables from the garden and the streets were our playground. There were hardly any cars and there were certainly no parked cars. Those days have gone. We must consider the lifestyle of children nowadays—this is not a health issue, but a lifestyle issue. There is a lack of physical activity. Children cannot play in the streets because of parked cars and people complaining. There are not enough sports facilities. Even sport in school is on the decrease from the horrible days when I was  made to vault horses and play hockey and netball in the pouring rain and the frost. Those days have gone, and we must get children back into activity. I want to address something quite sinister that happens to our children: in this consumerist society, sales are directed at children from an early age. McDonald's and the various other fast food outlets use pretty packaging and little gifts. It is extremely difficult for a tired parent to resist taking their child there. I know that there has been an attempt to address the issue recently, because of the bad image that it creates, but much of that activity is still going on. While we are driven by companies that see children, from an early age, as the consumers—the sweet buyers, the chip buyers and the chicken bite buyers—we will not be able to address childhood obesity as we need to. To some extent, we have attacked commercial activities in schools. I refer to the selling of fizzy drinks and the alleged sponsorship by chocolate manufacturers, for example, which allows people to get a computer if they collect a certain number of chocolate wrappers. That is the wrong signal to our children. In the short time that I have left, I want to make a simple point to the minister. This is an area in which Scotland can take the lead. I applaud Elaine Smith for raising the issue. Although some steps have been taken, I agree with her that we need a national campaign across all portfolios and ministerial briefs to address the problem. For once, perhaps, Scotland—which is such a wonderful producer of good food, which has plenty of space to exercise and which has good will—will deliver a healthy generation in the generation to come.

In that spirit, I remind the minister that 5,000 households with children in Scotland live in fuel poverty and have no central heating. Central heating could be installed in those households at an estimated cost of £1.6 million. In reviewing the regulations, will she take that into account and  consider lifting those vulnerable children out of the difficult circumstances in which they live?

Will the minister consider putting protocols in place for vulnerable adults?

I commend the social workers in Scotland, who have a difficult and often thankless task and provide a delicate service in difficult situations. The Joint Inspection of Children's Services and Inspection of Social Work Services (Scotland) Bill is not an attack on that service; rather, it aims to be supportive and constructive by helping people to share data. Before, data were there but the situation was like a jigsaw—information was available on Caleb Ness, on Kennedy McFarlane and, in my constituency, on Miss X, but it was not shared. The bill is a huge step forward. When services cross-reference and share information, children who are at risk can be identified and tracked and, perhaps more importantly, children who were not previously considered to be at risk can be discovered. Notwithstanding the fact that the bill's progress has been accelerated, there is agreement throughout Parliament that it is important. It is better to have the bill than not to have it, but the fact that it has been accelerated means that the codes of practice and protocols are even more significant. As I understand it, there will be separate codes or protocols for child protection and children's services. On confidentiality, it is difficult to strike the right balance between the rights of the child, the rights of third parties and the interests of the child. It will not be easy to achieve that balance and there may well be legal challenges when the codes and protocols are in place. However, taking on those challenges will be worth while if the bill protects a single child in Scotland from experiencing an horrific life that ends with an horrific death. The building in of disciplinary measures for breaches of confidentiality reinforces the significance of confidentiality. As the minister rightly said, staff are bound by their contractual obligations and employment obligations. That should provide a robust framework and a comfort to third parties who feel that their rights might be infringed. Implied consent is also a delicate matter but, subject to the protocols, I welcome the provisions in the bill. The people who do not want us to find out about children's records are the very people we should not have to ask. I appreciate that there might be difficulties about ages because in the bill "child" means a person under the age of 18. We have a conflict in Scotland because people can get married at 16, so there might be difficulties involving 16-year-olds and implied consent. However, I am sure that the minister will address that with the Education Committee and Parliament through the protocols. Finally, I will mention the issue of vulnerable adults, which I dealt with in the Miss X case in the  Borders all those years ago. I welcome the powers for social work inspectors to investigate and so on, but given that we are now familiar with the term "elder abuse"—we never thought that we would be—and that some vulnerable adults are like children, I would like the minister to provide for those people the same protection that we hope to provide for Scotland's children. I hope that the minister will consider putting in place protocols to protect vulnerable adults and elderly people. The bill is a worthy piece of work. As is always the case with legislation, the devil will be in the detail—that is, in the codes of practice and the protocols. As I said, I suspect that there will be legal challenges, but so be it. It is better to pass the bill and to put Scotland on the front foot in protecting its children. Abuse often takes place in the child's own home. As my colleague Fiona Hyslop said, the abuser is often not the stranger in the dark but the person at home, the neighbour or the friend of the family. The bill will provide support to Scotland's children. We commend it.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I thought that I was having a senior moment, but I am glad to say that I have not been having one. The bill, as introduced, is available for members, but there are no copies of the bill as amended at stage 2, which makes things difficult for members. I wonder whether those bills could be replaced.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will review the success of the new ways economic development strategy in the Scottish Borders, in the light of recent redundancies. (S2O-8732)

The minister is obviously reading from a different script from me—for which I am thankful. Now for the truth. When the strategy was launched more than six years ago, it promised increased prosperity and jobs in the Scottish Borders, but we continue to see sustained job losses in textiles, electronics, farming and tourism. The Scottish Borders has the lowest-waged economy in Scotland—the minister should know that from the statistics. Will he take the opportunity to visit Scottish Enterprise Borders and see what can be done to provide sustainable and decently paid jobs in this worst part of Scotland?

I mean for low wages.

Crap.

I am sorry.

To ask the First Minister what discussions he has had with the Prime Minister in respect of any planning issues associated with the development of a new generation of nuclear power stations for Scotland and the disposal of nuclear waste. (S2F-2064)

That is right. The First Minister will be aware that the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill says that the proposed national planning framework, which will have a 20-year span, must contain a statement of what his ministers consider to be priorities for that framework. The bill also says that ministers "are to have regard to any resolution or report of ... the ... Parliament" in considering that framework. Would a proposed nuclear power station or nuclear waste site require to be included in that framework? If so, and if Parliament objected to such an inclusion, what exactly would "have regard to" mean?

I advise the deputy minister that at a recent presentation by the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration, in response to my question about whether children could be deported while under investigation, I was given the straight answer yes. That flies in the face of a response last year from the Minister for Justice. I ask the minister whether the forthcoming protocol will deal with that issue and if so, how? If the situation remains as I have described it, does the minister share my concern that children are being deported from Scotland when they are under investigation by the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration?

A nation is known by its deeds, not by its words—and certainly not by its strategies. There is much to commend in the Government's good efforts in deprived areas of Africa, which it would be churlish not to recognise. However, against those efforts one must set our treatment of asylum seekers who come to Scotland—who have already  been mentioned—and our treatment of children who watch their parents being handcuffed and are forced furth of Scotland without having known any other place to live. Children who are deported from Scotland can even be investigated by the reporter to the children's panel and sent away with the very people who are abusing them. We let such things happen in Scotland's name. As a result, Scotland is hardly an ideal place in which to live and work. As members have said, such things fly in the face of the fresh talent initiative—they are total nonsense. Issues have been raised from our previous debate on rendition flights, which are mentioned in our amendment. We will be known by our deeds. Who is doing what? Where are they doing it? Who is investigating? That Senator Dick Marty has already accused European countries of remaining silent about the issue is interesting. He said: "all European countries should stop acting 'hypocritically' and decide whether or not to tolerate the dirty policies of Washington."

I am sorry, but I do not have enough time. I have only four minutes. Senator Marty said: "Since two, three years, the countries know what is happening. There are countries that have collaborated actively, and there are others who have tolerated. Others have simply looked the other way". To use the words of the famous Ming the merciless, see no evil, hear no evil, but let the evil be done—I added that last part myself. Senator Marty said that it is impossible for Washington to fly prisoners across Europe without anyone knowing what is going on, and that Governments throughout Europe are willingly being silent about camps in eastern European countries in which people are being tortured. What inquiries are taking place? The Council of Europe, Spain, Sweden, Iceland and the head of police in Manchester, on behalf of the Association of Chief Police Officers in England, are conducting inquiries, but we are doing nothing in Scotland. What is the definition of torture, which, according to Condoleezza Rice, is simply not taking place? For Colin Boyd, under Scots law, torture occurs when "severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person for such purposes as obtaining from him or a third person information or a confession".— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 22 December 2005; S2W-21581.]  Of course, that is not the United States's definition. It has defined enhanced interrogation techniques as follows:  "Grab: the interrogator grabs a suspect's shirt front and shakes him ... Slap: an open-handed slap to produce fear and some pain ... Standing: Prisoners stand for 40 hours or more, shackled to the floor. Said to be effective, it also denies them sleep and is part of a process known as sensory deprivation ... Cold cell: a prisoner is made to stand naked in a cold, though not freezing, cell and doused with water ... Water Boarding: the prisoner is bound to a board with feet raised, and cellophane wrapped round his head. Water is poured onto his face and is said to produce a fear of drowning". Would not we call such things torture? I appreciate that most of the airports in Scotland are not subject to the Parliament's investigations, but two are—Inverness and Wick. Highlands and Islands airports fall within the Scottish Executive's remit. There have been five Central Intelligence Agency flights to Inverness and two to Wick—that information was obtained from the US Federal Aviation Administration under American freedom of information legislation. I suggest to the minister that he should investigate matters and start by looking at the logs for Inverness and Wick airports, over which he has jurisdiction. He should do so here and now and then report to the police.

It is just a flirtation.

Is the minister aware of the excellent work being done at a day clinic at Borders general hospital? I know that the minister has visited it. It specialises in clients who have Parkinson's and  treats them clinically and holistically. I recently met 100 of those clients. Could I suggest that, as part of the review, either the minister or the deputy minister goes to that day clinic, meets the professionals and clients and learns from them about how they deal with such a dreadful and debilitating disease while keeping up their morale and staying in the best health possible?

I will confine my remarks to the unfairness of the council tax system and the benefits of a local income tax. What I will say follows on from what the member who spoke prior to me said. It is trite but true to say that taxation should be fair and collectable, but council tax fails on both principles. Council tax is difficult to collect and is not based on the ability to pay. The elderly and the vulnerable—those on low pay—are most disadvantaged by the system. That is not only my view but the view of pensioners throughout Scotland and the view of Citizens Advice Scotland, which has said: "Scotland's system of local government taxation causes significant hardship." It has pointed out that bureaux in Scotland dealt with 14,000 new cases relating to council tax benefit last year and that a further 3,500 cases concerned council tax debt. We are talking about very vulnerable people. As has been said, council tax has risen by 55 per cent since 1997. As John Swinburne rightly said, pensions have not kept pace with the increases. If we consider also rising fuel costs—people cannot restrict such costs, unless they sit in cold homes—we see that the vulnerable and  poor are being squeezed. Although it is difficult for us to do anything about fuel costs, there is something that we can do: we can substitute a local income tax for the unjust council tax. The council tax benefit system is a nightmare. Forget the complexities of the pension tax credit system, which I remember demonstrating in the chamber when I brought in a 68-page form and asked somebody to complete it during the debate. Doing so was impossible. The council tax benefit system is equally complex. I have looked at the Help the Aged website, which has pages on collecting council tax benefits. The website mentions the alternative maximum council tax benefit, which I had not even heard of. Working examples are given. There are administration costs and costs in human lives. In fact, 48 per cent of pensioners who are entitled to claim council tax benefit do not claim it. One in four of those on low incomes does not claim it because the system is so nightmarish.

We would simply not need such a system because people would pay for their local services according to their ability to pay. Such a system would be clean and clear. Everybody would understand it. Nobody likes paying tax, but people understand income tax. Twelve of the countries in the European Union have a local income tax system. Such a system is already being used—there are models throughout Europe. I am thankful that the Liberal Democrats support such a reasonable system, which everybody understands. The Deputy Minister for Finance, Public Service Reform and Parliamentary Business would support such a system.

I want to make progress. I will let the minister in later if I have enough time to do so. Other members have dealt with the figures, but what is happening on the ground? We all know what is happening. There are case studies in members' in-trays. There are cuts in the laudable care in the community programme. There are no social workers or district nurses to go out and there is no support. Aids and adaptations are delayed because there is no local authority funding to provide them. The knock-on effect is that people stay in hospital. They are assessed for discharge but cannot come out of hospital  because the support system does not exist because there is no money for it. They are institutionalised, they decline and they are reassessed. There is a mess that need not exist and that would not exist if there was appropriate funding. Members have laudable principles relating to care in the community and to residential homes for people who need to be fully supported, but there is not enough money for such homes and they are therefore closing. I will take a simple example from the Borders: shopping. People used to have somebody to take them out to do their shopping once a week or to get their shopping for them, but such services have been cut in order to save peanuts. That is what local authorities are doing. They are impinging on people's human dignity and independence at a basic level. There is not even enough funding to allow schools to meet the presumption that children with special needs will be educated in mainstream schooling. Small rural schools are closing in order to save money and so that the properties can be sold off. Those are the cases in my in-tray. The elderly, people on low incomes and the disadvantaged, who have to pay council tax although they cannot afford to do so, are the very people whose services are being cut. They are also the very people who cannot afford to pay for their fuel and are sitting in cold homes. Yet the deputy minister stands there and defends the council tax system. He defends cuts at the basic level. He should be ashamed of himself, but I have a feeling that he will not be in the job for much longer.

I concur with much of what Gordon Jackson has said, and I would not for one minute accuse any member of this Parliament of endorsing torture flights. I, too, have a definition from America—even worse than the one that Gordon Jackson read out—of torture as anything likely to lead to death or organ failure. It is important to note that our definition of torture is completely different from the American state's definition. All the examples of torture that he gave would not be considered torture, as defined by America, which also euphemistically refers to abduction as "extraordinary rendition" and talks about the various practices that he mentioned as "enhanced interrogation techniques". Such business-speak shames everyone, when we  consider what actually happens to people when they are abducted. There are three issues. Are people being abducted? Yes—there is lots of evidence from throughout the world that people are being abducted. As other members have said, inquiries are taking place all over the world. In Canada, a public inquiry is being conducted on behalf of an individual who was most horrifically treated. There are inquiries elsewhere too; the Council of Europe is having an inquiry. Are people being transported for torture? Yes—the evidence is everywhere. Are flights landing in Scotland? Yes—the evidence is that they are. As Chris Ballance said, evidence of a flight exists. A press statement from Reprieve states: "Flight logs demonstrate that the ... CIA-leased plane that delivered Reprieve's client Binyam Mohammed to torture in Morocco and transported Reprieve's clients Bisher Al Rawi and Jamil El Banna to torture in Afghanistan landed numerous times in Scotland, apparently for refuelling." Of course, ordinary people would not know that the plane was in for refuelling, because that was done secretly. The statement continues: "The plane is a Gulfstream V jet with the registration N379P (later re-registered as N8068V and then as N44982)." That is on the record—let it be part of the investigation that should take place. We know about the issue because of the plane spotters who were at the airports and saw strange events. At the time, they did not know that the CIA was involved, but they found out that the Gulfstream V was identified as being used to abduct terror suspects. One of the plane spotters said: "I have seen the planes land in daytime and I've seen them land at nighttime. You never see anyone get off them. Most of the time they are just coming in to refuel, but the ones coming in at night you would expect to see people getting off. But you don't—at least, I never have." He did not know what he was on to, he was simply spotting planes. Gordon Jackson commented on the arguments that the American state—not the American people—use to justify the cruel definition of torture that has been laid before members. The US says that, in the world in which we live, the measures are necessary to prevent terrorism. It is a cruel irony that, although we hope that regimes that treat people horrifically will grow to democracy and the rule of law—although not through intervention, as happened in Iraq—we have condoned a breach of the very rule of law and the democracy that we seek to uphold. That should not be done in our name.  I agree with Jim Wallace that we do not have power over airports, but we have power over crimes. If crimes are being committed on Scottish soil, we are involved in them, art and part. The Scottish Parliament has a role in the matter. Jim Wallace's colleague Menzies Campbell does not impugn the leadership in London, but he has made it plain that a hear-no-evil, see-no-evil attitude cannot prevail. He said: "Because there are no records and because there are no requests ... doesn't mean ... that extraordinary rendition may not have been taking place". How much more pressure must both Parliaments put on the Government here and the Westminster Government to ensure that immediate action is taken to investigate the flights, on which the evidence is all around for us to see?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it not inappropriate that there is nobody on the front bench during the debate?

rose—

rose—

I commend Des McNulty on a thoughtful and heartfelt speech. How can we possibly realise what it must be like for these people on the hillsides? An earthquake of magnitude 7.6 struck them on 8 October. It was far more powerful than the tsunami—in that regard, I endorse many of the points that Des McNulty made. It is estimated that around 80,000 people in that region were killed instantly. However, many more were injured. We saw the harrowing sights of bodies, partly exposed under mountains of rubble and the remains of the homes of many of Pakistan's poorest people. There were tens of thousands of people with injuries and, although we have worthwhile and hopeful images of a few people being plucked from the rubble, we have more images of men and women lamenting over the loss of entire families. Those images have now given way to pictures of figures huddled around pathetic little fires made out of meagre sticks, of barefoot children in flimsy clothing with the bitter winds of winter upon them  and of people of all ages with infected wounds who have been brought in from remote areas where their injuries have been untreated for months. It is estimated that more than 3 million people are homeless and without shelter in Pakistan—imagine three out of every five Scots being without a home and without shelter. I will quote an article about the experience of one family in Nullah Chambarr in Pakistan. It says: "When rain or snow pelts the muddy woods and terraced fields of Muhammad Yunus' mile-high mountainside, his family members scramble to the crude tent that has been their shelter since the Oct. 8 earthquake. All 32 of them. The family built a frame of sticks and branches, then covered it with a canvas tarp, some flour sacks stitched together and woven plastic mats. On the ground, they spread grass mats and thin, cotton mattresses salvaged from their destroyed or damaged homes after an earthquake that left 3.5 million homeless. Even when packed with blanket-wrapped bodies at night, the tent is frigid. Many of the 20 children have coughs and runny noses." One member of the family says: "Thanks to God, none of us has gotten any bad sickness". Relief that is available is not always easy for people to reach. The father of that family and those of other families make long journeys to try to obtain cover for the bleak winter ahead. As Des McNulty says, we face a horrific situation in which people might have survived the earthquake only to be killed by the cold. The problem is incremental. It is not as sexy as the tsunami—if I may say that without sounding frivolous. It is a parked disaster and it is not being given the attention that it requires. The charities that are involved say that the immediate requirements are medical care and medicines for the injured. All the Government hospitals were destroyed. Teams of independent doctors are there, but they have few facilities in which to work. It is reported that the army medical camp at Muzzafarabad has no bandages, gauze or painkillers. The horror for the people there is something that we can hardly imagine. There is also a need for shelter and clothing as winter sets in. I commend the relief agencies that are involved. I cannot mention them all, but they include Save the Children, Direct Relief International and Architects for Aid, which is providing shelters for the animals on which people depend for food—the animals are their future. I also commend the efforts of the many organisations of Pakistani origin that are involved, including the Imran Khan earthquake relief fund and the Pakistani eminent lawyers earthquake relief fund. If one does an  internet search on the Pakistani earthquake, one gets some 6 million hits. However, there is a huge problem of co-ordination. The public's generosity is to be welcomed, but I would like to see a worldwide strategic team that is ready to step in to meet needs at very short notice in the early days.

Susan Deacon eloquently described what I, too, would have liked the bill to do, which is to give cohabitants even more protection than is being offered. We know that many people in society think that they have established what they call a common-law marriage—a marriage by cohabitation with habit and repute—but by the fact that they say that they live together there is no repute, so they have no protection. The bill is not before time. I support the Executive's amendment 18 and oppose the amendments that my colleague lodged. Fergus Ewing made it plain from his speech that picking one year as an arbitrary time is nonsense. If people had stayed together for 11 months and 30 days, they could not establish that they were cohabitants, but if they had stayed together for 12 months and one day, they would automatically have the right to be cohabitants. That is ridiculous. I can imagine the court disputes that would arise over when cohabitation started in order to squeeze in extra days and weeks, so Fergus Ewing's amendments would not reduce litigation. We must keep the bill flexible, as the minister's amendment is. One must always consider the facts and circumstances of a relationship. I will give an invented example. Two elderly people have known each other for years, their spouses have died and they are on their own. They remain friends and decide to move in together—to cohabit and to live together as man and wife. Regrettably, one of them dies two months into the relationship. In all those circumstances, we could see that they had made a commitment, but lack of time took away their opportunity to establish that they were cohabitants under the criteria that Fergus Ewing tries to set. The presumption that would be provided for by amendment 18A is equally nonsensical. If we accepted such a presumption—which is Fergus Ewing's plan B—in the case of the couple in the plot that I related earlier, the surviving cohabitant would find that the presumption operated in his or her favour if the couple had been together for 12  months and a day but not if they had been together for 11 months and 30 days. We should not handicap sheriffs in that way. Sheriffs are perfectly capable of considering the facts and circumstances, as they do in cases of matrimonial breakdown. In the circumstances of the elderly couple in my example, the sheriff would be able to say that they were cohabitants and that the surviving partner was entitled to certain legal rights. In other circumstances, the sheriff would be able to decide otherwise. I support Executive amendment 18 and I reject the amendments in the name of my colleague, Fergus Ewing.

In answer to Margaret Mitchell's point, I comment that local authorities can commission the services of the voluntary sector. Amendment 44 tries to ensure a duty on local authorities to provide family support services, the provision of which, as Mary Mulligan made plain, is patchy throughout Scotland. That is particularly true of mediation services, which can remove many difficulties and shorten the amount of time that divorcing couples spend in court. I want to return to an issue that I raised this morning on contact centres. I am worried that, if we do not put a duty on local authorities to provide such centres, the present situation will continue—in some areas, solicitors can make referrals to contact centres but, in other areas, solicitors simply do not have that facility. A contact centre can be important at the abrasive stage of a broken-down relationship, as it can allow the parents, on neutral ground, to work their way to a civilised method of contact with their children. The  sooner we get parents who are in such circumstances to a contact centre, the better. Finally, I ask the minister whether compliance officers will have a role with regard to contact centres.

I, too, am listening carefully to the minister. He is simply informing us of the existing position in law. Parents must understand that a court order is not made lightly and that it is contempt of court to breach it. All that will be given is information—nothing substantive is changing.

Although I have a great deal of sympathy with amendment 41, I will not support it. Anyone who can show an interest in a child can make an application to the court at present—I use the word "interest" in its legal sense. Grandparents, aunts, uncles or associates who have been involved in the life of a child may already seek a contact order, residency or some role in a child's life. Children—often surprisingly young children, perhaps eight or nine—can be questioned by a sheriff if it is felt that they can  express themselves about what they want to happen in their lives. There are many good sheriffs on the bench who specialise in the sensitive area of family law. Grandparents often play a supportive role in relationships, although, as I learned in my 12 years of practice, some grandparents can be mischief makers when a couple are trying to reach a divorce settlement—they may pitch parents one against the other by saying things such as, "I wouldnae let him have access to the weans." Grandparents are like everybody else: a mixed crowd. It is good to bring the issue of wider family members to the chamber and sheriffs should take cognisance of it. However, we should not enshrine it in statute.

I am beginning to feel as if "Finally, I call Christine Grahame" is my tune for the day. I had thought that you were going to say that I could squeeze in a two-minute speech—that could have been your other line, Presiding Officer. This has been an interesting debate. I say to Paul Martin that my father is 90, and he has internet access—there are plenty of them out  there. I thank Euan Robson for telling me that there is something called an appliance population. I will bear that in mind. The subject of the debate is of course serious. Tommy Sheridan and others hit the nail on the head in saying that the real root of the problem is poverty. It is as simple as that. I am afraid that this Parliament is very limited in respect of what it can do about poverty. The measures that have been taken are, however, to be commended, including the warm deal and the central heating programme, although it could be improved and extended. At the moment, people are excluded from it if they have two working radiators in their house. That is wrong. In harsh financial terms, if we keep people warm, we save money through their not suffering ill health. Some of the statistics are absolutely disgraceful for an energy-rich nation, and there has not really been an improvement in the number of excess winter deaths. According to a parliamentary written answer that I received, there were 2,310 excess winter deaths in 1994-95. In 2003-04, that figure had gone up to 2,840. Nothing has happened to improve the situation; it is getting worse. In the peak years of 1998 to 2000, when there was an influenza epidemic, the figure doubled to 5,000 excess winter deaths a year. As has already been said by Margaret Ewing and others, with the current threat of a flu pandemic combined with a severe winter, it is not scaremongering to say that the figure might rise considerably again. The reality is that one in five pensioners in Scotland lives in poverty. John Swinburne was quite right to mention that a third of people who are entitled to pension credit simply do not apply for it. I once brought the form into Parliament. It has about 68 pages, and people need a PhD in form filling to get the credit. That is a bar to pensioners' receiving the credit. Four out of 10 of those who are entitled to council tax benefit do not apply for it. If we consider other statistics for elderly people, we find that 37 per cent of them are living in fuel poverty. If we add to that the 10 per cent who are on the cusp of being in fuel poverty, half of pensioners cannot afford to heat their homes. That is not the case in Finland or Denmark. In Finland, there is only a 10 per cent excess in winter deaths; in Denmark, it is 12 per cent. In Scotland, it is 16 per cent. We are top of the wrong league. The Scottish Gas and Help the Aged partnership recommended that a lead be taken on commissioning research into the many contributory factors to excess winter deaths. I know that that is not being done, because I asked a parliamentary question about research and was told that no study in those specific terms was  being undertaken. That was a year ago, and there has not been an update. We need to be honest and to examine what can be done with our limited powers. We have to conduct research on what can be done about poor insulation, on the fact that people are not getting their benefits, and on the facts that people have old appliances that do not work properly and they do not know how to maintain an even temperature in their homes. Some people think that switching all the heating off and then putting it on in quick blasts is an efficient way to bring a room up to a decent temperature, but exactly the opposite is the case. As with my question to the First Minister about childhood obesity and deprivation, the answer is always about poverty. It is as simple as that.

To ask the First Minister what research has been undertaken by the Scottish Executive into establishing any links between childhood obesity and social deprivation. (S2F-2003)

I thank the First Minister for that very full answer and I welcome the steps that have been taken. He talks about patterns of food buying in deprived areas, but we know that people in such areas do not always have the luxury of choice. They may need to buy cheap  foods, which often have poor nutritional value and may lead to ill health and obesity. Does the First Minister agree that until poverty, which is the root cause of deprivation and ill health, is dealt with, his Government's efforts, no matter how laudable—and we applaud them on this side of the chamber—will not tackle childhood obesity and deprivation? Until this Parliament has the power to deal with low pay and unemployment, we will be firefighting rather than resolving the underlying problems.

I, too, welcome the amendments. I share Pauline McNeill's concern about the lodging of substantial new amendments at stage 3. Nevertheless, the amendments have arrived and they are welcome. They remedy an injustice that is a consequence of people not realising what will happen on divorce—or, sometimes, unfortunately, of a solicitor's negligence, if they have not looked carefully at all the documents. The amendments are welcome because they will ensure that the true intentions of the deceased are reflected.

You make that sound terribly exciting, Presiding Officer. As I have said before, I practised as a family lawyer for 12 years. In my unfortunate experience, only one couple reconciled. The duty of a solicitor is to reconcile—it is not to rubber-stamp divorces. Divorces are always painful, personal and individual. However, the reality of life is that, when one party has decided that a marriage is at an end, it is at an end. I welcome the Executive's amendments, which I will support. It is proposed that there should be a minimum separation period of one year in cases of uncontested divorce, but consent can be withdrawn at any time. If that happens, people will have to wait two years to divorce. There are also fault divorces. The problem has been with the five-year separation period that is currently required in cases of contested divorce. Over all my years as a family lawyer, my experience was that, the longer  a divorce took, the more bitter disputes over children and property became and the messier the situation became. One partner may have moved on to a new partner and may have another family. Margaret Mitchell mentioned the Faculty of Advocates, but these days it handles very few divorces. It handles only those divorces that involve complex, perhaps international, law, severe difficulties with children or vast numbers of complex property rights. It does not really deal with—I hate to call them this—the run-of-the-mill divorces that many of us have been through. Like Margaret Mitchell, I divorced after 25 years of marriage. [ Interruption. ] I am sorry—I meant to say Margaret Jamieson. I assure members that divorce was not a step taken lightly, either in my experience or in that of the clients who came over my doorstep. I welcome the position that has been adopted. I would add that no sheriff will grant a divorce of consent if they are not satisfied as to the welfare of the children. That is an important point to remember.

Will the minister take an intervention?

In my many years as a family lawyer, one of the great problems was provision of contact centres, particularly in rural areas that have greatly dispersed communities, when there are disputatious arrangements for children. There is a huge difficulty in providing neutral territory at the early stages of separation and divorce where parents can have contact with their children. I ask the minister to consider that.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I shouted "No."

I rise to speak to the amendment in my name and to support the motion and the amendment in the name of Margaret Mitchell. I recognise the serious and sustained commitment of the coalition and Parliament to do all that politicians can to eliminate violence against women in all forms—physical, emotional, psychological and exploitive. I endorse the sentiments in the Conservative amendment. it acknowledges the invaluable work of charitable organisations such as Barnardo's, Rape Crisis Scotland, Scottish Women's Aid and others, which not only support victims—women and their children—but fund research and provide  invaluable briefings for politicians, for which I thank them. However, in this short and unfortunately necessary annual debate, I will focus on the attitudes and the cultural environment that encourage young girls—let alone teenagers—who are nowhere near their teens to dress in a sexually provocative fashion, all in the interests of selling products. That is a difficult path to tread, because I could be accused of saying, "She asked for it because of the way she dressed." She did not. I repeat: she did not. As the motion and my amendment say, such attitudes must be challenged constantly. They are the excuse of the cowardly and the ignorant and of those who assault, violate and degrade women by their actions. However, that is unfortunately not the view of a substantial percentage of the public. A recent poll revealed that 45 per cent of Scots think that a woman had a degree of responsibility if she was raped and had worn "sexy clothes", and that 37 per cent think that she is totally or partially to blame if she was "flirty". I do not support those views at all, but they require us to consider the responsibility of the paper and electronic media which day in and day out, in public places that the eye cannot avoid or where there is no remote switch, present images of scantily clad or near-naked girls and women in overtly provocative poses. Such images, which can be found on bus shelters and bill boards or in the newspaper of a man sitting on the bus, are used to sell anything from TV programmes—think of the voyeuristic and titillating promise of live sex on "Big Brother"—to newspapers such as the News of the etc , to lawnmowers. Images of young girls are often the best selling aid. Images of the female body beautiful have long been prevalent in the work of artists, photographers and film makers of the distant and recent past, both in erotic and pornographic depiction, but the sexploitation and dehumanisation of the female form have accelerated as a result of the electronic age, combined with commercialisation and mass consumerism. Our social environment is a heady breeding ground for the violator, the rapist and the exploiter of women. There are magazines that would rob girls of their childhood and propel them into a premature sexually aware adulthood. Gone are the days when 10-year-olds teetered around in their mothers' stilettos and played with lipstick and powder; now, the make-up for young girls is real and is marketed directly at them. I am thinking of magazines such as Bliss , which gives away make-up, shows 14-year-olds how to look 19 and entices girls to spend their pocket money with the promise of "a hot new body". Bliss , which  is the fastest- growing magazine for young girls, has headlines such as "Be sexy, be sussed" and "Look 5 years older in 5 minutes", for an article in which a 14-year-old undergoes "a makeover which actually convinces an older boy she is 25." The magazine is estimated to have about 257,000 buyers, half of whom are under 15. However, despite criticism, its editor claims that it is "providing a service to girls which is absolutely essential". How can that be when it has cover lines about a "pervy sex cult" and 21 pages of "sexy secrets"? It is no wonder that a recent BBC poll found that nine out of 10 adults want toughened controls on children's publications that are seen to promote sex. I repeat that the situation does not excuse for a moment any unwanted sexual or violent actions, but it creates a climate of dehumanisation of the female form. The ultimate extension of that perception of women is the sex-trafficking trade. Women are taken from small impoverished villages in, for example, Albania or Lithuania with the promise of au pair work or English lessons, are sold on to a brothel for a few thousand pounds and then sold on again and again, like cattle. Regrettably, when they are liberated, the women are returned to their countries, again like cattle. That is a blight on our society. I am no Mary Whitehouse; indeed, I am very much a libertarian, but the commercialisation of sex and the sexploitation of women and young girls have come at a high cost to the many women who have been traded, raped, sexually abused or suffered other forms of violation. If the media cannot regulate themselves and be responsible for the consequences of their actions, politicians should seek to make them responsible. I move amendment S2M-3670.2, to insert at end: ", and further, in challenging the attitudes which place the blame on the woman and not the perpetrator, condemns the overt sexualised representation of young women prevailing in a range of publications, electronic or paper, driven by commercialism, which presents women as objects rather than individuals."

I appreciate that one of the protocols at work is that the minister is not allowed to share the legal advice that he has received. However, I presume that the Executive has taken senior counsel on the assessors' findings and decisions.

I congratulate Alex Neil on securing the debate, which is on a niche issue that is important nonetheless. As I speak late on in the debate, most of the wise and informed words have already been said and I suspect that I will not add many more. I have taken great interest in what members have said, particularly Elaine Smith's comments  about the precedent of students in multiple occupancy homes or shared accommodation who have keys to their door. It seems a strange legal interpretation that a different rule applies to people in very sheltered accommodation, who are in a similar situation. I am bewildered by the law on that point. I am grateful for the clarification of the distinction between very sheltered accommodation, in which people have a room with shared facilities, and sheltered accommodation, in which people are in separate flats, even though a warden may be in situ. I concur with the point that unnecessary distress has been caused to many vulnerable elderly people and to the many people who feel that they may now be in the pipeline to pay council tax. I do not point the blame at the assessors, who applied the law as they thought appropriate, although I have in the past raised the issue of whether it should be the law. To be frank, the problem is the law of unintended consequences. I hate to state it again, but the old saying is, "Legislate in haste and litigate at leisure." I agree with Derek Brownlee that the Executive tends to push through legislation without giving the Parliament a proper chance to consider what may happen down the line. We have just passed the Housing (Scotland) Bill and other bills that will impact greatly on people's lives. Perhaps we should build into our legislation a clause that allows us to review and amend it without going through the formal primary legislation amendment procedure that may be necessary in the case that we are discussing. Subject to any other legal finding, I do not see how the Executive can change the present situation other than by changing the law that is the source of the problem. Given that I am left the scraps of the debate—although I by no means complain about that—I seek your permission, Presiding Officer, to broaden out my comments.

I am obliged. The issue that I want to raise is not too far off the mark and is connected to the debate. Many pensioners, including those in very sheltered accommodation, do not claim their council tax benefit—a third of those who are entitled to it simply do not claim it, which compounds the problem. Single pensioners have a pension of £82 a week. A third of eligible people do not claim the pension credit that takes them to £132 if they are married. On top of that, they do not claim their council tax benefit and they may suffer from fuel poverty.  We know the choices pensioners make: the first bill they pay is for rent and council tax; the second is for food; the final bill is for fuel, so they will have to cut back on that. The issue that we are discussing compounds the existing poverty among our pensioner population. I am most obliged to you, Presiding Officer, for giving me leeway to make that point. I ask the minister to clarify whether the solution is to amend the primary legislation; to issue guidance on interpretation—although I doubt whether that can be done; or to challenge in good faith the basis on which the assessors reached their conclusions, given the precedent that was established with regard to students in houses in multiple occupation. Indeed, I think that that nails the argument. I will be pleased to hear what the minister says.

To ask the Scottish Executive what concerns it has in respect of the provision of bus services in the Scottish Borders. (S2O-8285)

Is the minister aware that in many communities in the Borders there is next to no bus service and the oldest fleet is used? Those factors contribute to preventing people in the Borders, where the lowest wages in Scotland are paid, from breaking the cycle of social exclusion and finding work. Against that background and the recent derisory 2.9 per cent increase in grant-aided expenditure to Scottish Borders Council—1.9 per cent of which is ear marked for ring-fenced Scottish Executive commitments—where is the flexibility to improve public transport in the Borders and therefore social inclusion?

rose—

I am ever so slightly older than Alasdair Morgan and therefore slightly older than Roseanna Cunningham. I remember black-and-white televisions—I see that the Presiding Officer is nodding—that had screens that were 9 inches square while the back was the size of a house. In any event, that is not particularly relevant to the debate. Of course, the Borders is the first test bed for the switching off of analogue and moving into digital. Many of the issues that members have raised about difficulties with reception in certain geographical patches were evident at a recent meeting in Galashiels with Gary Robertson of BBC morning radio fame. It turned out that many people  in the audience could not get Channel 5, which meant that the set-top box would be of no use to them. I had a set-top box at one stage. They are not that easy to use; they cannot just be plugged in and set off. We can plug it in to find that nothing happens because it is very sensitive. I found that I had to get an engineer in to sort my set-top box and—this was the crucial issue—he said, "Hen, it's your aerial." He went up on to the roof and changed the aerial round. Alasdair Morgan mentioned the cost. Ofcom has said that the estimate for the required aerial upgrade might be as much as £190. If that is added to the cost of the set-top box, we are talking about £225 for starters. Someone who is not well off is not going to have that money, but the equipment will be mandatory in the area in which they live. It is a large sum of money to pensioners and those on low incomes, particularly with other punitive increases, for example to the TV licence, fuel costs, and the council tax. Also, there is not the option of not having digital. I know that there has been some mention of what will happen for vulnerable people. Ofcom estimates that there are 440,000 vulnerable households in Scotland. The United Kingdom Government ministers have not made clear what will be done to support such people so that they can afford those set-top boxes and aerials, and whether there will be a cap on any money. Another practical issue was raised at the meeting that I attended in Galashiels. The boxes are very sensitive and sometimes everything disappears off the screen. What we are supposed to do—I learned this word in the Parliament—is reboot by switching everything off and on again and letting it all come back on. Many older and vulnerable people will not know that. I am sure that they will then get on the phone to the TV engineer and he will come out. All he will have to do is reboot, but it will cost people money. Those are real issues because we are talking about people who might be using their televisions more than the rest of us do. There is also the possibility of cowboy operators moving in. When there is a whole area to be done, they could come along and say, "I'll just have a wee look on your roof," and then come down saying, "Tut, tut, this aerial's not good enough and not only that but the cabling will have to be changed." That may or may not be the case, but people who are told that may believe that it is something that they have to do. There are issues to do with practical delivery, reception and the fact that changes are mandatory, particularly in areas that seem to have been picked for an extraordinary reason such as  their size, such as the Scottish Borders, which is not really the best reception area in which to switch off the analogue signal.

I will probably not need five minutes, as much has already been said with which the SNP agrees. I thank Mary Scanlon for reminding me that I am back here tomorrow afternoon, as that had slipped my mind. I am beginning to eat, sleep and dream about the Communities Committee—that is a bad sign. Improving housing standards is crucial. I support what ministers and committee members have said about the state of Scotland's housing. Donald Gorrie said that housing comes far too low down the priority list and the budget list. In fact, many of our health problems and some of our educational problems and antisocial behaviour problems might evaporate if there were better quality housing. We know that those who are disadvantaged tend to live in the worst housing. Children do not get to school because they are ill owing to damp housing conditions and so on. I hope that the bill moves the issue up the agenda. I welcome tenants' rights being strengthened, particularly in the private sector. In many circumstances, tenants were frightened to speak  up because they felt vulnerable in their tenancy. I welcome the fact that there will now be a housing panel to deal with issues. I also welcome the minister's commitment to the discretion of the president and to develop mediation in circumstances where it is appropriate. Of course, the repairing standard is essential. As I said, there are far too many damp, cold, ill-supported and ill-maintained properties. The tenants rent deposit scheme was probably first suggested in the committee by Donald Gorrie, although the rest of us agreed with the suggestion. It is a simple but effective measure. Tenants have frequently found that the landlord has used their rent deposit for fictional repairs, for cleaning carpets or for fresh painting. Tenants would have to go to the small claims court to get that money back, so they give it up, although it is sometimes hundreds of pounds. I support the scheme. The right to adapt for the disabled is essential and it is high on the list of priorities for this Parliament. The minister referred to the fact that people know more about a can of beans than they do about the house they want to buy—I hope that this does not turn out to be a can of worms. I am open to suggestions and I wait for the guidance to come out. If at times I appear to be difficult, it is only because I want the legislation to work. I am afraid that I am a bit of a doubting Thomas. When I have not seen the draft regulations and I am not convinced that they will operate properly, I have concerns that the Parliament will fall into disrepute for producing legislation that does not work. There are reservations across the chamber—and across parties—about the cost of the purchasers pack, the single seller survey and so on. Those issues have not yet been resolved. No member has mentioned mobile homes. I regret that there was no amendment that allowed us to debate that issue. The mobile home sector is very important. Many rights have been given to people, but people in mobile homes are sometimes more vulnerable than people in other private sector tenancies because they have few rights. I am glad that they are included in the bill's provisions. On Glasgow Housing Association, I note carefully the minister's words, which can be founded on if anyone tries to challenge the bill as incompetent under European procurement law. We have the minister's words to tell us that no one can make such a challenge. Linda Fabiani mentioned the funding of the second-stage transfer. Issues have been raised with members about that funding. I seek an assurance that the funding will be in place, so that the people of Glasgow who voted—rightly—for the democratisation of social rented housing can see it happen expeditiously.  I, too, wish to thank the clerks. I am even worse than Patrick Harvie, because I go to the clerks with bits of paper with pencil scribbles and ask them to knit it up and make it into an amendment for me. I thank them for the assistance given to me in that regard.

I was simply asking whether amendment 64 will legally repeal the current situation in which, as I understand it, the relationship between the GHA and the local housing organisations is contractual. That is why the minister is in this legal quagmire. I take his assurance that tomorrow, or the day after the bill is enacted, the GHA will be able to conduct its affairs legally and not breach European law. That is all I ask.

Once again, the Executive has lodged a substantial 11 th hour amendment. The fact that the amendment was not produced at stage 2 means that the committee has not had time to take evidence on it or to consider it thoroughly. That is simply not good enough. Why does amendment 64 take the form that it takes and what is its purpose? It is my understanding that amendment 64 is required to allow the devolution of the Glasgow stock transfer from the GHA to the 63 local housing organisations. Ministers have known about the thorny issue of a breach of European competition law since the middle of last year, so why is amendment 64 required? Frankly, I believe that in their rush to push through the Glasgow housing stock transfer against tenant resistance, ministers made a mess of the procedures for the transfer. Ministers were able to sell the transfer to tenants who agreed by a slim majority on the basis that there would be a second stock transfer—a measure with which we agree. It is a matter of fact that the relationship between the GHA and the LHOs is contractual. I have it on sound legal opinion that they are separate legal  entities and I will be pleased to hear what the minister's legal advice is in that regard. The problem with the current process is that it falls foul of European competition law, thereby imperilling the devolving of the stock transfer to the LHOs. Several issues arise. Who are the bad guys in all of this? Is it the GHA or is the smoking gun to be found elsewhere? Amendment 64 is an endeavour by ministers to find a remedy to a legal mischief of their making. It allows them to lay the blame for the halting process at the feet of the GHA when, both in terms of the legislation and the funding that is required, it lies at their feet. Will the remedy work? The minister must be in a position today to tell the chamber that his clear legal advice is that amendment 64 is competent and, further, that once it is agreed to—SNP members will support it, because we want the LHOs to succeed—the GHA will be able to conduct its affairs legally. The minister must put that on the record. We require a clear statement on the matter. The point is a fundamental one. Will the minister explain the meaning of proposed new section 68A(1)(c) of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001, which states: "RSL 1 is to manage its houses in a manner which is consistent with the spirit of any notice served on tenants". What on earth does "the spirit of any notice" mean? What would it mean in a court? Instead of devolving power down to local organisations, proposed new section 68A(2) will give ministers the power to interfere with RSL 1 and, indeed, RSL 2. It will allow ministers to put the work elsewhere. The provision is top heavy; it does not come from the grass roots up. I would like explanations on all those points.

At stage 2, Scott Barrie said: "Christine Grahame has raised real concerns, but we have to say that if we agree with the principle, we have to find a way of making it work in practice".—[ Official Report, Communities Committee , 5 October 2005; c 2489.] I agree with that. The trouble is that, two years after we had all that stuff done, we still do not know how the survey will work in practice, because we do not have the regulations and that is where the detail will lie. That is my concern. Does Scott Barrie share that concern?

Will Scott Barrie give way?

For the avoidance of any doubt, amendment 2 says that the report should be laid before Parliament "within 2 years of the date on which the whole of the Part was first in force" That would give a clear two years after the regulations come into force in which to assess the way in which the single seller survey operates. I start from the point that the Scottish National Party supports in principle the single seller survey and purchasers information pack. It was entirely laudable that the initial aim of the survey was to have a home condition report that would help to bring about a change in the fabric and structure of those properties that are poorly kept up and where people tend to spend more on putting in kitchens year after year than on making sure that the roof and walls are sound. The home condition report is therefore understandable. The problem is that the survey was sold to the Scottish public as something that would get rid of the need for multiple surveys. Much has been said in the chamber about the trial that was conducted so I am not going to go over that again. I am going to go back to the evidence that was put before the committee at the time. We need a little more clarity about what a valuation is. A valuation is not done for the purchaser; it is done for the lender. The valuation that the seller pays for is instructed on behalf of banks such as the Halifax or the Royal Bank of Scotland. That is a very important distinction because if the bank does not like the single seller survey, it will ask the purchaser to have a valuation survey done. That is a huge issue just with the practice of the single seller survey. I do not think that the single seller survey will cure the problem. The committee had a huge argument about the shelf-life of the single seller survey. The value of a property is what it sells for. If someone has a valuation done in January, the value of the property might go up or down in March because, for example, something has happened in the area or there are rumours in the ether that a motorway might be built there. As I understand it, in England, the valuation part of the home condition report has  been taken out. That is another serious issue to be overcome. There is also a conflict of interest because the valuation is instructed by the seller. The contractual obligation must therefore be between the seller and the surveyor. To say that there is some strange kind of contract between the surveyor and the prospective purchasers is extraordinary because, in law, parties to a contract are not acted for by the same agent. I think that a belt-and-braces approach will be taken. The home condition report might well end up being part of the pack, but valuations will still be done on behalf of the lenders to the prospective purchasers and offers will be made subject to survey. Judging by the evidence that we have at the moment, it does not seem as if the proposals will work. The idea is not new; as I understand it, it has been on the go since 2003. When the issue of regulations was raised at the committee, the minister could not produce drafts even though all the detail of the workings of this law will be in those regulations. The regulations will be made after we pass the bill today and they might not work. That is why I am calling for a review.

I am glad that Phil Gallie is going to support the SNP amendment. I have reservations. I do not want to get hung up on the trial that was run because there might have been difficulties with it. There might also be some validity in saying that people will not buy into a voluntary scheme, but that is not the only basis on which I bring these issues to the chamber. There are issues of cost. We do not quite know what the purchasers information pack will cost. If it is £1,000, much of that will have to be paid up front by the seller. The seller might not have equity and might not have much money in the bank. They could be a very ordinary person who wants to move on to a slightly larger house. Where will the money for the survey come from? The minister said that there will be some kind of loan scheme. That was it. I pressed the minister at committee to say whether the loans will be secured against the property on sale. How will the loans be recovered? What if, having discharged the previous loan over the property, the seller does not have sufficient  spare cash from the selling price to be able to pay the loan back? How will the money be paid back to whoever has loaned it? Can a seller make several applications for loans? If I put my house on the market in January and there is a three-month shelf-life on my single seller survey, but the house does not sell and I have to take it off the market—and we should remember that all the costs have to be paid up front—what if I then put it back on the market and go back to whoever is giving the loans and ask for another £1,000? Can I ask for another £1,000 for another purchasers information pack? We do not know the answers to all those details; it is very messy. I am concerned because there is no point in passing law when we do not have the detail in front of us. We do this time and again and we end up with a framework of a bill and flawed regulations that cannot make the law work. That practice must change.

I certainly did not say that £1,000 was the cost of the survey. The cost of the purchasers information pack might be of that order and many of the outlays will have to be paid up front.

I find these amendments rather curious. The minister had the words "or other guidance" inserted on 28 September 2005 at stage 2. I am trying to work out why he is taking that out six weeks later. At the time, the Deputy Minister for Communities said: "In England and Wales, the Disability Rights Commission's code of guidance is required to be taken into account in court proceedings that relate to the tenant's right, and we agree with the committee that that should be the case in Scotland too. Such proceedings are based on housing law, which is a devolved matter, and so it is for the Scottish Parliament rather than Westminster to require the sheriff court to take account of the commission's guidance."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 28 September 2005; c 2456.] That seemed to be why the minister wanted to embed such practice in statute, and I do not know why the reasoning has changed in six weeks.

The amendments are all linked. I hope that the minister understands the spirit in which I lodged them. They aim to assist in the process of determining an application to the panel with regard to a landlord's failing to meet the repairing standard. I thought that, even taking into account schedule 2, there was no harm in fleshing the process out, in particular in section 23(1). Currently under that subsection, the president has only two options—to refer an application to the panel or to reject it. Amendment 80 would give the president more flexibility and would make consideration of any further written representations mandatory. The amendment says that "the president must consider any further written representations ... and may request further such representations"  before a decision is made. I hope that that solution is seen to be sensible and practical. On amendment 81, it is easier if parties can resolve their disputes by mediation rather than by going straight to a panel for a decision either for or against, because a decision can be made collectively. That is not always possible, but there may be circumstances in which mediation is absolutely appropriate and would take some of the burden off the private rented housing committee. Amendment 82 relates to section 23(3)(b) and would ensure the president made a decision "after considering representations". Therefore, the president would be given the opportunity to hear from the parties and to take a considered view. As I said, the problem may be resolved without taking it to the committee, but if it went to the committee, there would be full information. I move amendment 80.

I am delighted by the minister's response, which will appear in the Official Report —that is what I really sought. In the circumstances, I seek to withdraw amendment 80.  Amendment 80, by agreement, withdrawn.  [Amendments 81 and 82 not moved.]

I congratulate Alex Johnstone on a motion that is close to my heart. Before Murdo Fraser leaves, I should tell him that I have a picture of a certain MSP—at 8.30 am in our canteen—deeply absorbed in a large plate of bacon, black pudding, eggs, mushrooms, tomatoes and hash, delightfully dismissive of the fresh fruit shelf. It is indeed appropriate that we are debating Alex Johnstone's motion tonight. Where to begin? The seared scallops of Kirkwall—I will give members the recipe later—and the langoustines of Shapinsay, which I savoured this summer, still make me salivate. Highland Park, MacAllan and Bladnoch whisky are all, unfortunately, good friends. The Broughton beers in my fridge here are beautifully labelled and are also local to the Scottish Borders. The Selkirk bannock, which must be eaten warm with the butter soaking into it. Peebles cake. The vegetarian sausages that are produced by Wicken Fen, where I did my business exchange and, as hot sausages accelerated past me and draped themselves across my wellingtoned feet, shouted the predictable words, "Maureen, shut the machine off!" The good, simple meat from the  butcher near my local Gala office, including loin pork flavoured with apple and cinnamon, peppered steaks and butchers steak pie. I hope that members are getting hungry, because I am. There is good Scots food all around us. Well, it is almost all around us—everywhere but in this building. I appreciate the constraints of the Sodexho contract, but why cannot the Parliament have themed weeks—perhaps starting in the members dining room—featuring good Scottish food from the Borders, the Highlands, the Islands, the west and the east? That way, our many visitors could literally get their teeth into it. At the moment, only the cheese board features Scottish food. That is a missed opportunity. My suggestion would benefit not only our producers but, rightly, this Parliament, which would be showcasing those culinary delights. That would enhance our position after the bad publicity. Although I have talked so much about food, I have to advise the chamber that I will be unable to stay until the end of the debate—even if it has good recipes in it—because the Lancastria family members who are having an exhibition in the Parliament today are waiting to eat, as am I. Again, I congratulate Alex Johnstone. I cannot think of a better man to make a speech on Scottish food, although there was a little bit of irony in his talking about healthy eating: I say no more. As I have made a rather light-hearted but partly serious speech, I also congratulate Enric Miralles, who put my office so far from the chamber that at least I take lots of exercise when I go to and from the chamber after I have eaten my food.

I welcome the Conservatives, who have now entered the chamber, to question time. I associate myself with John Home Robertson's remarks and welcome Peter Peacock's comments, particularly because Channelkirk Primary School, which has 50 pupils and is in a growing community, is under threat of closure on 6 December. I hope that Scottish Borders Council will listen to what the minister has just said.

Is the First Minister aware that cuts in the supporting people fund are causing extensive cuts in warden cover in sheltered accommodation such as Glenfield Court in Galashiels, where residents who are much frailer than they were a decade ago have less cover than they did 10 years ago? Will he meet sheltered accommodation providers who have serious concerns about the cuts in supporting people funding impacting on warden cover?

Dr Murray agrees with much of the motion, so does she regret the fact that the Executive's amendment would delete the reference to fuel poverty?

I am not opposed in principle to wind turbine developments, but the fact is that there is no national framework. Modifications have already been made to the proposals to which Dr Murray referred for a wind farm at Walkerburn; that has happened as a consequence of a proper campaign to have it moved off the southern upland way. The member should get her facts right.

I intend to speak to two lines in our motion and my colleagues will speak about the rest. The two lines, which are the most important, read: "That the Parliament considers it unacceptable that in energy-rich Scotland fuel poverty blights our society". I know that that view is not shared by the Conservatives or the minister and the Liberal Democrats, because their amendments would delete those lines, which is absolutely appalling. It is a bitter irony that we are compelled again to mention fuel poverty in our energy-rich nation. I do not complain that we are a net exporter of energy, but it is a bitter irony that, even as we debate the matter, people are choosing whether to eat or to heat. The 2002 figures showed that 46,000 children lived in fuel-poor homes. I suspect that given the fuel price rises that have occurred and the fact that every 5 per cent rise puts another 30,000 households into fuel poverty, the figures are on the increase. Fuel poverty is defined as when more than 10 per cent of a household's income, including household benefit or income support for mortgage interest, must be used for household fuels.

My point is that people on low incomes are unable to cope with fuel price increases. It is significant that fuel poverty leads to respiratory problems among children, which means that they are off school. Those children are not only fuel poor, they are opportunity poor. In a parliamentary answer to me yesterday we were told yet again—using figures that are three years old—that 286,000 households, or 13 per cent, are in fuel poverty. It would be churlish of me not to applaud the Administration's central heating programme and other targeted initiatives such as the warm deal.

I must make progress.  I would like the central heating programme to be extended to faulty and still-functioning systems, which fall outwith its remit at the moment, as do homes with children living in poverty or homes in which there are people who are disabled or severely disabled. In addition, I would like the programme to be accelerated for people who can show medical need, so that they are not just put into a queue. Those initiatives would, if they were implemented, pay dividends in human happiness, health and well-being and—incidentally—would cost society less in health care and other demands on the public purse. In the meantime, against the background of the worthy initiatives and notwithstanding the winter fuel payment, the system continues to fail children and elderly people. It is a fact of life that low wages and low pensions bind people into poverty, which keeps them in poorly insulated poor-quality homes.

Phil Gallie is always trying. Sometimes he is more trying than usual; that question was very trying. [ Interruption. ] I have more important issues to deal with—only a few members have dealt with fuel poverty. The Administration has pledged to eradicate fuel poverty, as far as is practicable, by 2016. That will not happen. The Administration parties and the rest of Parliament would like it to happen, but we simply do not have the power or the opportunity to achieve it. We are constrained within the limitations of devolution. Independence is not an academic point; it is a practical, deliverable point.

No. I have only six minutes and will not get extra time for interventions. Excessive winter deaths remain a scandal: last year's figure was 2760, and that was a good year. In 1999, when there was a flu epidemic, the figure was nearly 6,000. It is not scaremongering to say that, given the situation in households in Scotland, the impact on Scottish people of avian flu would be far greater than even in the Scandic countries, which, although they are far colder than Scotland, suffer nothing like the number of winter deaths that we have. The minister's hands are tied because of our limited powers. We should have a thriving economy, but without the power to raise the basic level of our people in society, those winter scandals will continue. Poverty is the root of many social ills and it condemns many Scots families, our elderly people and our young people to a cold and uncertain winter. I say to the minister that that is not scaremongering. The scandal of fuel poverty  will be on all our hands, and the cold winter reality approaches fast. Without independence and the power to really deliver for the Scottish people, we will not radically change the situation.

Will the minister give way?

I chaired the Justice 1 Committee in piloting the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill through the Parliament. My party opposed the ministerial veto and we tried to contain the area of commercial confidentiality. Those matters have been addressed in the Parliament today. I attended a conference in Ghana dealing with freedom of information. The minister could look to South Africa, where freedom of information extends to private companies whose funding is wholly in the public sector. That would deal with the many references that have been made to PPP, the private finance initiative, private prisons and private contracts. We can certainly look abroad when taking those into account. We might also consider British Columbia, where built into the statute is a mandatory review of the operation of the FOI legislation every three years. As we know from various events this week and as we will see in the months ahead, FOI is a double-edged sword, not just for MSPs but for the Executive. I have had some successful little hits myself, for example concerning the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration. I discovered that data were being double-checked and that the Executive was putting other data in the place of the original data. I have the documents about that. I discovered that the Munchausen syndrome cases review, which the minister instructed the SCRA to undertake, was, to put it kindly, little more than a whitewash, asking previous members of the SCRA what they could remember—there were no records. There is a strong indication from FOI returns from police files that special branch is actively using informants to report on the activities of my party—the principal democratic Opposition in Scotland. Police warnings have been monitored over a set period as data were not held centrally; I am pursuing that under appeal. This is the time to test the information commissioner. As others have said, a change in culture is taking place. The days of finding indiscreet memos and e-mails are passing even as I speak. I asked for information regarding meetings on the G8 summit. There were meetings between senior officials of the Parliament and senior officials of the Executive on 16 February and 21 February but, strangely enough, there is no record or minute of those meetings stating the outcomes or purpose of them. Without a paper trail, how can anyone believe that government is genuinely open, transparent and accountable? I do not think there was even any information on Post-it notes; we might start asking for any Post-it notes used over a period of time.  We will see a culture change and I am darn sure that various public bodies are being told, "Be very careful with your e-mails and if you can have a wee word over the water cooler, do not just talk about 'EastEnders' but get the business done there." The issue of our expenses has been raised this week. I am of the view that it is a case of publish and be damned. We are damned if we do and damned if we do not. If someone wants to know how much my Galashiels office spends on bottles of milk and toilet roll, they can do so, but that is not what the act was supposed to be about. Those are the minutiae, but we want to find out about the big contracts and what is going on in the background. I turn to the caveat about taxi destinations. I have no problem with providing that information except that sometimes one takes taxis to meetings that are of the discreet variety, where one is being briefed on an issue that is not to be in the public domain and is not for other members to know about. If we publish times of taxi trips, we are stating that the houses of members who live alone are empty at a certain time, or that, if they are down here, their house up north is empty, for example. There are real issues with security not on a big, grand, pompous scale, but on a private, ordinary scale. Things are already being leaked to the papers before a committee has reported. We are being accelerated into things and members are not being given a chance to participate.

I am interested in what the minister said about extending the scope of the act. I think that it was the Minister for Justice who answered an inquiry of mine on whether FOI would be extended to housing associations. I was told that the Executive would have a position on that matter by the end of the year. Can the minister tell me what the timescale is for that decision, particularly in the light of current circumstances?

We have something in common.

It is a fine aspiration, to which we can all subscribe, to end homelessness in so far as that is possible by 2012. That is a challenge, but I regret to say that I do not think it can be met. I will tell members why. I have been looking at the statistics for the south of Scotland, especially East Lothian, Dumfries and Galloway and the Scottish Borders, which I represent. Comparing the figures for 2002-03 with the most recent figures for 2003-04, Shelter advises that there has been a 6 per cent increase in households applying for homeless status in East Lothian, only a 1 per cent drop in Dumfries and Galloway—that is a minimal figure—and a 40 per cent increase in the Scottish Borders. Although percentages are important, they mask the misery of families and individuals who are caught in the homelessness trap. The figures for homeless households are: 887 for East Lothian; 1,568 for Dumfries and Galloway; and 817 for the Scottish Borders. They are all people—individuals or families. The effect on rural areas is particularly bad, as so many homeless people in those areas have to be moved into temporary accommodation. Statistics show that in rural areas people are likely to spend longer in temporary accommodation and that the available temporary accommodation is often far-flung from people's work, school or  community. That exacerbates families' misery. I know that there are similarities between rural and urban homelessness, but there are specific rural aspects that exacerbate the problem, and I have mentioned just one. Notwithstanding what Mary Scanlon said, the right to buy, which other members mentioned, has undoubtedly depleted affordable rented housing stock, particularly in scenic areas. Indeed, research has shown that ex-council properties are not just bought by local people—they are also often bought thereafter as second or holiday homes. I will come to that later. There has been no new build. A parliamentary answer to a question asked by my colleague Stewart Stevenson revealed that in 1990 the total number of properties built, whether by private builders, local authorities or housing associations, was 3,901. By 2004, the most recent date for which figures are available, the figure had fallen to 3,483. That has driven some local authorities to purchase privately at cost—ironically, sometimes they have even bought previously discounted former council houses at full market value.

That is my point. The figures that I gave were from a parliamentary answer on all types of new build taking place in that period. New build was not even keeping pace with need in 1990. The effect of second or holiday homes has caused crisis hotspots to emerge across rural Scotland. The number of such houses has grown from 19,756 20 years ago to 29,229 in 2001, the most recent year for which we have figures. Some interesting points are made in the chapter "The impact of second and holiday homes on rural communities in Scotland" in a paper called "Precis" by Communities Scotland, which states: "The more remote rural areas had the greatest concentrations of second homes." Almost half of all Scotland's second homes—47 per cent—were in those very remote areas. People were being displaced; they had to travel not just 10 or 20 miles but 50 or 100 miles to get accommodation. That takes them well out of their communities. Rural areas have commuters, retirees and people who want a lifestyle change; all put housing pressure on scenic areas. Indeed, there are more than 1,000 holiday homes in Dumfries and Galloway and the Scottish Borders in the south of Scotland. I cannot believe for a  moment that that is a good thing for the provision of accommodation in those areas. At the meeting of the Communities Committee yesterday, the minister repeated the target of 21,500 new approvals by 2008. However, the most recent figures show that there are 54,829 homeless households, so that target is simply insufficient, especially given that the figures across Scotland are rising. The statistics do not show everything; they do not show the poor housing, the cramped accommodation or the effects of homelessness on the family unit, on health and on employability. The cost to individuals is high; the cost to society is also high, but in a different way. Yesterday, I asked the minister what data are available on the savings to other ministerial budgets, but particularly the health budget, through improved housing. If I recall correctly, those data were not available—they should be. In addition to abolishing the right to buy, perhaps we could use planning regulations to inhibit the purchase of second and holiday homes and to deal with retirement investments in such homes—I am not satisfied that such investments will not impact on rural areas. I also suggest that some money from the health budget would be better spent in the housing budget. That would not be bad for the Minister for Communities, who moved from the health portfolio. I ask that some health money follow him. A serious issue is involved, which is that the Executive could not make a better investment in its interventions to prevent ill health than in providing good-quality, affordable, warm housing.

That is charming. I was unaware that we had had that communication. I have concerns about the proposed commission's role, which I want to focus on, and ask those in the Parliament who are sympathetic to the Sewel motion whether it is offensive in some respects—for me, the jury is out on that. Both principles and practice are involved here. All members must support and adhere to principles regarding gender equality, human rights, anti-discrimination laws and so on. The problem is how the eventual act will be implemented in practice. My and my party's view is that that process will interfere with the devolution settlement. For example, the bill will impose a duty on public authorities to promote gender equality, but my understanding is that such a duty already exists in Scotland under the terms of schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998. Therefore, the proposal interferes with the devolution settlement. The CEHR's work will be relevant to policy areas that are devolved to this Parliament, such as tackling racism, sectarianism and hate crime and  social inclusion and social justice. Again, the proposed commission's powers give cause for concern. For example, there will be powers to hold inquiries and to issue codes of practice for areas that are devolved to this Parliament. In addition, powers to monitor the law are proposed. Already, alarm bells are ringing for me. Let us consider the commission's role in monitoring crime and crime prevention, particularly in the areas of assault aggravated by racial prejudice, sectarianism and crime that affects older people. A proud heritage of Scotland, even before the Parliament was established, was the independence of its criminal law. It appears to me that the bill interferes with the processes and practices of independent Scots criminal law. When promoting equalities in communities, the commission will be able to undertake work that relates to social, recreational, sporting and educational activities. The last time that I looked, all those areas were fully devolved. More alarm bells sound. There are points of similarity between the commission's remit in relation to age and the roles of the children's commissioner and probable older people's commissioner. Many members from all parties applaud the firm, robust stance of Kathleen Marshall on the human rights of children of asylum seekers. Would her wings be clipped by the bill? Many would like that to happen. More alarm bells sound. Under clause 7 of the bill, the commission for equality and human rights could be prevented from taking action in relation to human rights only by a similar body that has been established by the Scottish Parliament. Presumably, the reference is to the Scottish human rights commission. It is not clear whether the clause relates to the roles of the children's commissioner or the proposed older people's commissioner. In those circumstances, something might well be imposed from Westminster on areas that are fully devolved and very independent in Scotland, including the children's panels. Let us consider the structure of the commission's board membership. The member with special knowledge of Scotland will be chosen with the agreement of Scottish ministers, rather than of the Parliament. When we choose our commissioners, they are voted in democratically by the Parliament, after selection and debate. That will not happen in this case. Although the commission will have the ability to lay the reports of its activities before the Scottish Parliament, there is no provision for the Parliament or the Equal Opportunities Committee to do anything about those reports. It is not clear that we will be able to criticise the commission or to call for  evidence from it. Cathy Peattie is nodding, but I am not sure whether she is in agreement with me.

I am not confusing anything. I am quite clear that we support the principles, but the processes and practicalities of the bill will take power away from the Parliament in areas that are already devolved and in which we are putting clear blue water between us and Westminster. Confusion will arise between the Scottish human rights commission and the Scottish member of the board of the CEHR. Duplication has already hit the Justice 1 Committee in the face. I understand that the committee is appointing an adviser to take it through the quagmire of conflicts and confusion that there will be where one commission is doing the work of the other. Devolution muddies the waters, thank goodness. There are no clear borders between reserved and devolved issues, especially in the areas with which the bill deals. The problem for ministers is that the muddied waters are going in the wrong direction. If I may mix my metaphors, the tide is moving towards Westminster taking back from the Parliament powers that were hard fought for. For all the reasons that I have outlined, for the Scottish National Party the jury remains out. That will remain the case until the minister or deputy minister can answer the questions that I have put. They will not be able to do so today, so we will abstain at decision time.

The electorate did not endorse the Liberal Democrats either—Iain Smith's party lost the election. He does not have the mandate that he is talking about.

With regard to the petition from the supporters of the south of Scotland alliance, I cannot recall whether the minister was one of the people to whom the Public Petitions Committee was going to write about this subject. If so, I do not suppose that he can tell us anything about his response until the group has seen it.

I, too, congratulate Euan Robson on securing this debate on a very important issue. I cannot congratulate Mr Purvis on his rather selective quotations. I recall that, during the previous debate on this issue, infrastructure projects were seen as additional. One of the great needs in the Borders is the railway line, but investment is also required in the A75 in Dumfries and Galloway. Unfortunately, European funding is not available for those projects, although it would open up the economy in both areas. I was at the Ettrick Riverside business centre today; the reclamation of the old mill site is absolutely splendid. Funding for the development of the centre included £1.5 million of European funding. There are 26 or so businesses, employing 112 full-time equivalents. That is important in the area and should be set against the backdrop of the horrors that we all recall when 1,200 jobs were lost at Viasystems and when £24 million of funding was lost, which the DTI never got back. But what is new? A BBC Scotland office has opened up at the centre in Selkirk and new equipment has been installed. That is a broadcasting commitment to the Borders. At one point several years ago, it looked as if we might lose that commitment, so the opening of the office is very welcome. As we all agree, European funding is extremely complex, which is why I lodged a parliamentary question on the issue to find out how much funding goes to the south of Scotland. Allan Wilson answered that question, so he no doubt knows what I am about to say. The total amount of funding from the European regional development fund since 2001—without the 2005-06 applications, which have not yet gone through the system—has been £37 million and the European social fund has contributed £10 million, which are substantial amounts. I have connections with both areas in the south of Scotland. I have represented the Borders area and other parts of the south of Scotland since 1999, and I lived in Galloway for 15 years. From my experience, I agree with Derek Brownlee that the areas have much in common, although people may not always think so. The areas have similar problems with failing traditional industries and low wages. I presented the answer to my parliamentary question to Douglas Scott, who has been mentioned, and asked for his comments on it.  Interestingly, he said that the lack of clarity about the future for the south of Scotland was of grave concern. He made three points. First, he said: "The UK Government wants to nationalise European Regional Aid and the Chancellor has indicated he would replace the amount". However, the south of Scotland does not feel secure that the funding would come in its direction. Secondly, he said: "If the European Union's proposals for European Regional Policy stand, then a lot depends on the budget allocation ... If the European Commission gets what it wants, which is unlikely, then for the new funding period 2007-2013, the South of Scotland could get a maximum of £25 million". That is staggering when compared with the previous amount. Thirdly, he said that, if the south of Scotland funding were worked out on the same basis as that for the Highlands and Islands, we would get £200 million in that period. Some people think that there is a forced marriage of convenience between Dumfries and Galloway and the Borders, but I have never seen the relationship in that way. When the south of Scotland alliance was formed way back in 2000, there was a strength of purpose behind it. As I said, the areas have similar problems with infrastructure and low wages. They cannot simply be lumped in with cities in the east and west, as that would distort not only the population, but the economic viability of the areas. I hope that the minister will make progress on the issue. A petition on the matter is before the Public Petitions Committee, although it is from friends of the south of Scotland alliance and not from the alliance itself, which is a bit misleading. The petition will be considered again on 23 November, when, I trust, the committee will take account of this debate in its considerations.

Although I conceded that that decision would be made under the Electricity Act 1989, I asked whether the Parliament, rather than ministers, would have the final veto if, in reflecting the views of the Scottish people, it took the view that it was opposed to such a proposal.

So it is the ministers.

I thank the minister for fulfilling his promise  to hold a debate in Parliament on the proposed reform of planning legislation, which we all agree is long overdue. No one can quarrel in particular with the requirement for local plans to be upgraded every five years at least. I also welcome the introduction of planning mediation, which is close to my heart. As we can see, planning does not fill the press gallery or capture the hearts and minds of the public at large, because it is not really a sexy topic, if I may use that expression. However, it is hugely important to individuals who may wish to put up that must-have conservatory or resist a neighbour's two-storey extension, to a community that opposes whole-heartedly a development and to a nation that opposes nuclear power stations—but more of that later. Planning becomes of interest—sometimes heated and violent—when an application is in someone's face. The white paper, to which the Scottish National Party has made a formal response, contains much that is to be welcomed. The tiering of planning applications is broadly welcomed, as are the national planning framework and the promise of more robust pre-application consultation of all parties. However, as is expected of the Opposition, which should offer a considered critique of Government legislation, we have some buts. Substantial issues require explanation by the minister. The first question, which he has answered to an extent, concerns the proposed nuclear power stations. I will confine myself to planning aspects. I accept what he says, because in an answer to me in the chamber in June, he said: "Nuclear power stations will not be in the national planning framework. I have made it clear on more than one occasion ... that the arrangements for nuclear power stations are not affected by the proposals in the white paper."— [ Official Report , 29 June 2005; c 18446.]  Quite. I understand that the First Minister has made a comment that, it has emerged, was a reference to a little-known section in the Electricity Act 1989. That relates to the report in The Scotsman that Scotland can say no to nuclear power. I will discuss the 1989 act briefly, because it relates to planning. I hope that the minister and his team will correct me—I do not doubt that they will—but the section in question appears to be section 36 of that act, which is entitled "Consent required for construction etc. of generating stations". I say to the minister that I would like to understand the issue fully and put things on the record. Let us say that Tony Blair decides that a nuclear power plant should be built in the Borders and that I am the chief executive of nuclear plant  build ltd and want to build it. Suppose that I have the drawings and a track record, but the Borders community is 100 per cent opposed to the construction. Suppose that there is a national referendum that is not sponsored by the coalition or by a political party, that there are petitions that oppose the plant here, there and everywhere and that it becomes clear that a substantial majority of the people in Scotland are opposed to the construction. Of course, it is disingenuous to claim that the energy will be clean because it reduces CO 2 emissions—which it does—when the contaminating waste will lie in our soil for thousands rather than hundreds of years. Who will make the application? To whom should it be made? Under which legislation should it be made? As the minister said, the matter is outwith the scope of the planning legislation that we are discussing, so what processes will be used for considering that application? Who will have a final decision—ministers or the Parliament? Will I ever be allowed to build the plant? The Scottish public would like answers to those questions. When the crunch comes, does the Parliament have a cast-iron guarantee that it will have the last word on the construction of any nuclear power stations in Scotland? As for the caveat that the issue of nuclear waste disposal must be resolved first, we simply need to consider recent events. On 27 September, Dounreay shut down after a leak of radioactive waste. That was not the first leak and it will not be the last. Indeed, in the 1970s, I remember people proposing to put nuclear waste in granite in which there is a seismic fault in the Galloway hills—totally the wrong place. Of course, the right place is the clay of London, but nobody would suggest that it should go there. I wonder why. I move on to the SNP's second concern, which is not unconnected with what I have said about nuclear stations. We already know that the national planning framework and the designation of developments as developments of national significance exclude nuclear power stations, but are nuclear dumps excluded? I refer to the SNP's response to the white paper, which states that we need "clarity on the level and import of public participation and ... this should be clearly indicated to the Communities Committee prior to Stage 1." With regard to developments of national significance, the SNP states that "the level of public, indeed, parliamentary involvement and scrutiny" is again unclear. I raised that matter with the minister in the chamber in June when he made his statement. I asked about what was meant by "extensive consultation with stakeholders, subject to a strategic environmental assessment and decided on at the  national level by the Executive, with the full involvement of the Parliament."— [ Official Report , 29 June 2005; c 18441.]  Patrick Harvie raised that issue. I asked about committee scrutiny, bill procedure, having simple debates and votes and what we were going to do. The minister responded: "More detailed information will be available once further work has been done on that. It is a complex question."— [ Official Report , 29 June 2005; c 18446.]  We seem to be in the same place today as we were in June, but we should have moved on. There should be more clarity about projects of national significance, how they will be designated and who will designate them. Will anybody be able to appeal? When projects go into the national framework, which will have statutory significance, what can be done thereafter? Such issues are important. Finally, it is somewhat foolish for the minister to dismiss the third-party right of appeal out of hand. My colleague Sandra White—who is to be commended on her member's bill on the matter—will address the issue more fully. Some 86 per cent of responses to the Executive's consultation were in favour of such a right of appeal. I stress that I am talking about a very limited third-party right of appeal in the context of what I trust will be—the minister has said that it will be—a robust public participatory planning process.

That is an own goal for the member. I am talking about Scottish National Party policy. The member should read our policies. We should not be scared of a third-party right of appeal that would operate in very limited circumstances. It is not as if we are talking about something that does not occur elsewhere. Sandra White will talk about how things work in Ireland, the National Trust for Scotland, heritable property and so on. The system works elsewhere. People should be made to feel fully involved, but they feel excluded. I hear what the minister says about all the hearings, but people go to hearings and feel that they are not listened to; they will still feel that they are the one party that is excluded when a development is being decided. I will talk about the very limited circumstances in a moment. I am not sure how long I have got. Is it a minute?

In the context of robust pre-application consultation, the limited circumstances, which are also supported by the National Trust for Scotland, in which we would see the third-party right of appeal being used are: (a) where the local authority has a clear interest and is not a disinterested party; (b) where the application is contrary to the development plan; (c) where the decision goes against the planning officer's recommendations; and (d) where an environmental impact assessment is needed. Those are very firm circumstances. There is much in the Executive's proposals that is worthy, but on some fundamental issues—nuclear power and nuclear waste; the scrutiny of the content of the national planning framework; the designation of developments of national significance, whether or not they are being fast tracked at the expense of accountability; and third-party rights of appeal—there is much to be on guard about now and throughout the bill's progress. We will keep on guard about those issues.

The minister may not know this—I certainly do not, which is why I am asking. Would he have a role if, against the wishes of the community, the Melrose fire station were to close? Is there a ministerial role there?

I congratulate David Davidson on securing this important debate. He referred in his speech to the announcement on the radio this morning of the threatened closure of Melrose fire station. It is rather ironic that he is calling for additional retained firefighters when it is retained firefighters who are threatened with the loss of their jobs; more important is the threatened loss of fire protection in that part of the Borders. Although the Melrose crew are retained part-timers, they are not amateurs; they are fully professional, as has been said by others. In particular, they are on the front line for call-outs to the Borders general hospital, which is just over the road, the Huntlyburn psychiatric unit in the same area and Borders NHS Board headquarters at Newstead—all are within their catchment area. The population is growing in that area, and there is the potential for 5,000 new homes in Galashiels and Melrose. The population may expand further when the railway comes in 2008, although, following yesterday's debate on the Waverley railway line, I am still waiting for the funding. With 10,000 new homes coming into the area during the next decade as well as the hope of new businesses, this is the wrong time to consider cutting fire protection in Melrose. It is true that there is a fire station at Galashiels, but the majority of that crew's work is in the Galashiels area. As others have said, fighting fires  is a minority part of a fire brigade's work. In the Scottish Borders, as elsewhere, their work has an awful lot to do with serious road traffic accidents as well as field fires, suicide attempts, wandering escaped cows—rather than lost cats—and mountain and river rescues. The modern tender at Galashiels fire station is incredible—it is a bit like the TARDIS when one gets inside. It has climbing equipment and even inflatable rafts. However, that does not mean that Melrose fire station is not required. The fact that there would be a saving of only £120,000 to £150,000 per annum if Melrose fire station were closed makes the situation even worse. Fergus Ewing and others have said that the proposed closure of the fire station will mean that it will take four and a half to six minutes longer for an appliance to get to an emergency in the Melrose catchment area—and that takes into account only the first appliance to get from Galashiels to Melrose. Those four and a half to six minutes are crucial when there is a house fire or a road traffic accident—they are the golden minutes after something horrendous has happened. We can imagine the extra time that can be lost if we do not have people with local knowledge of back roads, locations of fire hydrants and remote local areas with funny wee names. The people who operate the computers elsewhere cannot even pronounce the place names and have no idea where they are. That is already happening: calls to the police are now centralised, and telephone operators cannot understand the accent—for example, "Hike" is Hawick. I am not making frivolous points. Local knowledge means that the Melrose crew have the edge on their own patch compared with the Galashiels crew, good though they are. We support the innovative ways in which David Davidson's motion suggests that business could encourage people to participate in the retained sector. There is no doubt that if we have a vibrant economy and people who are happy and well paid, they are more likely to do those other jobs as well. Reducing fire cover will also impact on businesses that might want to expand or to locate in an area. After all, who will try to build an extension to their hotel if the insurance company wants to know about the fire cover in the region? It is clear that taking away such fire cover for industrial and commercial premises has knock-on effects for the economy. I have no idea what the time is, Presiding Officer, but I notice that you are not giving me fierce looks or wagging your finger at me. However, I will conclude now by saying that, a few years ago, I stood on the picket lines with the  Borders fire crews at Hawick and Galashiels when they were having trouble with their salaries. The crews came through that period of destabilisation well; however, the closure of Melrose fire station is very bad news and creates more destabilisation at a time when the crews could do with our support. Closing Melrose fire station should not be an option. It is ill-timed and all wrong. In an economy that is stepping forward, such a move would be a step back.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it monitors the level of economic activity of immigrants who remain in Scotland for more than one year. (S2O-7693)

I am sure that the minister agrees that, without high levels of immigration, the fresh talent initiative will fail. Does he recognise that images of economic migrants being horribly deported—such as the Vucaj family were at dawn today, having been in Scotland with their three children for five years—send a powerful negative message to the rest of the world? Does he agree that we are deporting exactly the kind of families that Scotland requires?

Is the minister aware that Channelkirk Primary School has 54 pupils, with 11 who are enrolled in the nursery and that, as Jeremy Purvis said, the local community numbers about 500? That is hardly unsustainable. If the school closes,  it will set a new high level that is required for schools to stay open in the Scottish Borders and elsewhere. As Scottish Borders Council is not listening to the people of Oxton, will the minister meet with their representatives to discuss the matter?

It was all sweetness and light.

I congratulate Susan Deacon on a very thoughtful speech. As my colleague said, areas of deprivation are where young people are more likely to offend and be offended against. That links with what Susan Deacon said—intervention cannot start early enough. Children need good  nutrition and care from parents who, themselves, do not have destructured lives. I will speak on a practical level about the role of the children's hearings system, to which children who are in need of care and attention—whether they are offending or not—will be referred. Only 25 per cent of referrals to the children's panel concern children who are involved in criminal pursuits; unfortunately, children who have begun to come apart at the seams and have not yet committed a criminal offence might do so if there is no intervention at that stage. Before I delve into that, I endorse Susan Deacon's request for acceleration of the pace of delivery. In an intervention on Bill Butler, I made the point that this report seems to be cauld kail rehet. The Justice 1 Committee hit on all the same bullet points years ago, including the need for continuity of funding and more secure places for those who are under the remit of both the social work and justice departments. At one stage, the committee asked why the funding does not come from one funding stream rather than competing funding streams. We also identified the lack of social workers and the lack of an index of diversionary and throughcare programmes, as well as the absence of a database and an inability to share information across the various agencies. We discussed the silos that people work in—their own little territories—in the voluntary sector and in Executive agencies. That has all been talked about before; we need to deliver more. We are at phase 2 of a review of the children's hearings system. I will quote heavily from a letter from the Scottish Borders Council children's panel advisory committee to bring the panel's concerns to the minister's attention. The hearings system was the jewel in the Scottish crown of dealing with difficult children and children with problems. The system has a quasi-informal set-up, and its methods are inquisitorial rather than adversarial. Most important, its approach has always been child centred rather than to see the child as a problem or someone to blame; it has looked for solutions rather than punishments. One or two issues were of grave concern to the advisory committee, and I would not like the advisory committees to be undermined. Statement 14 in the "Statements of Intent" of the Executive's "getting it right for every child: Proposals For Action" states: "If appropriate, community representatives or victims might be invited to sit in on the Hearing to reinforce that the behaviour has an impact on others, and to understand better what efforts are being made to address the child's behaviour." The Scottish Borders Council children's panel advisory committee's response does not support that at all. It says:  "This could have a negative effect on the child by distorting the focus of the Hearing away from the needs of the child, which must remain paramount. That is important.

The grounds of referral should be made very clear; the panel must be fully apprised of all the facts. However, having someone else sit in on the hearing might distort it. The advisory committee was open to the idea of links with victims through a system of restorative justice; the issue was simply that if the victim sits in on the hearing, the atmosphere created will be more like a trial than an investigation into circumstances. Statement of intent 16 states: "Children's Hearings should provide information to communities about the nature of decisions made and their outcomes." The advisory committee had serious concerns about the lack of clarity in that proposal. Although it would support the publication of general information about decisions, it would not want to publish individual decisions publicly. What is meant is not clear from the statement of intent. Statement of intent 21 suggests: "We propose amending the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 to remove the requirements that Children's Panels and Children's Panel Advisory Committees be linked to local authority boundaries." Jeremy Purvis quite rightly made the point that, in the Borders, we are extremely lucky, in that all the services—including the health board, the police, the council and the children's panel—are coterminous, which makes it so much easier to work in a team. Other areas are not so fortunate. Penicuik in the Tweedale, Ettrick and Lauderdale seat is in the Midlothian Council area and is perhaps sometimes isolated from services. Team working is terribly important. The advisory committee does not support statement of intent 21. The recruitment, training and retention of panel members are ignored, which is a huge issue. Years ago, I argued in the chamber against the Executive's resistance to allowing people over the age of 60 to sit on panels. I know that that now happens. I thank the Executive for that and  welcome it. However, complex issues concerning children come before panels. The panels need support, training and recognition. Increased pressures on panel members to go on weekend training are ignored. Although we are saying good things in the chamber, children's panels, which are so special to Scotland, need to be looked after, cherished and addressed. I would like to hear the minister respond, if not today then in due course, to the issues that I have highlighted, which come from front-line panel members.

I despair to hear that point again and to read it in the report, given that previous committee reports on diversions from offending made a similar point. We made the point five or six years ago, but the situation remains the same. Is Bill Butler as saddened by that as I am?

I congratulate John Home Robertson on securing the debate and on making a very informed speech. I have heard his previous remarks on the subject and I am aware of East Lothian's problems; indeed, at one point, the council had to buy back ex-council homes at substantial cost to meet its legislative obligations. I believe that that takes us to the heart of the matter. The sale of council houses has caused an enormous problem in Scotland, especially in some of our picturesque areas. Houses were purchased not only by residents in the area but as second homes, which meant that they were removed completely from the housing stock. The SNP believes that we should end the right to buy for new tenancies—I make it clear that we are talking about new, not existing, tenancies. I appreciate that the Executive has deferred the matter until 2012, but we must grasp the nettle now. Why should housing associations or local authorities buy houses while this sword of Damocles hangs over them? They will not spend that money on properties if they know that they will lose them in due course. The circumstances in which people find themselves cause particular difficulties in rural areas. For example, if a couple separates, both people might require rented accommodation. One of them might then find themselves homeless, but the only housing association property that is available might be 50 or 60 miles away from where their children attend school. The large distances between rural communities can give rise to such huge issues. We require a culture change. In a sense, the culture has changed because of the high price of first-time-buyer properties. Although the SNP believes that a £2,000 first-time-buyer grant should be introduced, I do not think that that alone will solve the problem. People used to earn kudos for owning their homes, but home owning has now become a necessity because, with nothing available in the social rented sector, mortgage payments are sometimes cheaper than the extortionate sums that can be charged for private rented accommodation.  That situation has a knock-on effect for couples because, if they do not have secure accommodation, they can defer having children for a considerable time. When I first married, couples started out in a council house. They were able to save a little money, put a deposit down on a very modest house and go on from there. The ability to do that has been lost to this generation. I am sure that that is linked to the decline in our population, and that it ripples out to other areas. For example, who will provide the tax receipts that will pay for services for the rest of society? This is not just a housing issue but a huge social problem. I completely concur with John Home Robertson's point about land banks. The prospect that, for example, a railway might be constructed has led developers, particularly in some areas of the Borders, to build up the amount of land that they have—and they will certainly not allow anyone to develop it until the railway comes. We must consider the role of Scottish Water, because funding is required to develop the infrastructure in certain areas. In the Borders—some areas of Peebles, for example, and in Lauder, although I think that the situation there is all right now—any further development was embargoed simply because sewerage systems could not be put in. Indeed, the same problem meant that not one more house could be built in the whole of Perth. I end my speech by highlighting a typical case. A letter that I received says: "Dear Christine Grahame I'm writing to you as I don't know what to do! The problem is my daughter ... and her partner ... and their three year old son ... live in a one bedroom flat. My grandson can't even have his own bed as there is no-where to put it. They have been down time and time again to the" housing association "but they are getting nowhere. Can you give some advice on what to do." The problem is that very little can be done. As John Home Robertson pointed out, homeless people—quite rightly—always get properties ahead of these people. Such a situation cannot be good for that family or that child.

It is not a delay.

I will deal first with the amendment in my colleague Fergus Ewing's name, which states: "the Scottish Executive should discuss with the promoter of the Bill whether it is able to continue to be the promoter." As far as I am concerned, that reflects absolutely paragraph 312 of the committee's report, which states: "In light of the concerns expressed by the Committee in this report, the Committee calls upon the Scottish Executive, as the principal funder of the project, to consider whether this project is being competently managed and to reflect on what action is required". Because of the mishandling of parts of the presentation of the land referencing, the bill has been set back a year, as the committee made plain. That is the issue. No one in the chamber could be keener to see the bill delivered than I am. My first members' business debate was about the Waverley line, I set up the cross-party group on Borders rail and I encouraged the Public Petitions Committee to go to the Borders to hear the evidence, with 250 people present. It is not a question of my showing passion or commitment, but of my being dismayed at the fact that Scottish Borders Council has let us down throughout, although it is now getting its act together to some extent.

No. I have only a short time. Some of the member's colleagues took eight minutes for their speeches. It has been stated that wages in the Borders are extremely low. The average wage in the Scottish Borders is only £371 a week. If people travel to Edinburgh they get another £66 a week. While we are considering the business case we must consider the broader area. Currently, the area has been thrown back to relying on its traditional industries—textiles, farming and, more recently, tourism. I had a terrible job getting ministers to consider the case for the railway in relation to tourism in the Borders in a series of parliamentary questions. I kept being reassured that the Executive was content with the details that it had on the tourism case. I am delighted that that case has been strengthened  and that the committee has recognised it. My goodness, it was like pushing a boulder up a hill to get the Executive to consider the tourism industry in the Borders, which generates £200 million and employs 3,500 people. Pushing the case has been hard work. It is difficult to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the wider Borders economy will benefit, although it is possible to prove it on the balance of probabilities. I am not in dispute about that with colleagues of any party who represent the Borders. I pray in aid as evidence the impact on the local economy of the closure of the Kyle of Lochalsh line for three months in October 2002, when it was assessed that £5 million was lost to the local economy in that time. The converse therefore follows that £5 million must be dependent on that line. It is a chicken and egg situation for the Borders line: we will know how the wider Borders economy will thrive once the line is there. I am convinced that, given what we have seen elsewhere, the impact on that economy has been underestimated. I do not want us to get trapped into talking about whether houses to fund the line will be built or about bums on seats, because there is a much bigger argument. How did we get here? This is an example of a people's campaign to which more than 18,000 Borderers drew the Parliament's attention. I congratulate the Parliament, through its Public Petitions Committee and the then Rural Affairs Committee, which brought the debate in June 2000 and voted unanimously for the line to be reinstated all the way from Edinburgh to Carlisle. That is credit to a Parliament that does not often get it when it ought to. In the debate in 2000 I said: "This is a question of vision and hard cash. One vision is a terminus at Galashiels, trains with Borders rail livery, cycleways parallel to the track, bridle paths, local industries flourishing alongside the line, villages in which the schools remain open because families live there and a community at last repaid long-overdue debts accrued in the time from the closure of the railway to the closure of Viasystems. That would be a tangible achievement that would last for centuries. It might not be the rail that Jack would build, but it would be the rail that this Parliament would build. Most important, it would be a lasting testament to the tenacity of the Borders people."— [ Official Report , 1 June 2000; Vol 6, c 1225.]  So I defer to the Campaign for Borders Rail, of which I am an honorary lifelong member, to Madge Elliot, who was mentioned by Euan Robson, and others. They are the people who have brought this matter to the floor of this people's Parliament. They deserve to have the line reinstated. The problems relating to funding should be addressed in that context. The £11 million that  Scottish Borders Council has to find might not be found. This Parliament should be generous to the people in the area that has the lowest wages and the highest elderly population in Scotland—which imperils all the area's services—and ensure that the railway line is delivered. Yesterday, driving the tortuous A7 route, which parallels the rail bed, I saw two yellow-waistcoated workmen on the track. I hope that that portends well for the future. I have news for Michael Palin. He is behind me in that queue for tickets for the first train on the Waverley line since 1969.

What is the position of the member's party on twinning the track at Midlothian, so that an express service that travelled on the hour and half-hour could pass straight through the Midlothian stations and stop at the other stations? That is possible or could at least be built in as a prospect.

On the merits of early diagnosis, I refer the minister to question S2W-16616, by Shona Robison, which was answered on 26 May by Rhona Brankin, the then Deputy Minister for  Health and Community Care, regarding "research published in The Lancet ... on the relative effectiveness of MRI scanners compared with X-rays in detecting breast cancer in women under 50."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 26 May 2005; S2W-16616.]  The answer was that further evidence was required. Has that further evidence been secured, and when will we see some response to that research?

I remind the First Minister that media reports suggest that each month there are around 35 cases of elderly abuse, which is possibly the most ruthless example of age discrimination. What programmes are in place to end that horror?

I ask the minister again to consider having automatic, mandatory review of enhanced disclosure certificates every three years or so. Currently, if someone with such a certificate remained in situ for 10 years, the certificate would not be reviewed, although their circumstances may have changed and they may not be entitled to the certificate.

rose—

I will speak to the SNP amendment, but also in support of the motion. I note the terms of the Executive's amendment and have heard what the Executive has had to say on the matter—it is ridiculous. The Parliament has been debating the issue for years and it would be  ridiculous to go overboard about a last-minute Jack fix-it. These people have been suffering for years. The issue has been debated over and over in the chamber and it is ridiculous to expect Parliament to welcome, in the words of its amendment, the Executive acting with "the greatest possible urgency". What has been happening for all these years? The Executive's amendment urges ministers to continue discussions on a protocol. Come on—let us get into the real world and what has been happening to families day-in, day-out in Scotland and elsewhere, which Robin Harper graphically described. The Executive's amendment is a fix-it that is too late. The motion raises two issues that require to be addressed. The first is the morality of the deportation of asylum seekers in the first place when their application fails under a very harsh UK regime that makes dubious decisions about whether people will be penalised or victimised for their political views when they return. The second issue is that the regime distinguishes between asylum seekers and economic refugees. That is done in a country that has had more people go abroad as economic migrants than any other in the world: more than 5 million people of Scots descent are elsewhere. This is a different nation with different priorities and a different history. How does that regime square with Jack McConnell's speech to the Parliament on the fresh talent initiative? He said: "By 2009, Scotland's population will fall below the symbolic 5 million level. By 2027, there could be ... a quarter of a million fewer people of working age in Scotland. ... Population decline is serious."— [ Official Report , 25 February 2004; c 5940.]  These people have children who are at school here, would go on to university here and would work here. They are the very people whom we need. I cannot see how the current regime squares with the First Minister's so-called obligation to the fresh talent initiative. Robin Harper referred to the treatment of asylum seekers. Issues have arisen previously. The commissioner for children and young people stamps her feet and shouts. She is a wonderful woman, but she is toothless on the issue. She has no powers to do anything, although she has asked for such powers. I ask the Parliament to re-examine the Commissioner for Children and Young People (Scotland) Act 2003 to investigate what powers we could give to that wonderful person who is trying to champion the rights of children. The same situation occurs with respect to the role of the reporter to the children's panel. My amendment refers both to the commissioner for children and young people and to the reporter to  the children's panel. I have had a lot of communication about the matter because, through the freedom of information legislation, I found out about a case in which six children had been deported from Scotland while they were subject to an investigation by the reporter to the children's panel. When I asked ministers how that had happened, there was confusion all round. I received letters from Peter Peacock and Malcolm Chisholm. I also received answers from Wendy Alexander and from the First Minister, but nobody could explain to me why children who were under investigation by the reporter to the children's panel were deported before the investigations had been concluded. Those children had been subject to reservations under various sections of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995, which took into account the fact that they were "likely ... to suffer unnecessarily; or ... be impaired seriously in ... health or development, due to a lack of parental care" or were "likely to become, a member of the same household as a person in respect of whom an offence" has been committed. The offence that is referred to is sexual offences against the children. Those children were sent back with the same people while the case was under investigation. What did the ministers here know about that? Nothing, because London paid no attention to the jurisdiction of the reporter to the children's panel and it pays no attention to what the commissioner for children and young people has to say. It will also pay no attention to the Executive's wishy-washy amendment. I move amendment S2M-3323.1, to insert at end: "and, separately, calls on the UK Government to give due regard to the different child protection measures in Scotland, in particular the remit of the Commissioner for Children and Young People and the jurisdiction of the Reporter to the Children's Panel."

He has forgotten his name.

To ask the First Minister what impact rising fuel costs will have on targets to end fuel poverty by 2010. (S2F-1813)

I thank the First Minister for whichever answer he gave me. I remind the First Minister that, for every 5 per cent increase in fuel costs, 30,000 people are sent back into fuel poverty. Given that 3,000 people, most of them elderly, died in Scotland last year as a result of the cold and that 72 per cent of pensioners are completely unaware of Government programmes to help with heating, what is the First Minister doing to ensure that that figure is reduced, or at least does not increase?

First, I tender my apologies to the minister and to members for my late arrival, which was due to circumstances outwith my control and had nothing to do with cricket balls. I was formerly a family lawyer for 12 years, so that experience will obviously colour my observations on members' remarks and on the report. Indeed, my experience as an individual will also affect my observations. My views on the bill and the issues that arise from it differ from those  of Fergus Ewing and Brian Adam—I believe that we should not take party lines on the bill. I commend the report for being sensitive and thoughtful and I commend members for what they have said in the debate. Whether I agree with them or not, they have all brought different dimensions to the debate and have made it interesting. I think that the difficulty for us lies in trying to structure the law to deal with people who are in emotional turmoil. When a person walks into a lawyer's office in such circumstances—it is usually the woman, as Fergus Ewing said—they can seem at first to be in control of their emotions, but often within 10 minutes they are in tears and the hankie is brought out. Their lives tend to be chaotic emotionally and in their work at such times, and they are usually worried about what will happen to their children and their home. We are trying to structure something that will take the edge, the nastiness and the adversarial nature out of such circumstances, although it is not always possible to do that. I do not want to go into the individual cases to which members have referred, but my experience is that it is usually one of the parties in a relationship who causes the acrimony; it is not caused by the solicitors, the sheriff, the judge or the Court of Session. When children are involved, every effort is made by parties representing both sides to act in the children's interests. In doing so, they are also acting in the parents' interests, because the unhappy moments will pass and 10 years down the line, for example, mum and dad might have to be at their daughter's wedding or a christening. Therefore, we want the parents to be able to speak to each other. We do not want them to put such bile into their relationship that they cannot do so and end up, for example, not being able to see their grandchildren. It can be like trying to square a circle. I also want to raise the issue of marriage and cohabitation. I do not take the view that marriage is necessarily the best relationship for children to grow up in. I think that the best relationship is a happy, loving, caring, responsible one, whoever is involved in it, whether grandparents, an auntie or someone else—it does not matter, as long as they give the children stability. I suspect that many children of married parents are unhappy because their parents bicker and stay together only to save face or for other reasons. It would be kinder for children and others in such situations if parents faced reality and accepted that, although they had tried, the marriage was not working and that it was in neither their interests nor their children's to keep up the façade. I agree with Fergus Ewing that the first duty of a solicitor when a marriage breaks up is to try to  reconcile the husband and wife. I never forgot that obligation when such people came into my office. When a person bursts into tears after 10 minutes in a lawyer's office, the lawyer should not start by trying to divide the matrimonial property or by talking about what will happen to the children. The wife and husband should be allowed to talk to each other and the lawyer should listen. Sometimes, the husband and wife will resolve their problems themselves. Unfortunately, my experience was that everyone usually returned to my office in due course for a divorce or a separation agreement. Only one husband and wife with whom I dealt were reconciled, but I heard years later that they subsequently divorced. However, they had at least tried reconciliation to save their marriage. I distinguish between reconciliation and mediation. The latter has always had an important role to play in the sense of formal mediation or of solicitors sitting down informally together to talk about their clients to try to resolve property rights and rights in respect of children, who are usually the biggest issue. My experience therefore is that divorce is not easy. It was extremely painful for at least one of the parties with whom I dealt and it was, unfortunately, painful for the children. I approve of the move towards the view that recognising marriage by cohabitation with habit and repute has had its day. The report refers to that issue. I once obtained in that way—it was a one-off—recognition of marriage for a woman who wanted to receive her deceased partner's pension. I am glad that we seek to acknowledge that couples who think that they are in common-law marriages and have rights in respect of children and everything else do not have such rights. Members will realise from the flow of what I have said that I support divorce after one year with consent and after two years without consent. I want no-fault divorces. I have seen too many averments put down in divorce proceedings in which the pursuer says nasty things about the defender and vice versa and then the children get to read them. That method is used to put pressure on the parties and to get the divorce over with quickly. I want that sort of thing to be taken out of the system. We are dealing with people; they are nice people and they will reconstruct their lives, so let us not put fault into the matter. When one party decides that a marriage is at an end, it is at an end. Let us give that marriage a decent burial and allow the parties to move on.

Will the member take an intervention?

I associate myself with many of the remarks about the elderly made by John Swinburne. I have found the debate disgraceful in parts with its knockabout humour. We are talking about prosperity for all when many Scots are caught in the poverty trap; for them, simply getting through the week is a huge ordeal. When I was at school, I had a history teacher who tried to engage us in his lessons by making us do a compare and contrast exercise. He would give us two contemporary people of historic significance in order that the class could come to some deductive conclusions about their contributions to society. I will do my own bit of comparing and contrasting using the coalition's legislative programme and the First Minister's statement versus real life. The programme for communities is quickly dealt with because there are only two contentious areas in planning law. Those are applications that are designated as being of national importance to be fast-tracked, which is a euphemism for dispensing with consultation, and third-party rights of appeal in planning, which are to be rejected. As the coalition position is clear on both of those, the Communities Committee might as well fast-track the bill because, with the in-built Labour-Liberal majority, I can guarantee the stage 3 outcome now—apart from the tweaking of a few conjunctions and adverbs. As for the First Minister's speech, here are some highlights—or were they lowlights? I will omit the most banal. "We know that criminal behaviour in adulthood often has its origins in childhood and adolescence."— [ Official Report , 6 September 2005; c 18776.]  Cure: more legislation. "We want all children to become healthier, and to do that we are targeting resources", and "In 1999, one in three Scottish children were living in poverty. Now the figure is one in four".— [ Official Report , 6 September 2005; c 18779-80.]  The target is to eliminate child poverty by 2020 and the First Minister applauds that as an achievement, instead of shameful in an oil-rich, sophisticated, European nation. "Some 35,000 young people in Scotland between 16 and 19 are not in education, employment or training."— [ Official Report , 6 September 2005; c 18778.]  Cure: re-engage with those people. What on earth does that mean? Let us contrast all that with the real world and not the world according to Jack. I bring in evidence production 1, the Scottish Executive publication, "Indicators of Sustainable Development for Scotland: Progress Report 2005". Indicator 18 is about home life. In 1992, 17 per cent of children were living in workless households. In 2004, 18 per cent of children were living in workless households. There was a marginal improvement in 2001-02, but the figure has worsened since Jack McConnell took over from Henry McLeish. I quote from the publication: "Making the most of our greatest resource—our people—means giving every child the best possible start in life. Poverty of income and of opportunity in childhood is more likely to lead to poverty of experience as a young person and adult." There is no target for that. I bring in evidence production 2. It is the "Employability Framework for Scotland: Report of the NEET Workstream". NEET is a euphemistic acronym for not in employment, education or training and refers to those 35,000 children between 16 and 19 that I mentioned—14 per cent of the age group. I quote from the NEET report: "Research indicates that young people aged 16-19 who are NEET for a prolonged period are most likely to encounter persistent problems later in life." For instance, they are: "○ More than four times more likely to be out of work  ○ Three times more likely to have depression and mental health issues ○ Five times more likely to have a criminal record  ○ Six times less likely to have any qualifications". Ironically, the authors say on the front of the report: "Publication is not an undertaking that the Scottish Executive will implement their recommendations." The report describes a world that is very different from that of the knockabout debate that I have heard so much of today, on what Scotland is supposedly doing. This is not talking Scotland down. This is a reality check—a reality check that John Swinburne gave the chamber and that I am now giving too. And I remind John that we have been here not for one year but for six years. Six  years and nothing has changed for children and unemployed young people in Scotland. I will finish with a quote from a speech by the Rev Martin Johnstone on 5 March this year, when he addressed the annual general meeting of the Scottish League of Credit Unions. In his speech, he quoted Seebohm Rowntree, who 100 years ago said: "'That in this land of abounding wealth, during a time of perhaps unexampled prosperity, probably more than one fourth of the population are living in poverty, is a fact which may well cause great searchings of the heart. There is surely need for a greater concentration of thought by the nation upon the wellbeing of its own people, for no civilisation can be sound or stable which has at its base this mass of stunted life. The suffering may be all but voiceless, and we all remain ignorant of its extent and severity, but when once we realise it we see that social questions of profound importance await solution.'" The reverend then added: "It is staggering, and depressing, that a hundred years later his words are still so clearly appropriate and accurate." Just as they are, at this moment, in this chamber.

The member must be joking; I make six releases a week.

I am sure that the minister will agree that family mediation services have played a crucial—indeed, integral—role in matrimonial disputes and disputes over children. Is he therefore considering granting additional funding to family mediation services, whose role will increase under the Family Law (Scotland) Bill?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I congratulate Karen Gillon on securing the debate, which is not the first we have had on ASD. I also congratulate the campaigning groups who, quite rightly, continue to lobby us hard and the individual parents. Like Stewart Stevenson, I have experience of individual cases from my constituency case load. If I may, Deputy Presiding Officer, I will digress slightly from the motion. I want to make the connection between the fact that 3,090 pupils in Scotland have been identified as having ASD with the fact that they will leave school and become grown-ups. ASD is for life. If things are not good for the young person in the school setting, they are not much better when they leave school. One young woman, who was 21 and pretty—I have mentioned her before in the chamber—was not recognised as having a disability because her disability could not be seen. She tried to lead an independent life: she had work in a supermarket and an understanding employer. However, she also required supported housing, supported sleepovers and, as other members have said in relation to other cases, no change to her routine. Any change to her care package caused chaos. I do not know how her parents' marriage survived the strain. They were wonderful parents who had to take it in turns to deal with their daughter, whose life was often disarranged by changes in the care package. That is a terribly important issue. The one thing that I want to add to today's debate is that it is important to remember that ASD stays with people for life. There might be many people in prison, sleeping in the streets or with disorganised lives who have undiagnosed ASD. I know that this is not in the minister's brief, but I think that it would be interesting to have some analysis of the number of people who are in prison or are sleeping rough who have this disorder. That information would help us to find out where we are letting them down as well as where we are letting people down within the school framework.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will offer financial assistance to Borders NHS Board to ensure that the cottage hospitals in Coldstream and Jedburgh remain open, in light of local and professional opposition to the closure of the hospitals and following the publication of the Kerr report and its support for community hospitals. (S2O-7321)

That was not my question. I asked whether there would be any financial assistance. I remind the minister that the first of the Kerr report's top 10 proposals was for boards "to put in place a systematic approach to caring for the most vulnerable (especially older people) with long term conditions with a view to managing their conditions at home or in the community and reducing the chance of hospitalisation." That is exactly what Jedburgh and Coldstream hospitals do.

In the light of Margaret Mitchell's question, will the minister address the issue of funding? The proposal is a cost-saving exercise that has nothing to do with service delivery—

I thank the minister for the advance copies of his statement and the white paper. The difficulty in reading the white paper during the debate on the Housing (Scotland) Bill was mine, not his. I welcome the requirement for local development plans—which are held in disrepute and disregard because they are so outdated—to be reviewed, whether quinquennially or otherwise. I refer the minister to section 5.1.1 of the white paper, which is headed "A New Hierarchy for Planning". In particular, I refer to the paragraph on national developments—an issue on which he has  been quizzed before. The proposed tiered planning system is of interest. However, in the examples that are given, why has he not included nuclear power stations and major wind farm developments? Are those not national developments? In addition, what is meant by "the full involvement of Parliament" in those decisions, given that the decisions are to be made by Scottish ministers? Will that involvement be through committee scrutiny, bill procedure or vote? Will there be an appeal process for the public at large when decisions are made to categorise those developments, and will there be an appeal process within the procedures of the Parliament?

I welcome what the minister has said about progress following evidence taking by the committee. That shows the value of a committee that takes its task to heart. I will deal first with the single seller survey. I have always had reservations about the proposal, but that does not mean that I do not think that there is a place for it. However, as the evidence unfurled, many colleagues who do not have a legal background began to see some flaws in the proposal, including problems with shelf-life and the reasons for such a survey, that I think I was aware of from the beginning. It is fine to have something that is equivalent to a scheme 2 survey, but attaching a valuation to it can cause difficulties. We also need to think about the cost of the survey. As Colin Fox pointed out, introducing the survey will impact on people who do not have much money. The survey will probably have to be paid for up front, it will certainly cost more than £400, and sellers might simply not have that money to spare. As no small or medium-sized firm will carry outlays for the single seller survey and the other documents that are required for the purchasers information pack, the survey will put a severe burden on a house seller who has no capital whatever. On the other hand, rich people will be fine. Such a problem might stop people moving on. In that respect, I commend to the chamber the evidence submitted by the Glasgow Solicitors Property Centre, which seems to offer remedies for the timing of the single seller survey. I know that the minister has taken cognisance of the evidence that we received. In any case, I am not convinced that such a measure will end multiple surveys. I suspect that, notwithstanding the introduction of such a survey, building societies, banks and other lenders will demand that prospective purchasers obtain their own valuations. Karen Whitefield, Donald Gorrie and other members mentioned the private rented housing panel. The committee wanted the panel's remit to be extended; as Donald rightly pointed out, housing matters centre mostly on people versus property, not on one or the other aspect, and I am glad that we recommended that the panel's remit should cover mediation and the separate function of adjudication. I note from Citizens Advice  Scotland's evidence that, according to the mediation service at Edinburgh sheriff court, 20 per cent of cases dealt with between November 2004 and April 2005 related to disputes between landlords and tenants. Moreover, as Linda Fabiani pointed out, one in 10 issues that are dealt with in citizens advice bureaux concern housing. As we know, the sooner intervention happens, the happier people are and the less expense everyone incurs. At this point, I should say that the rent deposit scheme is an excellent idea that was endorsed by almost all, if not all, committee members. I also commend Citizens Advice Scotland's submission, which suggests that, in any such scheme, "all deposits" should be "held by an independent third party"; that any dispute should be referred to "an independent alternative dispute resolution service", which is what we have suggested with regard to the private rented housing panel; and that there should be a "sanction for landlords who charge deposits but fail to pay them into the scheme". Many of us have anecdotal or other evidence of students and others in houses in multiple occupation who, when they try to get back their deposit of, say, £350, find that repairs to the property such as wallpapering and carpet cleaning magically appear from nowhere. They do not get that deposit back and most of them give up trying to do so. The current system is very unfair. Patrick Harvie, Maureen Macmillan and Nora Radcliffe dealt with energy efficiency very well. I like Nora's suggestion that a thermal photograph should be taken of a property, although I should point out that the thermal photograph that was taken of this building got us into trouble. I suspect that, given the heat in the building, very interesting thermal photographs could be taken of some members. The issue is certainly important. Maureen Macmillan made the very good point that there is no tradition of valuing energy efficiency in Scotland. I hope that, given the Scandinavian example, the issue becomes much more essential to new build in Scotland. John Home Robertson focused on the housing shortage in Scotland and David Davidson mentioned rural proofing. I should say to Rob Gibson that the issues that he highlighted also arise in the Borders. I assure members that we received comprehensive evidence from the Scottish Estates Business Group and the Scottish Rural Property and Business Association and listened carefully to what they said. Some committee members know about the special costs of repairing, bringing up to standard or even  adapting properties in rural areas. They cannot even be insulated because they have solid stone walls or special roofs or because Historic Scotland will not allow the windows to be changed. The committee understood all that, which is why we recommended that there must be local flexibility within the national framework. Moreover, other members have mentioned the cost to rural and remote communities, such as those on the islands, of bringing across materials and tradesmen in order to repair properties. The committee was well aware of all those matters. On disability issues, which Sandra White, Donald Gorrie and others highlighted, I welcome the review of means testing. Having ring-fenced funding would be excellent; I am not always in favour of such a measure, but it has its place here. I also look forward to the minister's answer to the question whether there will be an upper limit to grants. Members have not really touched on resources. The committee raised concerns about whether the financial resources and the personnel were available to allow, in particular, local authorities to carry out repairs, to monitor the schemes and to do everything that they are required to do. As always, it will cost more than the Finance Committee's report suggests. I have to say that I was a bit disappointed in that report, which concluded that the financial aspects were okay. I see you twitching, Presiding Officer, so I know that I have a minute—

I was ahead of you. The SNP supports the bill's principles, subject to the caveats that are set out in the committee's report and to an assurance that consideration of amendments at stage 2 will be paced sensibly and that we will have fewer amendments at stage 3, which will allow us more time to consider and debate them and the substance of associated regulations. I share Donald Gorrie's concerns on that last point. I realise that that is quite a list of caveats, but the Parliament has a habit of passing legislation in haste. In that respect, the lesson for the minister is, "Legislate in haste, sue at leisure."

Does the minister agree that it is not the buyers but the lenders—the banks and building societies—that rely on the scheme 1 valuation? We must bear that in mind and consider whether lenders will have to rely on single seller surveys that may be three or four months old.

I rise this evening to speak the words of Hauwa Ibrahim, who is in the public gallery, just as in 1999 a man had to speak her words in court because, as a woman, she was prohibited from speaking. Hauwa is an extraordinary woman and I will never forget her compelling speech at the W8 conference today. These are her words: "I am married with two sons and I've worked pro bono on 10 cases of women accused of adultery—some sentenced to be stoned to death, some sentenced to flogging—and several cases of boys sentenced to amputation for offences like stealing cattle. I was born and brought up a Muslim. My father was ... one of the mullahs who call for prayers. It was not allowed for girls to go beyond the elementary schools (in my village). At the age of 12, 13, you should be ready for marriage. I refused to get married because I thought, 'I want to get more education.' I picked up a newspaper on the road, and I saw a university graduate with a four-square cap. And I thought, 'I must be like that person.' I funded my schooling by picking roots to hawk. I was hawking anything that is hawkable—food items, vegetables, peanuts. I practiced law in the northern part of Nigeria, and it exposed me to the entire 19 states of the federation. That's into the hinterland, some of the places you can't go by bicycle or motorbike. I had to use camels or donkeys to get to the villages. But I was determined to go out and do the work. We have 11 cases for amputation that I am handling. They are in Sokoto prison, nine of them are under the age of 18 ... I do feel uncomfortable, at times fearful. When it comes to the issue of death, the moment you stone the first woman, there may be no stopping of it. And I cannot live with that. Because of that, I fight ... I fight my fear. Almost all those women ... are from a very poor background, the same background that I came from. I feel that I'm returning back to humanity what I was given in terms of my education". Thank you.

I declare an interest as an enrolled but non-practising solicitor with historic experience as a civil legal aid lawyer for 12 years. It has been six years since I last practised but, even then, the legal aid system was imploding. Solicitors were voting with their feet and partners in some firms were not prepared to allow anyone to continue to do legal aid work, because it was being subsidised  by their fees. This crisis has been a long time coming. I will come later to the Justice 1 Committee's report, which, as members will recall, is now five years old; there are things to say about how little we have moved forward since then. I agree with much of what members have said. Simple things such as cash flow, which Jackie Baillie mentioned, can be relevant. If small firms in particular did legal aid cases, that might keep them doing business for the time being. There is a lot of merit in Annabel Goldie's suggestion about accredited solicitors with different rates. There is merit in suggestions that have been made all round the chamber. Jeremy Purvis referred to mediation. I went to Baltimore two years ago to look at how mediation operates there: it is taken seriously and used in large commercial cases. Companies no longer go at each other in court like bulls, thereby wasting money and court time. They mediate because they know that most civil litigation ends in compromise, either between the parties or imposed by the sheriff. That saves a great deal of public money all round. In Baltimore, mediation is also used in criminal cases. I do not know whether the ministers have visited Baltimore yet, but mediation is pushed by the leader there, who has made a great change to the system. The good thing about mediation is that parties have agreed to it. It is not adjudication; it is mediation. Parties buy into the solution and have to stick by it. I refer to the briefing paper from Citizens Advice Scotland. CAS does a lot of good work, at a basic level, on the issues that Jackie Baillie referred to. Those issues include housing, in which many solicitors do not have technical expertise; hire purchase and debt; and employment, which is a specialist area. CAS also does great work on state benefits. However, its work is patchy and it is underfunded. It depends very much on volunteers, and on volunteer solicitors, who work in the evenings to give advice on criminal or civil matters. We must consider all those aspects. A point was made about the costs of legal aid. I was pleased to hear the minister talk about contributions to criminal legal aid, because there is always an issue about how big the legal aid bill is. In civil legal aid, though, many people contribute. I note from the Legal Aid Board's figures that 30 per cent of civil costs are recovered, so to some extent civil legal aid pays its way through expenses. I am disappointed that the report from the Justice 1 Committee—of which I was a member at the time—has made so little impact. The parties from which the committee took evidence are to be consulted again. We took evidence from Professor Alan Paterson; the Scottish Consumer Council; Citizens Advice Scotland; the Equal Opportunities  Commission; the Faculty of Advocates; Victim Support Scotland; the Association of Scottish Legal Advice Networks; Scottish Women's Aid; the Glasgow Bar Association; the Law Society of Scotland; the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland—I could go on. All that evidence is contained in the report and, as far as I can see, nothing in the system has changed. Sandra White talked about inconsistencies in the use of the pension credit. Recommendation 52 in the committee's report says: "The Committee is concerned about inconsistencies in the treatment of benefits and recommends that as a matter of urgency the Executive should examine this matter with the aim of seeking to simplify the system"—

Unfortunately, we took that evidence five years ago. Five years ago, we told the minister about the inconsistencies in the system. That situation could have been remedied. There are still inconsistencies in the benefits system and we said that we looked forward to receiving proposals at an early stage. Likewise, in recommendation 116 we said: "the Committee is seriously concerned about the lack of a strategic overview, planning and delivery of the provision of legally aided services in Scotland". We said that five years ago. We said at the time—to be fair I will read it—that the committee "is not yet convinced on the need to set up a legal services commission." However, we have moved on. My heart is with civil legal aid, having practised as a civil legal aid lawyer for 12 years and my concern—I say this to the minister to be helpful—is that, once the Executive has finished its consultation and implemented the Justice 1 Committee's report, we must have an independent commission to take a strategic overview on how we draw together all the skills in the interest of access to justice across the board, whether locally or nationally, and in the interest of the public purse. I welcome the minister's announcement that the fund will not be capped, but we must make the best use of the money in a society that is litigious—rightfully so, sometimes, given that people are more aware of their rights. That is the case especially now that we have the European convention on human rights and the Disability  Discrimination Act 1995, which will raise other issues on access to buildings, for example. I do not say that to be hostile. I ask the Executive not to waste the Justice 1 Committee's work and not to spend time doing another consultation with the same people—we could almost write their responses now—but to have an independent commission take a strategic look at the delivery of legal aid services throughout Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is now satisfied with the operation of Disclosure Scotland. (S2O-7216)

Is the minister aware that, once someone has passed the enhanced disclosure procedure, there is no review mechanism in place? There will be an inquiry only if the volunteer moves organisation or if a third party makes a referral to the organisation. A volunteer might stay with an organisation for 10 years. Does the minister agree that there may be a place for a mandatory review system? Reviews could be carried out every three years, for example.

I am interested in what the minister is saying, but how can young people put in bids for project funding? If the minister cannot tell us now, perhaps he can let us know in writing,  because it would be worth while for projects similar to the just youth project to be run in other areas.

I, too, congratulate Karen Whitefield, the young people and staff of the just youth project and, perhaps most important, the residents of Gartlea Gardens who took part in the DVD. I regret that I have not seen it yet—I have been whirling about the Borders today—but I intend to see it and to bring it to the attention of the director of education at Scottish Borders Council. I was sitting on a panel with him this afternoon and I will tell him all about it. The title of the DVD is, "Age: It's Just a Number". I like that idea, because that is how I look on myself, and I intend to do so for a very long time. As someone who is now a pensioner, I am annoyed by the stereotypes that exist of older people and young people. I know that I look my age, but I do not think that I look like a pensioner. What does a pensioner look like? We are all different. We have different personalities, and it is the same with young people. They are all different; they look different, they have different attitudes and they are individuals. Older people and young people have much in common. Older people are thought of as doddery people who do not have much to contribute to society. Young people are thought of as a pain in  the neck—people think that their heads are full of nonsense, that they play loud music and that they do not have much to contribute to society. In that sense, older people and young people have something in common, and they can have a dialogue straight away. Of course, younger people often get on well with their grandparents and bypass their parents and talk to their grandparents about things. When my sons were going through the pimply, difficult stage—they are still doing that and they are older now, but never mind—it was my mother or father who would have a word in my ear and say, "I think I should have a wee word with you about so-and-so. He was just telling me such-and-such." I had to be terribly discreet; my sons would not tell me things, but they knew that they would come back to me via their grandparents. Older people and young people have an awful lot to say to each other and an awful lot to learn from each other. I am sure that that is proved by the just youth project. I make a tiny plug for the up to you project in the Borders, in which the Deputy Minister for Justice might be interested too. In that project, young people from Peebles High School go out not to visit older people but to communicate with the younger generation at primary schools about the temptations of alcohol, drugs, casual sex and all that stuff. They are listened to because they can enter into a dialogue in a way that middle-aged people perhaps cannot. I say to the young people who are here that my only difficulty is that I do not know how to work a DVD. I could have a dialogue with them about that straight away. I do not have a DVD player at home, and I do not know whether my office computer plays DVDs.

I have learned something from being at the debate. I look forward to somebody coming to show me how to work it so that I can watch the DVD and publicise it in the Borders.

I, too, add my congratulations to Jackie Baillie—not just on her motion but on her persistence in parliamentary questions on these issues. I also want to thank Enable Scotland for a very full briefing for this debate. Recently, when I was visiting sheltered housing on parliamentary business, I met an elderly gentleman who told me that earlier in his life he had been kept in an institution for 32 years. That  had been his life, before he got a job and moved on. Thank goodness that, to some extent, the days have gone when such things could happen. However, I sometimes wonder how many of the people who sleep rough on the streets have fallen through care nets. They may have learning disabilities and have no one to take up their cause. The briefing from Enable raises several issues on which I would like to focus. We have already heard that only one in every five people with learning disabilities has been identified by local authorities. There is clearly a huge gap and we have to find the people who are not being given any assistance. Enable points out that, of the people with learning disabilities who attend further education, 54 per cent attend for only one day or less each week, and only 17 per cent attend for more than three days. That seems to be not just a case of having low expectations of people, but a case of tokenism. We should be truly giving people the opportunity to develop and to fulfil their potential. Enable also refers to direct payments. I have spoken about direct payments before; they are a wonderful way of allowing people to have some control over their life. They allow people to decide who will care for them and how they will be paid. I do not know whether the issue is part of the minister's brief, but I understand that there will be changes to Direct Payments Scotland. At the moment, there is a network of support service providers for people who use the system. The network, which covers all of Scotland, shares good practice and encourages people to take up direct payments. I think that a little bit of a battle is going on between Direct Payments Scotland and local authorities. Local authorities' noses are a bit out of joint because people now receive payments directly. Local authorities have not been good at helping people to get direct payments. Enable's briefing says that, in March 2004, 912 people in Scotland were receiving direct payments. Of that total, only 135 were people with learning disabilities—which is only 0.6 per cent of all the people with learning disabilities who are known to local authorities. That is a pretty appalling figure. In building people's confidence, there is nothing better than letting them decide for themselves what they get, rather than simply telling them what they get. Jackie Baillie spoke about health. A fatal accident inquiry into the death in 2000 of a man with a learning disability led to several recommendations, including: having specialist learning disability nurses in general hospitals; offering training in learning disabilities to hospital staff; and providing advocacy services. All of us can feel overwhelmed when trying to explain an emergency in a hospital; I ask members to  imagine how confused and lacking in confidence a person with a learning disability might become. Five years after that inquiry, the implementation of the recommendations has been very patchy. I understand that many health boards have still not produced comprehensive and timetabled action plans. Producing such plans does not seem a terribly difficult thing to do—a point that links to what Jackie Baillie said about general practitioners and primary care. I suspect that there is a huge gap there as well. I commend the Scottish Executive for what has been done so far, but some pretty practical things could be done right now to improve people's circumstances. I would also like to know how we can identify all the people with learning disabilities who have yet to be identified as such.

Will the voluntary smart card be separate from or amalgamated with the national concessionary fares scheme card? In either event, will we still have the concessionary fares scheme in 2006?

It is a pleasure to support Alex Fergusson on his long pilgrimage to have some serious effort put into providing a cure for ME. He knows that I became involved after a friend of mine was diagnosed with ME. My friend has ended up in a wheelchair. He can now manage things to some extent, but, as ME is a spasmodic illness, he has bad spells. I have said in the chamber before that sometimes, when he does things too fast, the electrics go awry and he has to spend hours trying to shave. It takes ages before he can work his way back again. It has taken an inordinately long time to discharge the label of yuppie flu. Thankfully, that is no longer around, although the thought still lingers in some people's minds that people with ME are "at it". Perhaps a minority of people are, but someone cannot be "at it" when they are in a wheelchair or when, if they do something quickly, they are debilitated for a long time afterwards. I will not go into funding; one of my colleagues will address that. I also cannot repeat the eloquent information that Alex Fergusson gave to the chamber today. I want to mention the impact on and the difficulties for people with ME in accessing benefits; an issue that I have raised previously in the Parliament. If we do not pursue a cure, sufferers will be disadvantaged in several ways, because the tests that are applied for disability benefits are not relevant to someone with ME. They might be asked if they can walk up stairs or do certain tasks; of course, on one day they are able to do them and pass the test, but they might not be able to function for many days and weeks thereafter. They face a double whammy: they have an illness for which there is a possibility of a  cure that is not being pursued and they are also denied the assistance that is given to others who have illnesses that are, in some respects, visible. I welcome the debate. I am sure that Alex Fergusson will be successful one day, as his determination certainly bowls me over. I hope that it bowls the minister over.

I feel as if I should stand up and then sit down if I am to be as quick as possible. The vast majority of volunteers in the charitable sector are excellent, dedicated and honest people. They work in a vast and varied sector, which ranges from wee shops that sell second-hand toys and furniture in order to help ill-treated animals—there is one such shop opposite my office in Galashiels—to mega-charities such as Oxfam. However, when a few bad apples contaminated the barrel, the repercussions on donations and on people's attitude towards the sector were ill-deserved. The bill will remedy that situation by providing a framework and an independent office—OSCR—whose role, which should not be underestimated, will be to regulate and assist the charitable sector. I believe that the Communities Committee strengthened the bill. We had the usual healthy tensions that should exist between a committee and a minister, such as the skirmish over a humble little amendment of mine, which I never expected to win. The distraction concerning the independent schools sector skewed things,  because the bill is vast and comprehensive and deals with much more that independent schools, including many things that are much needed in Scotland. The SNP will support the bill.

No.

rose—

I will move amendment 60, but I may have to seek leave to withdraw it. I want to hear what the minister has to say about his amendment 41. Amendments 60 and 61 are Law Society of Scotland amendments and they are quite technical. Under old Scots law rules, there is a general rule against the delegation of trust duties. Current market practice has developed in such a way that, to comply with electronic market deadlines, individual shareholders have shares held in nominee names. If anything goes wrong with the nominee, the trustee could be exposed to unlimited personal liability. Therefore, amendment 60 seeks to give authorisation to trustees to have investments held by a nominee company. Under the same general rule against the delegation of trust duties, if anything went wrong with a third  party, the trustee could be exposed to unlimited liability. Amendment 61 seeks to give authorisation to trustees to delegate investment decisions to a suitably qualified person. Amendments 60 and 61 seek to give trustees the power to wield the wider investment powers that are contained in the bill. I look forward to hearing the minister advise whether his amendments deal with those issues. I move amendment 60.

We need a little more light and a little less heat. Section 8 applies not just to independent schools, but to a wide spectrum of organisations, of which private hospitals and sports clubs are just two examples. The issue is proportionality. The test is whether the payment made is so great that it is unduly restrictive, which  means that the organisation that charges the fee is not inclusive. That is a matter not for the Parliament, but for OSCR. Mention has been made of the Inland Revenue. I understand that, as Donald Gorrie highlighted, the Inland Revenue will completely ignore the position that OSCR takes on charitable status in that it will treat organisations that have been disarmed of charitable status as if they were charities. I think that that is something to get excited about. It makes me despair when Westminster is prepared to override the will of the Scottish Parliament to do something for Scotland. That is not a constitutional point; it is a fact.

The only reason why I feel that amendment 54 cannot be supported is that its use of the phrase "directly or indirectly" in paragraph (c) of the subsection that it seeks to insert is very woolly.

Amendment 22 is a humble and practical amendment that I hope will find favour—indeed, I think that a similar amendment that I lodged at stage 2 found favour with some committee members. The amendment simply seeks to provide for a list of charities that are defunct or have been removed from the register. Members may wonder what the purpose of the amendment is. One often thinks of the student with no money who tries to find a charity to help them. A charity that was set up some time ago may still be lurking somewhere; even if it is no longer functioning, it may still have assets that, under its charitable purposes, are directed specifically to a football bursary, let us say. The student might not know that the charity existed and might have great difficulty finding it. However, if OSCR kept a list, anyone who sought to find out whether a defunct charity or a charity that had been removed from the register still had assets would be able to find such bodies centrally and, perhaps, access them. When I raised that idea in committee, the minister rejected my amendment, saying that "such a list is unnecessary, as section 47 allows financial institutions to inform OSCR of any dormant charity accounts."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 27 April 2005; c 2095.] That is simply allowing; it is not compelling. If we were to compel, a comprehensive list would be available to the whole of Scotland. I cannot understand why the minister is so resistant to that idea. The amendment seems sensible and practical. The measure would be useful to many people throughout Scotland and I look forward to hearing what the minister has to say about it. I move amendment 22.

I wish to press it.

I will be terribly brief. I cannot accept the minister's position with respect to amendment 48. I understand that snooker is a sport, but the physical exertion that is involved is tiny—men simply lean over a table and push a little ball about. Therefore, the word "or" is more appropriate than the word "and". [ Interruption. ] I cannot see the definition.  I would like members' attention again. My second point is on amendment 47. I have only a tiny amount of time to speak—I will then let another member say something. I have difficulties with Karen Whitefield's proposal that the purpose should be "public participation in sport". If a person stands and shouts their lungs out in the hope that Scotland will score a goal, that is public participation in sport in my book, but I would not say that it is a charitable purpose. The definition is slack. I was content with the "amateur sport" wording that we started with and to leave it to OSCR to decide whether there was too much professionalism and therefore whether something was no longer a charity.

rose—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I simply want to make the point that I do not recollect the suggestion being made by sportscotland to the Communities Committee.

The Scottish National Party supports amendments 20 and 27. I note that amendment 58 has been supplanted by amendment 64, which we also support. I have the same concerns as Donald Gorrie has with regard to amendments 33 and 45. The committee was clear that there is a world of difference between mismanagement and misconduct. Mismanagement might be so gross that it can be interpreted as being misconduct, but there are minor errors that cannot be called misconduct. The SNP will not be supporting the Executive's amendments 33 and 45, which seem to fly in the face of the rather decent-spirited amendments that were agreed to at stage 2 and which reflected the strong views of the committee, whose stage 1 report says: "The Committee recommends that the Executive should amend the definition of "misconduct" in section 103 to reduce the possibility of those charity trustees who make relatively minor and genuine errors of mismanagement having action taken against them." That was a unanimous recommendation and, as far as I know, the committee's view has not shifted.

I support amendment 46. I refer Parliament to the spirit of the committee's stage 1 report. In paragraph 21 of the executive summary, we say: "The Committee ... encourages the Executive to ensure that charities have the advice and support necessary to help them adapt to the new regulatory framework." The committee also made it plain that it did not want a burden to be placed on OSCR for specific guidance, but that charities should be given more general guidance about the appropriate direction in which to go, thereby helping them to avoid falling foul of regulations. The Scottish National Party supports amendment 46.

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Executive intends to measure the success of the  fresh talent initiative and how the Executive will make the resulting information available to MSPs. (S2F-1710)

I will not thank the First Minister for that answer. If the number of lame excuses that the First Minister gives this Parliament were matched by the number of people settling in Scotland each year, I am sure that we would not have a population crisis. How satisfied is the First Minister that the low targets that he set for bringing fresh talent to Scotland—only 8,000 a year—will be met? At what stage is he prepared to put his hand up, face reality and say that the fresh talent initiative is dead in the water, blocked by London, thwarted and emasculated?

On the point about sovereignty, the interesting case of the Lord Advocate v MacCormick established that sovereignty in Scotland lies with the people. If the people decide that they want their sovereignty, they shall have it.

I congratulate John Swinburne on securing the debate, which the Scottish National Party welcomes. Devolution has been a success to some extent. We have been able to hold the Executive coalition to account and scrutinise legislation. There has been too much legislation, but we have been able to pass decent laws, which would not have received parliamentary time at Westminster. During the six years since devolution, I have been a member of the Scottish Parliament and I have witnessed the maturing of the Parliament. I liken my MSP class of 1999 to a primary 7 class, whereas the class of 2005 is more like the sixth year. We have travelled a long way, individually and collectively, since 1999. In time, the shadow of the cost of the Holyrood building will disappear and we will be judged, as we should be judged, on our performance as politicians, individually and collectively. However, it is apparent that devolution  is a journey, not an end in itself. I say that not just because I favour independence but because it is a fact. There are and always will be tensions between reserved and devolved matters. For example, energy is reserved, but the environment and planning are devolved, so there are tensions to do with nuclear power stations, which are not wanted by the people of this country. There are tensions to do with debt. Consumer credit is reserved, but we must pick up the pieces of freely available consumer credit. We have to deal with the bankruptcies, broken marriages and ill health of people who carry huge burdens of debt, but we can do nothing about the enticements of consumer credit that lead so many people into debt. Scotland's population is increasingly elderly. We have more pensioners than we have primary and secondary schoolchildren and, thankfully, many people are living longer. That is reflected in the fact that we can buy 100 th birthday cards in ordinary retail shops. There must be lots of 100-year-olds. The demographic change will impact on our public services, such as health, housing and transport. The Parliament has done some good things. Free personal care had cross-party support, although we lost the £20 million that was saved in benefits. Westminster clawed that back—it did not come to this Parliament—so when we make savings we do not get the money to put into other areas. Free concessionary travel from 2006 for our older people and the central heating programme are both good initiatives. However, we have no control over pensions, tax and benefits. One in five of our pensioners lives in poverty and 40 per cent of those who are entitled to the pension credit simply do not apply for it. Many of the pensioners who live in poverty are single women who are not even entitled to the shamefaced £79 per week basic state pension. There is no point in having heating installed through the central heating programme if people cannot put their heating on. This Parliament can do nothing about that. It is as plain as a pikestaff that what England needs is its independence, which I would give it tomorrow, so that ridiculous and unjust political borders are removed and we become a true, normal Parliament that is responsible to the people and responsive to the people. We could deal with the big issues that are important to people, such as war, as well as the smaller ones. Would we have gone to Iraq if we had been an independent Parliament? I doubt it. We could deal with international affairs. On poverty, I welcome the First Minister's statement on Malawi, but, like Norway, we could do so much more as an independent nation. There is only one way  forward, and that is towards democratic, accountable and accessible independence.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I apologise. I will let him continue.

Thank you very much. I apologise to Donald Gorrie for that. It was very  rude of me. Questions have been asked previously on the issue that Adam Ingram raised, as it concerns the welfare of the children and referrals to the children's panel. That is the issue and I am concerned that such questions are now being ruled out of order.

First, I make it clear that Ms Robison has given her excuses to the Presiding Officer for not being here for the conclusion of the debate. I preface my main remarks with a recognition that the vast majority of staff in our hospitals are decent, caring people, who frequently work under pressure and in understaffed conditions. That hits home most when older people are involved. They require that most precious commodity of all: time—time to help them with their meals; time for staff to toilet them; and time to stop and talk. That has been recognised by many members, including Stewart Maxwell. I acknowledge what Carolyn Leckie said. The debate is not an attack on staff in hospitals; however, it is about what is happening to some—to many—of our people. This is where I take issue with some of what the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care said, although I acknowledge and welcome the comments that she has made and the steps that she is taking following the two tragic cases that we have been discussing. I cannot agree that the problems are not systemic. I simply do not know whether what happened to Mrs Dick and Mrs Irons is or is not part of something systemic. There are too many such examples. I will not go through the case of my own mother, which I covered in a members' business debate, but just about everybody sitting in the chamber has an example to give. It is when a tragedy takes place that we focus on the issues. People are being neglected: they are unable to feed themselves and they are not being looked after. Their cases might not become tragedies, but they are being treated in that way because they are elderly, and people do not have time to look after them. I will put the matter into context. I say to Richard Baker that there are, indeed, instances of direct discrimination. He said that there is no such policy,  but there is. Historically, clinical trials and medical research tend to exclude older patients, yet they can be given medication that has not been tested on them. Screening programmes for breast cancer apply to women aged between 50 and 70, who are called regularly, but after the age of 70, women are not called and must apply, despite the fact that the chances of developing breast cancer increase as women get older. Help the Aged's very helpful briefing paper states: "One estimate has suggested that 1500 lives could be saved annually if the programme was extended to older women". Therefore, there are policies that directly affect older people. I want to concentrate on the indirect discrimination that has been described in some speeches. The use of the term "bed blocker" stigmatises older people. They are talked about as if they are a category, like furniture. In fact, older people are individuals. They are as quirky as Mike Rumbles.

They are as quirky as Andy Kerr and they are as different as Stewart Stevenson. By the way, he has now delivered his 200 th speech. I do not know whether to weep or laugh at that. I have not been here for them all, thank goodness. Stereotypes are being made. That is a cultural issue, which is why I am summing up for the Scottish National Party today. This is not just a health issue; it is a cultural issue that applies to all manner of services. The list of issues goes on. One is mixed accommodation. I understand that the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care has put money towards getting rid of mixed-sex accommodation. I do not know what has happened in that regard—perhaps the minister will tell us. If she cannot do so today, she might be able to write to us another time and explain what has been done. What could be more humiliating for older men and women than having to share wards? It is appalling. Sometimes, a nurse will come along and immediately call somebody by their first name—it can be a simple thing like that. Some older people like to be called by their full name and might not have asked to be called by their first name, yet a nurse will come along and say, "How are you, Jeannie?" and the person will get upset. There is a discourtesy in that. That can be even more the case among older people from ethnic minorities, who might not have the best command of English. They can find themselves more isolated, and their age will make that even more difficult.  Jackie Baillie said that hospital can be the default response. Admissions can often follow a fall in the home, for example a fall from a stepladder, because no home help comes in who can change the light bulb or reach up to the high cupboard, or a fall in the bath, which would not have taken place if a walk-in shower had been fitted. If we made some progress on the provision of aids and adaptations through social work services, fewer older people would be admitted to hospital. The best medicine for us all in hospital, whether we are young or old, cannot be found in a bottle. It is not medication. It is called TLC—tender, loving care. That is what our older people require.

Will the member take an intervention?

I welcome Professor Kerr's whole-hearted endorsement of community hospitals which—I note—the minister shares. Will the minister send a clear message to Borders NHS Board not to close Jedburgh and Coldstream cottage hospitals and, as a postscript to his message, will he send them the funding that will keep them open?

I know that I am not always the best behaved member in this chamber, as the frowns from the Presiding Officers often tell me. However, and even though I may be making a noose for my own neck, I detect a trend. Increasingly, members who have taken part in a debate are not present for the wind-up speeches. I appreciate that members may have other commitments, but their absence can be inappropriate when those winding up answer points that they have raised or perhaps even compliment them.

Not yet, minister, although I think that there will be tiny compliments later. I should say that I am a member of a credit union—although that is not in the register of members' interests—and I worked for a long time as a volunteer solicitor at a citizens advice bureau. Like everybody else here, I have done bits and pieces. I welcome the minister's initial comment that we should not be patronising about the voluntary sector. If all we do is talk about motherhood and apple pie, we do a huge disservice to the voluntary sector. The sector is dynamic and robust, and it deals with difficult issues—sometimes too difficult. It was also appropriate that the minister celebrated diversity—the volunteers range from individuals to mega-organisations. She also touched on the provision of vital services. Our amendment relates to that, and I will come to it later. She also touched on homelessness. One thinks of the work of Shelter Scotland to address policy on homelessness and one thinks of "The Big Issue", which has taken the stigma away from being homeless. "The Big Issue" is a major and in-your-face operation; people coming out of  supermarkets meet people who are homeless and can buy a magazine that is worth buying. Shelter and "The Big Issue" are major contributors but there are also small ones. I thought that John Scott was reading out the charities in his constituency from "Yellow Pages". As he spoke, I could see press releases growing like fruit on the trees—but why not, John, why not? I am going to talk about Homestart, which does not operate in my constituency; I just happened to meet some people who work for it. The organisation has a £25,000 budget for different areas. Using that money, it supports families in difficulty that have children under five years of age.

He fell for the bait, and no wonder.

Absolutely not. I was talking about Homestart, which spends only about £5,000 on each family. We could consider the example of a mother who has post-natal depression and is not coping. With that little bit of money, the family can stay together and the children can avoid health problems. The children will also not stop attending school. Stewart Stevenson pointed out that the benefit of the voluntary sector is not always monetary but can be something else that is hard to weigh. Linda Fabiani was right to say that social enterprises emerged from the voluntary sector. She was also correct that there are too many funding strands for voluntary sector organisations, which is a point with which many members have sympathy—I sense that there could be support for the SNP amendment, although it will not get it, except from the Conservatives and perhaps from the Greens. Funding does not always begin and end at the same time, so an organisation might have three-year funding from one stream and another that starts at a different time, which creates difficulties. That brings me to Stewart Stevenson's mixed metaphor, which was the glory of the debate and a joy to hear. He talked about using scaffolding to allow us to navigate. I wonder how we would get on, navigating the seas of life with scaffolding round us, but there we are—that shows that I was listening to his speech. The serious issue is the importance of continuity of funding. The issue is not simply about providing a blank cheque. Our amendment mentions "measures to ensure continued and stable core funding",  which of course would be put in place after discussion with the voluntary sector. That could mean audit trails or assessment, but surely once a project is established it should not have to fight for funding from the various sources, such as the Lloyds TSB Foundation for Scotland and lottery funding. I agree with Stewart Stevenson—in fact, I think that it is party policy—that we should have a national lottery fund. I regard the lottery as a voluntary tax on the poor that is then applied to people who are poor. Mary Scanlon's points about the citizens advice bureaux were correct—they almost have the role of solicitors and they have concerns about their funding. I do not always enjoy Donald Gorrie's speeches, but I enjoyed today's. I agree with him about local control, fairness in council procurement and the need for sustained core funding. We saw that need in the Justice 1 Committee when we considered throughcare provision for prisoners. I concur completely with Donald Gorrie's points on disclosure. The present system uses a hammer to crack a walnut, or whatever the metaphor is—I am drowning in metaphors—and gives rise to unfairness. If somebody has a complaint made against them and the police make a charge but the case is not prosecuted, the matter remains on the disclosure form, even though there has been no test of the evidence and the person has had no chance to clear their name. I understood Jim Mather's speech, although I do not always understand his language. He had a delicious phrase about navigating financial and compliance issues. We are doing a lot of navigating in this part of the chamber—perhaps Jim will need some of Stewart Stevenson's scaffolding. Jim Mather also talked about a local fulfilment vehicle, which I think means a charity or a voluntary organisation. I do not mean to be spiteful; he is really good on such matters and he taught economics, but sometimes I am at a loss. He made a serious point about the role of volunteers in making areas more attractive to investors and businesses and the knock-on effect of that. I agree with Karen Whitefield that volunteering is good for the volunteer—that is self-evident—and John Farquhar Munro was right about the increased costs for people who volunteer in rural areas. We will vote against the Green amendment, because the suggestion is too complicated and the issue is already too complicated—it is a quagmire. We thank the Conservatives for their support for our amendment. As the Executive will accept the Green amendment, we have no choice but to abstain on the Executive's motion. The issue of core funding is essential because if small, medium and large voluntary sector organisations stopped tomorrow, basic services would also stop.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I apologise for interrupting Mark Ballard, but I point out that there is no minister on the front bench to listen to his speech.

I thank Donald Gorrie for his kind words. Does he agree that, when we were on the Justice 1 Committee together, we heard of many wonderful rehabilitation courses and throughcare schemes for prisoners that hit the buffers because they had to fight for streams of funding? That is an example of what our amendment aims at.

The Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations is asking for a review of the effectiveness of futurebuilders as a way to increase the contribution of the voluntary sector and it would welcome the minister's view on that. Will she tell us her view?

I welcome the opportunity for Parliament to recognise the sacrifice made by men and women in the forces and as civilians from many countries—many with their lives—which delivered democracy to western Europe, although, regrettably, not yet world peace, as we note when we scan the international headlines and see wars around us. That sombre thought becomes even more sombre when one counts the losses in world war two. The loss of 57,000 Scots accounted for 20 per cent of all UK deaths—double our share of the population. Russia lost 29 million, 17 million of whom were non-combatants; China lost 3 million;  6 million Jews and 5.5 million Germans were lost; and Poland lost more than 6 million. However, all those figures are only estimates. How timelessly true the following quotes are. The Greek philosopher Plato, who died in 347BC, said: "Only the dead ever see an end to war." Hiram Johnson, governor of California, said in 1910: "The first casualty when war comes is truth." Mao Tse-tung, the chairman of the Chinese communist party, who died in 1976, said: "Politics is war without bloodshed while war is politics with bloodshed." Perhaps the most apposite and oft-quoted line was from another European empire builder, Napoleon Bonaparte, emperor of France, who died in 1821. He said: "On ne fait pas d'omelette sans casser des oeufs." Figures in the millions can mask not only the myriad individual lives lost but the tales of those who survived, so I will tell the story of two men. One was my father's friend, Jock Hunter from Hawick, who volunteered the day on which war was declared and joined the King's Own Scottish Borderers. Jock, whose war ended at Arnheim in the month and year of my birth—I was my father's first child and was born in September 1944—was shot down as the parachutes unfurled in the sky. Walter Hirst, my assistant's grandfather, was a survivor of the Lancastria, which sank on 17 June 1940 with an estimated loss of life of 4,000—the worst naval disaster in British history. This is his story: "I became an enlisted man in December 1939 before being sent to Clacton-on-Sea for basic training with the Royal Engineers. We were billeted in chalet accommodation at the Butlins Holiday camp in Clacton. The winter was bitter. We—663—had two weeks basic training with 1914 armaments before embarkation to France on or around the 26 th of January 1940. Prior to leaving we were described by an officer in the Duke of Wellington's regiment as 'civilians in soldiers clothing'. Once in France we were quickly put to work on a variety of construction jobs at an airfield just outside Nantes. Around the middle of June we were assembled and informed of the pending embarkation to England. It was a long, hot march. Eventually we reached St Nazaire around the 15 th /16 th of June amidst an air raid alert. That night I spent sheltering under a stairway with another member of 663 whom I was teamed with, Charles 'Chick' Napier. Myself and Chick were from the same county in Scotland, Coupar Angus. On the 17 th we boarded the Lancastria late in the afternoon. We immediately grabbed a couple of life jackets which I thought would make ideal pillows. We were ordered below and shortly after witnessed, through a porthole, the Oronsay being hit. Both myself and another Sapper decided then that it would be healthier if we were topside and so we did against orders.  Soon after the Lancastria was hit. It was a massive explosion. There was total panic and chaos. Soldiers, including some from 663, positioned at either end of the ship began to open up with Bren guns at the circling enemy craft. I managed to get myself into a lifeboat but as it was being lowered the ropes on one end became jammed in the davit. A panicked sailor suddenly jumped up and started to hack away at the ropes with a knife. Myself and others yelled at him to stop, but immediately we were all thrown into the sea. Although I had a lifejacket on, I still had my doubts about being in the water as I was a non-swimmer. We were all saturated with oil. I kicked off from the side of the Lancastria on my back. I kept thinking, 'Got to escape the suction of the ship.' The Lancastria continued to roll over to port. Hundreds of men were now clinging to the upturned hull. Some of those standing on the turning hull began singing 'Roll out the Barrel'. Then one tenor voice began with 'There'll always be an England'. During this time the enemy continued to strafe the men on the ship and in the water. They also began dropping incendiaries in an attempt to light the leaking oil. At some point a seemingly crazed man tried to remove my life jacket, but I manage to fight him off. Even with the jacket on I stayed as still as possible in the water hoping this would improve my buoyancy. I believe I was in the water for around two hours. At one point a large dog swam by. I briefly held onto it because it was swimming away from the ship and I thought it would take me with it. I believe it had belonged to some refugee Belgian children who had been on the boat. They did not survive. Eventually I was picked up. We finally arrived in Plymouth the next day. We were forbidden under 'King's Regulations' to mention any word of the Lancastria." Some of the relatives of the people who did not survive did not hear anything for nearly 18 months until they received a War Office telegram that stated that their husband, father or son was lost in action in France, presumed dead aboard HMT Lancastria. Walter Hirst, who survived what happened to the Lancastria, had his own long history; Jock Hunter was survived by my father, who is now 90 and has family, friends and his own long history. However, Jock and the millions of others who became part of that awful history had none of their own. Some people once thought that the first world war was the war to end all wars. As we remember the dead and the injured and VE day, we should always remember and regret all those who continue to die in wars and because of wars now, tomorrow and the day after, in Iraq, Sudan, Afghanistan and on and on. Plus ça change, plus c'est la même chose—or, as the Erskine poster on the way into the chamber today says: "War isn't a thing of the past".

Further to Cathie Craigie's question and to the delicious questioning by Shiona Baird, is it not the case that the First Minister and his Liberal Democrat colleagues have a wee bit of a problem, because energy is a reserved matter, whereas planning is devolved? The solution is simple: designate nuclear power stations as developments of national significance, bypass democracy and then build them. What will the Lib Dems do then?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many children under 16 are currently detained in institutions in Scotland. (S2O-6652)

Wrong minister. What the minister did not mention is that, at one point, six children were detained at Dungavel house. They were referred to the reporter to the children's panel, as the Minister for Education and Young People confirmed in an answer that he gave to me in Parliament. He said: "None of the children was referred to a children's hearing as a result of those investigations."— [ Official Report , 24 March 2005; c 15759.]  However, he failed to tell the chamber that the children were deported before the investigations were concluded. Does the minister share my concern that six young children whose welfare was such an issue that their case was referred to the children's panel were sent furth of Scotland when the matter of their welfare had not been resolved? Will she and her colleagues undertake to give the Parliament a guarantee that that will never happen again?

I have not speed read the documents—indeed, I have looked only at certain paragraphs—so my speech will be quite short. I am reminded that Christine Grahame can be taken out of the classroom, but the classroom cannot be taken out of Christine Grahame. Christine May used the word "disinterested" and quickly and properly corrected herself. That word is one of my bugbears and I mumbled, "Not in an education debate." If members do not know the difference between what she said and what she should have said, Christine May and I will take them to the side and explain the difference in detail. I proceed to the matter in hand. I am not going to repeat the claims in all parties' manifestos. Obviously, we have all done very well. The point is  that we are not talking about anything new. People were doing such things in the 1960s and 1970s. "I know"—as a rugby player once said—"'cos I was there." Schools had day-release and part-time release arrangements. However, stigma was attached because in those days, people who were not very bright did such courses. That stigma must go. Those of us who have been a pupil and a teacher—as I have been—in a classroom know from experience that children can be identified who are simply in the wrong place at the wrong time and would benefit from vocational experience. Such children are desperate and they sometimes turn into problem or disruptive children, or they simply become completely detached from the system, which is unnecessary. When I see what plumbers can earn nowadays, I think that I would love to have trained as a plumber. They earn more than lawyers earn and will not come into people's houses without a £60 or so call-out fee, after which they will simply change a washer. A career as a plumber, electrician or plasterer is a far better career for a young man or woman now than it was. Far too many pupils who have gone on to college or university tell me that they have studied politics and journalism. We are awash with people doing politics and journalism courses who will not get jobs and who will not contribute to the community. I do not share people's great concerns about the skills shortage in football and rugby. I have been anaesthetised to that since the day of my birth—I am genetically opposed to sport. However, we have serious skills shortages in all kinds of trades. I note that 3,000 pupils at further education colleges move on to higher education, so the situation is open and flexible. I will comment specifically on parts of the strategy that have been brought to my attention by Jewel and Esk Valley College and Borders College in my constituency. As I am sure the minister is aware, colleges are worried about the expectations that have been raised and their ability to deliver on them. There is a particular issue in relation to special needs pupils who may attend colleges. If the minister would listen, perhaps he could tell me whether colleges were consulted on the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill, which is an important point. A relevant issue that I would like the minister to clarify is who is legally responsible for pupils when they enter a college. I understand that the schools should be responsible because the discipline systems in colleges and schools are different and I understand that school pupils will go into colleges for only a few hours a week. They will have to learn to adjust to their new situations and adults in colleges will have to learn to adjust to the influx of  young people, which can be mutually grand. When I started my law degree, I thought that I was awfully old—I was 38. I had to adjust to the fact that people of 18 who were in my classes kept asking me for the answers to questions. I told them that I did not know the answers, but they thought that somehow I knew stuff because of my age. Difficulties will arise from differences in age, but those differences can be mutually beneficial. The minister will correct me if I am wrong, but I understand that the cost of an adult attending a college is about £200, whereas the cost in respect of a school pupil is nearly £800 because of liaison costs, supervisory costs, disclosure and the legal costs of discipline. One little paragraph of the document that I managed to read concerned delivery in rural areas, which Rosemary Byrne and other members mentioned. Paragraph 11.11 states: "Further modes of delivery may need to be considered, principally in respect of ... distance-learning, including open and flexible learning and videoconferencing." How much of that is in place and will be funded? How will it be funded? The part of the document that deals with extending delivery includes the statement that "More than 70% of Scottish secondary schools have a broadband connection" of a certain level—I do not know what the figure means, so I will not quote it— "or better." I want to know where the other 30 per cent of schools are located. Are they in rural areas to which broadband has not been extended? Will that disadvantage rural areas when they seek to take part in the strategy? In general, the strategy is a good idea, although it is not new. Overall, it is welcome; it represents commonsense and pragmatic education development policy, which makes a change.

Given Dr Loucks's evidence to the Justice 1 Committee that a person is six times less likely to reoffend if they keep up family contact, what steps will the Executive take to have more family contact officers in prisons, following the Cornton Vale model?

The Deputy Minister for Justice said that maintaining contact with the community is crucial to rehabilitation—but the most important community is family. I am grateful to Marlyn Glen for providing those words to preface my speech, which will also quote from the report and from evidence to the committee from Families Outside. The Families Outside report makes it clear that imprisonment is, indeed, a family experience that may involve the prisoner's family losing their home and most of their income. The children's behaviour may deteriorate—bed wetting is common—and, furthermore, the children of those who are in and out of prison are themselves more likely to offend. Family members may become ill, either physically or mentally, and they may be shunned or ostracised by neighbours and may be disowned by their own family. Thus, the breakdown of the relationship between the prisoner and the family extends beyond the four walls of the family home. One of the most interesting parts of the Families Outside annual report for 2003-04 is the section entitled "Can you help me get to prison?" Not many of us want to go to prison, but people need to be able to do so for visiting purposes. Referring to a 2003 survey, the report states: "The key findings showed that:   46% of visitors relied on public transport   44% travelled with children, nearly half of whom were under five years old ...   It took 40% of families  between 5 and 12 hours  to make an entire journey including a visit. For over 18% it took longer than 12 hours."    Simple things such as the transport of families to prison can be crucial in improving prisoners' morale and in giving them a reason to reform. Paragraph 65 of the committee's report quotes the following evidence from Families Outside: "'the rehabilitation work that needs to be done between families and prisoners is crucial, but it is neglected'". The paragraph continues with a further quote from Families Outside, which states that rehabilitation "'can reduce the likelihood of reoffending by up to six times'". That position is later endorsed by Dr Loucks. The report goes on to state: "Families Outside also emphasised the value that families could add to the process by being more involved in sentence management— 'There is scope for families to be involved in supporting employment and training initiatives. Families should also be made aware of addiction and treatment programmes.'"  Many of us who have been involved in these issues for a long time know that much acquisitive crime is fuelled by the need to buy drugs. Many families, although not all, would like to offer support and be part of the regime that the prison is trying to develop. The problem is that, as is mentioned in paragraph 73 of the committee's report, the role of the family contact officer seems to be de minimis in many prisons, with the notable exception of Cornton Vale. Paragraph 75 states that "in other prisons, the role is commonly allocated to staff as an additional responsibility, over and above other duties". I suggest, as does the committee, that that is not good enough. That paragraph quotes Families Outside as saying that its main anxiety is that the prison officers who take on that responsibility often move on, so that improvement, continuity and experience are lost. That concern is reinforced by the Audit Scotland report mentioned in paragraph 78, which describes the "variation across prisons in relation to the availability of family contact development officers." I conclude with the committee's recommendation. Paragraph 80 states that "rehabilitation in prisons is ad hoc , fragmentary and slow ... The Committee therefore recommends that the provision of dedicated family contact officers, where it is already available, should be enhanced and protected from redeployment to other services and should be rolled out to other establishments in the prison service as a matter of priority." That is a simple but telling step. If it reduces the chances of reoffending by so much, we should be doing more to ensure that the breakdown of the individual does not continue as a breakdown of the family. That would be a simple means to reinforcing rehabilitation.

I refer the minister to the report of the cross-party working group on religious hatred, especially recommendation 11, which states that the co-ordinating group—which comprises the police, the Crown Office, the Scottish Executive, local authorities, voluntary organisations, the Scottish Football Association and the old firm clubs—should "seek to encourage, sponsor and evaluate project programmes and research designed to change sectarian and other aspects of religious hatred." I return to a hobby-horse of mine and again ask the minister whether she will consider pursuing an awards scheme that will involve the co-ordinating group presenting awards to project programmes that prove successful.

I refer the minister to the latest public-private partnership/private finance initiative contract to hit financial difficulties. West Lothian College was a pioneering model in respect of such contracts, but it is currently £4 million in the red following the financial difficulties that resulted from the collapse of Ballast plc in East Lothian, which had a knock-on impact on schools. Is not it time to ditch the PPP/PFI model—which schools in the Borders are being forced to follow as being the only game in town—because that model is discredited, risky and costly to the public purse?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will publish the replies it received to its questionnaire on the current and future role of community hospitals. (S2O-6500)

As a result of the Freedom of Information Act 2000, I have the response from Borders NHS Board in my hand. One of the interesting points that it makes about cottage community hospitals is that they provide an "intimate environment ... well suited to providing Palliative and Respite Care for some patient groups." It then makes a telling point that "there are no hospices in the Border area." Given that the Borders currently has the highest number of elderly people in Scotland and that that will increase by 30 per cent over the next few years, does the minister agree that cottage hospitals such as those at Jedburgh and Coldstream, which provide respite and palliative care in an area with no hospices, should remain open to fulfil that important role for the elderly frail in the area?

I am glad to hear the minister's words because, several times, I have raised in the chamber the possibility of extending the scheme to  carers or companions. I hope that he will provide us with a timescale in relation to this issue. I know that his heart is in it and that he said that he is supportive of the idea that carers or companions should also have access to the free travel scheme. However, I ask him to assure me that some progress will be made to ensure that we no longer have a postcode lottery in relation to the issue.

If the minister will let me intervene, I will tell her why that is not so.

Will Rhona Brankin give way?

It would be helpful if Rhona Brankin took some interventions from Opposition members.

I commend the report, which is a sound and thorough one. I also praise my former committee. I miss all its members and I suppose that they miss me a little—who knows? The report was an important piece of work to commission. Indeed, the Health Committee is an important committee and I am pleased to see that it is continuing to hold the Executive to account by pushing forward on this important agenda for the public. All members' in-trays contain many examples of contacts from people who cannot access NHS dental care. The minister said that we will have an extra 200 dentists by 2008. Is that a net figure? I am concerned about the number of dentists who will have retired by 2008 or who may have quit the NHS. The minister may be able to clarify that point in summing up, because this is an important issue. Mary Scanlon and Eleanor Scott made the point that there is not much point in people having a free dental check if they cannot then have a follow-up, but the report goes even further in saying:  "The pledge of free check-ups for all by 2007 is going to be difficult to fulfil". There may be too few dentists for people to have a check-up, let alone any treatment thereafter. Recruitment and retention are important. An important point that Mary Scanlon made about the action plan is the complete lack of national data. That fact thunders through the report. We all have snapshots of what is happening, and the minister, who seems genuinely concerned, wants to turn round the failures within our dental service—I was going to say the "decay", but I must avoid such puns. However, we need rigorous data. I hope that that will be acted on. If I may use the horrendous expression "golden handcuffs"—from which Mike Rumbles is backing off—there are in fact no national criteria under the SNP scheme for medical students. The scheme is open to all and, as we have pledged for a while, an e-copy of the information on our consultation is on its way to the minister now. We would be happy if she would respond. Shona Robison and others raised the issue of the chronic underinvestment in dental services. I am glad to hear that there are negotiations with the profession on fee levels. As Brian Adam said, dental practices are businesses; they have to pay for overheads, staff and equipment, while delivering services to the public. That is where the gap has occurred. I will deal with some instances of fee levels that were recently brought to my attention by Borders dentists. The SNP fully supports the outreach centre in Aberdeen, which gained cross-party support. I will not make party-political capital out of it, as I acknowledge that Mike Rumbles—along with Richard Lochhead, Brian Adam and other members—has long pursued dental issues in the Parliament. The centre was fully supported, locally and nationally, by the SNP, and it is referred to in our general election manifesto, which is on its way to Mike Rumbles. We are very good—everyone is getting information from the SNP. Mike Rumbles commented on the £40 million to £50 million increase that the SNP proposed. That is an annual increase, which—strangely enough—exactly matches the £150 million that was announced later by the minister. We were ahead of her. I am quite happy to produce the evidence beyond reasonable doubt for Mike Rumbles. Stewart Stevenson's point was interesting. Dentists have felt isolated from other NHS professionals and do not feel as if they are within the embrace of the integrated national health service that we all want. The fact that bad teeth can affect other areas of health has been brought to my attention by dentists. The Health Committee  is considering legislation to integrate dental services—not before time. I, too, visited dentists in the Borders, and I notice that the report mentions that Dumfries and Galloway and the Borders are the worst off. Not only are 80 per cent of dentists in primary care not taking new patients there; they no longer have waiting lists. That means that people must make a round trip of 100 miles—if they are lucky—to get to an NHS dentist in Edinburgh or over the border in England. That is not easy and I am not surprised that the Borderers, with their usual determination and perhaps desperation, pursued Kate Maclean in the belief that a member of the Health Committee would do if they could find no one else. Heaven forfend that that is where we end up. To get back to the business side of the issue, the Borders dentists described to me the effect of changes. Let us take a simple thing such as root implements, which are now to be used only once. Each implement costs between £26 and £28, but the piecework figure is £30. As a result of the rigorous standards—fully supported by dentists—being introduced on decontamination of premises and equipment, dentists are simply not making enough money to keep in business and to keep treating NHS patients, much as they want to. Dentistry is becoming quantity driven, rather than quality driven. It means that someone receiving NHS treatment will not get some of the sophisticated treatment—better for them and better for their teeth—that they would get if they went private, because dentists simply do not have the time. It is a case of in the door, out the door. Dentists have to drill and fill as fast as they can. There are a lot of data that we require. For instance, I would like to know—this is a point that was put to me by a dentist—how the Scottish Executive communicates with general dental practices in Scotland. The Executive seems to be out on its own most of the time, or lobbying its MSPs. We have to ask why we are where we are. Heaven forfend that I blame anybody, but we have had 18 years of the Conservatives and eight years under London Labour. For six of those eight years, the Liberal Democrats have been in collusion with Labour, so Mike Rumbles should aim his fire elsewhere. One thing is true: it wasnae us on this side of the chamber. I conclude on a more conciliatory note and congratulate the Health Committee on the report, which is just a beginning. Duncan McNeil was right—it needs to be taken further and should not now just rest on a shelf.

I am interested in Liberal Democrat support for what we might term golden handcuffs for dentists who are going into training and education. Does Mr Rumbles have the same support for those who would train to be general practitioners? Does he agree with the golden handcuffs plan for them?

I ask members to forgive me, but I have found the debate rather depressing because I know from my previous life in the Parliament on the Justice 1 Committee—I am a former convener of that committee—that all the things that are being said have been said for the past six years. We know that too many women are imprisoned and that many of them are imprisoned for completely the wrong reasons and to ill, rather than to good, effect. I remember a procurator fiscal saying that prisoners in the main were bad, mad or sad. It has already been said that many of the prisoners in Cornton Vale are very sad, damaged people. We know that government moves slowly, but I must go back to a comment that was made in 1999 by the then Deputy Minister for Justice. He stated that "the only relatively sure method of dealing with the problems associated with women in prisons is to make a significant reduction in the number ... going to prison".— [ Official Report , 16 December 1999; Vol 3, c 1774.]  That has not happened and, in my book, taking six years is too slow. Good and worthy comments have been made by many members throughout the chamber. I will touch on as many of those comments as possible. The points are consensual, which is why I feel that progress must be accelerated. We must not stand in the chamber in a year's time debating the same issues with the same worthy comments being made. The 218 time-out centre is to be welcomed, but I understand that it has a small capacity of approximately 20. That hardly touches the  problem of rehabilitating women and diverting them from prison. On the info packs for sheriffs, I remember that when I was convener of the Justice 1 Committee, we went to great lengths to examine alternatives to custody and to look for a way whereby sheriffs could access information about such alternatives. I can only be glad that that work is moving forward, hence my question about information being put on an electronic database. Sheriffs are modern people: they could press a button and find out what places are available on the day, if the information existed. Sheriffs will not use alternatives to custody if they do not know what is available; they would have no option but to send women to prison. As Pauline McNeill said, sometimes they do so for reasons related to the health of the woman. Sheriffs sometimes look at a woman and say that the only way in which she can be helped and given a structured programme is by being put into Cornton Vale. That is the wrong reason for imprisoning someone. Stewart Stevenson raised important issues about short sentences. We all know that they are not meaningful and that there is a revolving-door syndrome—prison becomes a habit. The process is costly to the individual and to the public purse, but it achieves nothing. He also raised the issue of decriminalising some offences, such as non-payment of the TV licence. I know that that matter is reserved, but it is an important issue. It is a farce that people are imprisoned for non-payment of their TV licence. Linda Fabiani touched on the important issue of voluntary organisations. During the Justice 1 Committee's inquiry into alternatives to custody, we kept coming across the issue of funding for worthy organisations that were providing alternatives to custody. They sometimes had three or four funding sources and used acres of paper and a lot of their time trying to access funding, and all their grants lasted for different periods of time. That must be addressed. When a project is successful it should be given core funding to keep it going. Michael Matheson raised the important issue of the systemic nature of the reasons why women offend. That issue was also raised by other members. Stewart Maxwell pointed out that half the women in Cornton Vale each year are on remand and that many do not go on to a custodial sentence. That is another curable nonsense. Short sentences and low-level offences have been mentioned. People should not be imprisoned for low-level offences. Members have also raised the huge social and human impact that a person's imprisonment has on their family.  Mary Mulligan raised the issue of how wrong it is to put fine defaulters into prison. She also referred to the Justice 1 Committee's alternatives to custody report and raised the health issues that face many of the women. She asked why progress has been so slow, but I do not think that she gave us an answer—I hope that the minister will do so. Annabel Goldie rightly addressed the issue of maintaining the confidence of the public in our sentencing policy. She also agreed that prison is not relevant for many women prisoners. I agree with her comment that there must be effective collection of fines when they are properly imposed: again, we must ensure that we take the public with us. I was glad to hear her mention the issue of alcohol abuse, because it often gets missed in the mixture of problems that many of the women have. I say to Annabel Goldie that both the Conservative and the SNP amendments could be agreed to—the Conservative amendment could follow the SNP amendment, if SSP members were good enough not to pursue their amendment. Bill Aitken talked about how prison sentences impinge on families. He was quite right, and the matter was raised over and over again during the debate. I think that Bill Aitken is not unsympathetic to the idea that the failure to pay one's TV licence should not lead to imprisonment—

It is arguable; I give Bill Aitken that. Colin Fox was right to say that there are wider social issues. Poverty drives many people into criminal activity, which is often low-level activity in which people are themselves victims. That point was also made over and over again. However, I cannot agree with him that no women should be in jail—I think he said that, although I do not know whether he meant it—because obviously a woman who commits a serious criminal offence such as murder or assault should be treated no differently from a man who commits the same offence. Society must be protected and there must be an element of punishment, which might include the removal of someone's liberty, for certain offences. Pauline McNeill referred to very damaged women. We all agree that that is a problem, particularly in Glasgow, where 90 per cent of prostitutes are on drugs—a horrific figure. Pauline McNeill used an expression that I will remember; she said that street prostitutes lead a "brutal" existence. A system that allows such people to end up in prison is not compassionate. Elaine Smith referred to community sentences. I agree with her that such sentences are not a soft option, but she will have to take the public with her, because when the public read that someone  has been put in jail they think that the problem has been dealt with and has gone away—that is not the case, of course. Patrick Harvie questioned the philosophy that underpins punitive justice. As I said, there is a role for punishment in some circumstances, but in others there must be compassion and rehabilitation. The approach will depend on the nature of the offence and the individual. I will quickly pose a few questions for the minister. Did she have discussions with the Sheriffs Association on the difficulties of implementing alternatives to custody? What input and return will there be on the information pack for sheriffs? Is the minister concerned about bullying in Cornton Vale prison, which was mentioned in the report by Her Majesty's inspectorate of prisons? It is not all roses in Cornton Vale. Finally—this is a hard nut to crack—when will there be a return even to the 1999 numbers of women in prison in Scotland, when there were slightly more than 200 women in Cornton Vale prison?

I am delighted that an information pack on alternatives to custody will be sent to sheriffs—we pursued that aim when I was on the Justice 1 Committee. Will the information be available in an electronic format that can be rapidly updated, so that programmes that fall off the agenda are not included and sheriffs can rely on the information?

I was interviewed yesterday by a student who is writing a thesis on the early years of the Scottish Parliament and in particular on one of the Parliament's founding principles: equality of opportunity. She asked me what we had done and could do to promote such equality, but I could not prise my thoughts from the blight of poverty. Equality of opportunity might be a founding principle of the Parliament, but people cannot begin to grasp opportunities if they live in the postcode poverty that predetermines their educational success, health, lifespan, home, home life and very happiness. I say to James Douglas-Hamilton that the answer is not Tory passports for people to buy their way out, but the eradication of the poverty that trapped them there in the first place. The facts are that in Scotland one in five of our pensioners and one in three of our children lives in poverty. In parts of Glasgow, males have 10 years shaved off their lives simply because of where they live. A pensioner in Scotland on the basic state pension gets only £79.50 per week. Of course, there is always the pension credit, but unfortunately we have a ruthlessly cruel benefits system and at least a third of those who are entitled to claim pension credit do not do so. Some 50,000 pensioners in Scotland do not claim the benefit to which they are entitled. What Scottish pensioners want, to answer their needs and aspirations, is a decent basic state pension that is not means tested. Some 58 per cent of our pensioners live in fuel poverty. In Scotland, three times more deaths are excess winter deaths than in England and Wales. It is estimated that in Scotland 3,000 people each year die from living in a cold home in an energy-rich country. Where is the equality of opportunity for people who live in a cold home, whose choice is between food and fuel? Of course, the Parliament has some achievements. Margaret Ewing is quite right; the Parliament is chipping away, with free personal care and concessionary fares throughout Scotland, both of which were whole-heartedly supported here. However, we do not have the power to tackle systemic poverty. I am sure that I will bore members, but I return to the fact that without the powers of an independent Parliament we cannot touch the poverty that blights the lives of one in five of our pensioners and one in three of our children. During the election campaign, I watch  Westminster politicians trample all over devolution when we should be trampling all over reserved issues. They talk, from Westminster and in the broadcast media, about policies on crime, justice, health and education as if they are UK policies, when in fact they are English policies. We must resist that and fight against the erosion of devolution. At present, we are not doing that, let alone eroding reserved matters. I have a message for the pensioners, for those on low incomes and indeed for those who generate wealth, because without generating wealth we cannot redistribute it to those who are in need. They must realise that without the powers of a real national Parliament—powers to match this glamorous building—Scottish pensioners will continue to die prematurely from winter cold, and children in peripheral, decaying estates will continue to be born to fail. With independence, they have a chance to be born to succeed and to have the equality of opportunity that we should hold dear, which an independent Scotland with an empowered Parliament could deliver. Until then, I fear that the poor will always be with us. Perhaps not though. Thankfully, we discovered in a poll today that 46 per cent of the Scottish people support independence. That is the way to eradicate poverty in Scotland.

As a former school teacher, I agree with much of what Robin Harper is saying. However, does he share my concern that we might be throwing babies out with the bathwater, in that some of our pupils have difficulties with literacy that pupils did not have in what Robin Harper might call the bad old days, when teaching methods delivered the ability to read, write and count?

I want the minister to imagine that I am a Lithuanian nurse who will be arriving in Scotland tomorrow. How soon could I be working on a Scottish ward?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many children being held at Dungavel House immigration removal centre have been referred to the children's reporter under the Children (Scotland) Act 1995. (S2O-5962)

I refer the minister to an e-mail retrieved under the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 from Alan Miller to Yvonne Strachan at the Scottish Executive, dated 12 September 2003, in which he states, inter alia: "I note with interest the recommendation in the recent HMIP report that regular and independent assessments of child welfare and development needs should be implemented for all children in Dungavel." He goes on to ask for guidance from the Home Office on "(1) the likely response to this recommendation and (2) the timescale on which a response is likely." He asks further: "Is it possible to get any clarification on these points? An early response would be very helpful." However, after my FOI inquiry, the trail goes dead. Can the minister bring me up to date?

He was talking about being First Minister.

This is tricky legislation to get right. The definition in section 1 uses the phrase "having met or communicated", but it seems to me that the debate is circling around electronic communications, such as the internet and mobile phones. I wonder whether it would have been appropriate to use the phrase "for example, but not necessarily" or "inter alia" in relation to such communication. The Solicitor General is disagreeing, but we are not talking about somebody posting letters; we are talking about people using the electronic communications that exist nowadays, which make people much more vulnerable. I note that the Justice 1 Committee would have liked the act of grooming—I use that term loosely, not in a legalistic sense—to be referred to in the bill. It is possible that someone could groom a young person via a chatroom but leave it at that. A second person could then come along, not necessarily from the same paedophile ring, and engage in the same behaviour with the young person. The contact that they have already had might make them vulnerable to making a journey to meet the second person. There are difficulties with not stating in the bill that grooming is in itself an offence. I understand that the committee's view was that a breach of the peace charge would not necessarily be sufficient to cover that, so there might be a gap in the legislation. On the age issue, I note that the committee's report states:  "the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents pointed out that, as currently drafted, the legislation 'suggests that grooming can only be downwards—an older person grooming a younger person'." However, the ASPS suggests that "it can be the other way round." Any vulnerable person, including an adult, can be groomed. That is not recognised in the bill, so an opportunity has been lost. The bill could have referred to "a child or other vulnerable person". I appreciate that we are now too far down the road to put that in the bill, but the matter should be considered by the Executive. I move on to the evidential difficulties with the standard of proof. I understand where the Executive is coming from; if I am correct, risk of sexual harm orders are rather like interdicts in that the standard of proof is the balance of probabilities, whereas in the case of the other criminal offences or breaches of RSHOs the standard of proof would be that the evidence was beyond reasonable doubt. The matter is difficult and I do not have solutions, but there are human rights issues in that Disclosure Scotland might be contacted. Somebody might not have committed a criminal offence but be on Disclosure Scotland's list, but the standard of proof for prohibiting them from an area would simply be based on the balance of probabilities. There are concerns about that. As I said, it is a difficult issue and I have not come down firmly on one side or the other about the standard of proof, although I know that because it is a civil matter the principle that operates in Scots law is that it should be on the balance of probabilities. There are also difficulties with the four tests that have to be met. It seems to me that issues are involved. I think that the committee saw the proposed legislation as being preventive legislation. Establishment of proof will be extremely difficult. I have a final point to make. In a letter from the minister on the evidence test, she acknowledges that it may well be useful for protocols to be produced to reduce the risk of contamination of evidence—that is, contamination between the criminal offences and the civil offences. I do not know what that means. It would be useful, if there are to be successful prosecutions, for the Solicitor General for Scotland or the minister, who is now entering the chamber, to explain exactly what that means.

Evidence from the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents, or possibly it was from the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, raised the concern that, although a 15-year-old could be predatory on a younger child, the older child would not fall within the remit of the bill. I see nothing in the deputy minister's letter of 16 March  to the Justice 1 Committee that deals with that issue.

As the First Minister well knows, since I became an MSP I have fought for the line with every breath. Will the First Minister join me in congratulating the tens of thousands of borderers who signed the petition and brought it to the Parliament? I include among them the Campaign for Borders Rail, of which I am an honorary life member, and people such as Madge Elliot from Hawick, who has campaigned since the day the line was closed. It is their victory. In recognition of that, will the First Minister give an assurance that the first piece of track will be laid in the Borders, towards Edinburgh, and not the other way round?

What Finland and Sweden have in common, which we do not share, is that they are small independent nations.

First, I want to make some general comments on discipline and class sizes. We all know that one unruly child can contaminate an entire class. Support for teachers in the school environment must therefore be real and financed and the personnel must be in place. I am pleased that the power to exclude as the ultimate sanction has now been returned to head teachers. That power must be used. In passing, I mention Jamie Oliver—in fact, I have lodged a motion on the 2005 Sodexho school meals and lifestyle survey. Jamie Stone made important points about the impact of additives in food on the behaviour of our schoolchildren. I turn to class sizes. From my historic experience—and it is quite historic—as a primary and secondary teacher, I have no doubt that when I had a smaller class, the exchange between the teacher and pupils was far more rewarding. On a practical level, with five classes from first year to fifth year, hundreds of children passed through my classroom doors every day, and each child generated work that required my attention. Quite simply, if jotters were not taken home every week—if not every night—they could not have been marked. Primary teachers—of which there are two in my family—are now buried in assessments and forms and spend unpaid hours preparing. Although they have a vocation, they sometimes get weary. Add to that the impertinence and unruly behaviour that trickles down even to primary 1. My sister recently narrated an incident in which she tried to separate two very young primary children who were at each other's throats. However, she could not intervene for fear of being accused of assault by the two little children who were at each other's throats. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's motion mentions independent schools, with which I have no issue. If parents want to spend £10,000 or  £15,000 a year to send their children to independent schools, that is a matter for them and is their financial choice. There are big distinctions within the range of independent schools. I think that schools such as Donaldson's school for the deaf and Rudolph Steiner schools will still have charitable status—that is not a matter for me or for the Conservatives, but for the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator. However, I cannot see how schools such as Fettes College, with their unduly restrictive entrance fees, can possibly pass the test in the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Bill. I have continued to make that point on behalf of my party. School closures are as much about the coalition's intransigence as anything. In its document entitled "Building our Future: Scotland's School Estate", the coalition focuses on buildings. Buildings are important, but that document states: "The school is a core part of the physical community and should play a role in building strong, confident communities and a safer environment, and contribute to an improved quality of life for the community." So everything is about the community. However, councils are taking up PPPs and private finance initiative contracts, which are pretty much all that they can use. They are building schools that will cost a fortune at the end of the day. As with buying a car on hire purchase, things look good at the top of the balance sheet. However, then we see that we have actually paid a vast amount of money, and when we eventually get the asset, it will be 25 or 35 years old. Of course, risk for a building in such contracts does not simply pass from a local authority to a company, as we have seen with recent bankruptcies and with the dispute about who would pay for moving prisoners following fire damage under PPP and PFI contracts in prisons in England. Such deals are bad deals. Those contracts are also a bad deal for the structure of buildings. Recent reports have made it plain that, under such contracts, classrooms that are too small and which are inappropriate for children from an environmental point of view have been built. Even gymnasiums have been made small to comply with contracts, just when we need our children to take more exercise. There are huge problems. I turn to closures and the Conservatives. Bearing in mind what my colleague John Swinney said, I quote what David Mundell said in a speech in a members' business debate on a motion in my name on the closure of Borders schools. He said: "It would be helpful to make clear the position—which is also my position—of my Conservative colleagues on Scottish Borders Council. They clearly believe that no school should close unless closure has the support of parents and the community."—[ Official Report , 25 March  2004; c 7180.] Well, goodbye Burnmouth Primary School, Hutton Primary School, Cranshaws Primary School and others, which the Conservatives all voted for. Obviously, people were not listening to David Mundell's speech. Such things need not happen. In that members' business debate, we argued for a presumption against school closures against the background of a commitment that schools should be at the heart of the community. We should take a lesson from the Highland Council, which does not close schools. It has a presumption against school closures and makes great attempts to keep them open, even when there are no children at a school in a community. Such schools are mothballed for two or three years while the council finds out whether it can draw people into the community and therefore bring in children. The council does so because the death of the local village school means the death of that community. We must stop such things happening.

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I want clarification. Robert Brown introduced himself as the convener of the Education Committee and his speech was broad to begin with. However, he is now talking about Executive policy. In what capacity is he speaking?

The debate has been interesting. I want to make some general comments about the geographical imbalances. Paragraph 3.23 of "Homes for Scotland's People" talks about "the need to respond to the geographical imbalances in supply and demand" and the importance of local authorities. That issue was acknowledged in the interesting speeches of George Lyon and Susan Deacon, to which I will refer. There are differences in tenure not only between rural and urban settings, but between cities such as Edinburgh and Glasgow. The market in Edinburgh is 75 per cent private. Susan Deacon spoke about the special difficulties that are experienced in that hot spot, which has spread out to Midlothian, East Lothian and West Lothian and, to some extent, the Scottish Borders and Fife. The  factoring schemes that operate in Glasgow's tenements are alien to Edinburgh. Small rural areas have been badly affected by the right to buy. Maureen Macmillan spoke about the problems that second homes create. Young people are now unable to remain in their local area. That has a devastating impact on employment and local facilities; it makes it difficult even for an area to keep its local school. I was particularly interested in the comments that were made about Mull. There is nothing new in life: I remember the building of key-worker houses back in the 1960s and 1970s. The houses were provided for key workers not just to buy but to rent. I moved to Galloway because key-worker houses were provided in the area for the schoolteachers, doctors and dentists who moved into the area. Young couples—I was at that time part of a young couple—moved into the area and then moved on to buy a house in the same area. The provision of key-worker housing took the pressure off young couples and gave them time to settle in the area. The idea is one that could be explored again today.

For reasons that may be known, I really do not want to go there at the moment. Because young couples, whether married or otherwise, are finding it difficult to purchase a house, they are deferring having a family. That has a huge impact on population decline, because it affects the decision whether to have one or two children. Young couples are burdened by onerous mortgages as that is the only way that they can enter the property market. Currently, 136,000 households are on the waiting list for social housing in Scotland. I know that the figure is not accurate because it includes multiple applications. Nonetheless, it illustrates the substantial difficulty that the Executive faces. I want to touch on the right to buy—I do not want to linger on the subject. The SNP policy on the right to buy is that it would go for new tenants; existing tenants, whose tenancies include the right to buy, would keep it until it was exercised.

Do I get to make up the time, Presiding Officer?

In that case, I will move on.  The right to buy is only one part of the solution. That said, the Liberal Democrats seem to have two right-to-buy policies: Mike Rumbles is facing one way on the subject and Jeremy Purvis the other—but what is new about that?

Certainly not. Shelter has made it plain that, in 2004, 16,300 homes were lost through the right to buy. I accept that someone continues to live in those properties, but the key point is that the houses are no longer available for rent. If the trend continues in the same direction, a further 130,400 homes will be lost to rent by 2012. It is an absolute nonsense that we are selling council houses three times faster than we are building them. Mention has been made of the Executive's plan to build 21,500 affordable homes over three years, of which 16,500 would be in the social rented sector. However, given that those houses can be sold, is the figure gross or net? Household wealth is being created at the expense of others. In aid of the argument to get rid of the right to buy—

I am sorry, but I have very little time. I want to quote the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland—

If the Presiding Officer allows me extra time for interventions, I would be delighted to do so.

The Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland said: "As we approach the silver jubilee of the right to buy, I am very concerned that this paternalistic policy no longer meets the needs of a modern Scottish society"—

The SNP amendment calls for the right to buy "to be reformed for new tenants" and that is exactly what I am speaking to. Cathie Craigie should either read what we have to say on the subject or get some new glasses. "The current Right to Buy policy does not allow local communities to influence how their housing needs can be best met." Those are not my words but the words of Jim Pollock, the chair of the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland. Shared equity is a good idea. Shared ownership has not been working. It is my understanding that many people use the device simply to get into the rented sector by another means and do not buy into a percentage of the property. The policy has to be reviewed. The grants for first-time buyers that my party proposes are just another tool in the toolbox and not the be-all and end-all; our intention is that they would assist people into the housing market. I am quite happy that the stamp duty threshold has been raised, as the new threshold reflects the inflation in house prices. Although Patrick Harvie is not in the chamber, I acknowledge the importance of what he said about energy efficiency. I also want to mention his point about the need for a change in the culture towards renting or buying. There is much to be welcomed in the Housing (Scotland) Bill. Good housing ideas do not belong to one or another political party; we need a mix of proposals for social rented and owner-occupied housing. A subject that we have not touched on is the private rented sector, in which tenants can be very vulnerable. The pendulum has undoubtedly swung too far, even if it is out of necessity, towards buying a property as the only way to get a house to live in. We need social rented accommodation for young people to move into and a culture change—social rented housing must not be seen as plan B or as substandard. Let us have good-quality social rented housing, as in other countries, where no stigma is attached to saying that one does not own one's home.

So did we.

Will the member take an intervention?

I agree with the member. A valuation is a waste of time. The single seller survey is equivalent to a structural survey, but a structural survey has a date on it, and it will be difficult for buyers to rely on a survey that may be three months old. That will cause the seller a great deal of expense. The seller may not be particularly wealthy but may have to carry out repeat surveys in return for up-front payments.

Will the minister clarify a matter that has been raised in the Communities Committee? By "affordable housing", does she mean social rented housing or is she using the generic term for all kinds of affordable housing?

The minister might be aware that the Communities Committee heard evidence today about the expiry date on surveys, which will cause her team some difficulties. For example, if a seller pays £800 for a single survey, but does not sell their house within three months, they might have to get another survey done. They would have shelled out £1,600 and they might  have to shell out even more. Will the minister consider the issue? It is a serious problem, which could prevent the measure from going ahead.

Will the minister give way?

I think that I am correct in saying that the McFadden commission examined the appointments system in an effort to resolve the contentious issue of third-party direction. I note that the bill does not take that up. I wonder whether the ministers are considering that as a way of uncoupling the system.

Does the member accept that the SNP amendment makes that point? As I said, there is a spectrum. At one end there are the very elitist schools and at the other end there are schools such as Donaldson's. In the middle are the very schools that Mr McAveety is talking about, and that is why we cannot support the SSP amendment. Different schools have different educational cultures and some might very well fit into charitable status.

I refer the member to section 8(2)(b), which states that regard must be had to "where benefit is, or is likely to be, provided to a section of the public only, whether any condition on obtaining that benefit is unduly restrictive." That is the test for the independent, private, fee-paying sector—the "unduly restrictive" test.

Paragraph 150 of the committee's report makes the point that I make in my amendment. That position is supported by the SCVO, which the member has applauded—it wants a statement to that effect to be included in the bill and I agree.

I should declare an interest, as I am the  patron of Scottish Heart at Risk Testing and Jam, which are two Borders charities. I hope that the amendment in my name is not contentious. The Scottish National Party fully supports the thrust of the bill, which is much needed and has been a long time in coming. Of course, it follows in the wake of scandalous charity disasters, which have brought much disrepute to an extremely important sector and caused a great deal of damage. When the bill reaches its final stages, it must provide—as I am sure that it will—a robust framework for the registration and operation of charities, which will, of course, be the function of OSCR. The SNP welcomes the way in which OSCR operates and the way in which it has been set up. We also welcome the bill's clean-slate approach to the question of what is and is not a charity. There will be no presumption that an existing charity should remain a charity. That is reflected in paragraph 25 of the Communities Committee's report. Time has moved on and some organisations that have historically had charitable status and the concomitant tax and rates benefits might no longer be entitled to that designation. That is covered in paragraph 86. Although it is ultimately for OSCR to determine any application, we in the chamber have a duty to assist OSCR through the primary legislation. I am interested in what the minister said about public confidence and the public perception of what is and is not a charity. That is reflected in paragraph 86, which says that the committee "believes that it is important to set criteria that bodies should meet in order to benefit from tax relief and to ensure that there is public confidence in the charitable and voluntary sector as a whole." I, too, thank everybody who gave evidence to the committee and my colleagues for working through the bill. The programme is constructive, but there are issues that the minister has mentioned that need to be resolved. There are, of course, the national collections—our art galleries, museums and so on—to which the minister referred, which will have difficulties in passing section 7(3)(b), which is on third-party direction. The minister also mentioned NDPBs and the appointments system. There may be issues for the SNP—there certainly are for me—to do with the appointments system, which we will examine at stage 2. Similar difficulties arise with Scotland's colleges, which I do not think that the minister mentioned. They would pass muster on the charity test on all counts, except the same subsection on third-party direction. I refer the minister to paragraph 134 of the report. Of course, those difficulties must be resolved. Colleges act in the public interest and do a great public service and we do not want them to  lose their status and the benefits that arise. My colleague Fiona Hyslop will address those matters more fully. I will deal with the more contentious part of the SNP's amendment. I make it clear in passing that the SNP cannot support the Scottish Socialist Party's amendment, although I am sympathetic to it. We cannot support it because it would remove charitable status from all fee-paying schools and all private schools, with the exception of independent special schools. The amendment is too specific. There might be schools that use alternative education methods—the Steiner schools might be one type, but there are others—and the amendment does not deal with the private health care sector. The catch-all part of the SNP amendment would give flexibility to OSCR, which is necessary in the grey areas that will arise in practice. Our amendment, which includes the words "overriding purpose", makes it clear that some fee-paying schools and indeed the private health care sector—it should be remembered that each organisation must independently apply to OSCR for registration—would find it difficult to meet the charity test on public benefit. I will be blunt. The Gordonstouns and Fetteses of this world—fees at Fettes College are £12,000 to £15,000 per child—represent an exclusivity that would fail the test, while Donaldson's school for the deaf is at the other end of the spectrum. There are grey areas in between.

I will take an intervention from whichever gentleman wants to intervene.

The member has done his bit for his electorate. The point is that those schools do not meet the charity test. What the member says is irrelevant to the bill that we are considering. They may have other routes that they can take, but that is not one of them. In evidence, it was made plain by representatives of the independent schools sector that perhaps one in nine of the pupils has an assisted place. My committee colleague John  Home Robertson—who attended a private school—put it in a much more interesting way when he said: "So about nine out of 10 pupils do not receive ... bursaries." He also said: "I confess that I would struggle to defend the proposition that there is a public benefit in private education". My colleague Scott Barrie stated: "We can all accept that the educational aims of the independent and state sectors are the same. However, like other members of the committee, I am struggling—from some of the answers that we have received so far this morning—to establish why it is necessary for the independent sector to have charitable status to achieve those aims, when the state sector seems to be able to do so without that status."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 12 January 2005; c 1568 and 1573.]

That is an unfortunate shifting of John Home Robertson's ground. The point of the amendment is to have in the bill a simple statement of the overriding purpose of charitable organisations. There is no such purpose in the bill as it is drafted. I wish the purpose to be inserted into the long title. I hope that I will get extra time for this, Presiding Officer. The private sector fails in my book—and I thought that it failed in John Home Robertson's book—to pass the "unduly restrictive" test. We need only look at the language that is used in talking about private hospitals. In his evidence to the committee, David Mobbs said: "We do not see charging fees as being restrictive in our marketplace because people can access our services through insurance ... —a large proportion of the population has insurance—or through cash plans, taking loans".—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 12 January 2005; c 1571.] "Marketplaces", "loans" and "cash plans" are not the language of charities. The test should be clear and simple. This is no witch hunt against private schools or hospitals and it is not—as a Conservative member said this morning—the politics of envy; it is a call for a simple and clear statement in the bill of the modern purpose and definition of a charity.  In my last minute or so, I will touch on some minor points that I welcome on behalf of the SNP. We agree that there should be separate lists of current, active charities and those that are no longer functioning. As Donald Gorrie said, some may have assets that can be used by other charities with similar purposes. That was a positive point to make. In a recent letter to us, the Law Society of Scotland said that it would like to see a list of charities that are foreign based. That should be made clear and accessible to the general public through an on-going electronic register in which they can feel that everything is safe and secure. That would also assist OSCR. We welcome the fact that a Scottish organisation will not necessarily be designated a charity just because its English twin is and, in reference to John Swinney's question, we recommend that a protocol be established between the Treasury and OSCR to tidy such matters up before the bill progresses much further. In paragraph 27 of the summary of its report, the committee recommends that "the Executive should amend the definition of 'misconduct' in section 103" to prevent honest people who are working as trustees in charities and who make minor and genuine errors from falling foul of the law, which is too draconian. I have touched on a few points and expect colleagues to develop others. I commend the insertion of the purpose of a charity into the long title of the bill, so that the bill is not simply regulatory—a charity is a charity is a charity—and that people will recognise that. I trust that our amendment will receive a fair wind. The SNP otherwise fully supports this long-awaited reappraisal. Whether or not our amendment is supported, we support the thrust of the bill and the regulation of our many charities, which should now flourish in the confidence that rotten apples cannot get into the proverbial barrel and contaminate others. I move amendment S2M-2352.2, to insert at end: "and, in so doing, notes the Scottish Executive's commitment to protect the National Collections' charitable status but has concerns that Scotland's colleges may fall foul of section 7(3)(b), and calls for there to be a clear statement on the face of the Bill of the purpose of a charity, namely that only those organisations which have as their overriding purpose the provision of a benefit to the public should qualify for charitable status, and for the Executive to bring forward appropriate amendments at Stage 2 to this effect."

In his letter of 10 February to me, the First Minister rejected my proposal for an award along the lines of investors in people to recognise football clubs' good efforts to tackle sectarianism. Will the First Minister explain why he has rejected such a proposal in favour of one that regulates through licensing and does not incentivise clubs— using the stick and not the carrot—when the majority of Scottish Premier League clubs, including Celtic and Rangers, have supported my scheme?

I too congratulate Christine May. In the global economy, fair trade is a David against the multinational Goliaths. Despite the unevenness of that contest, however, we know who eventually won. Let us sound a sombre note about supermarkets, which display a narrow range of fair trade products. It would be interesting to ask the major supermarkets to do an audit of their fair trade products and present it to the Scottish Parliament, to let us know whether they really buy into fair trade—if I may use that expression—or just indulge in gesture politics. There is a degree of hypocrisy within the Parliament. My colleague Roseanna Cunningham referred to fair trade products that have disappeared from the Parliament. In an answer to Des McNulty in November last year, the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body revealed that the only fair trade products on offer at the Parliament were tea, coffee and orange juice. The answer stated: "The SPCB is committed to increasing the availability of fair trade products ... and a Responsible Purchasing Initiative ... will ensure fair trade issues are embedded in the way we procure goods and manage contracts."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 19 November 2004; S2W-12124.]  I feel a supplementary coming on. I wonder how far we have moved on, because fair trade products are certainly not on display in the canteen or other areas. That degree of hypocrisy extends to the public. We are in a climate in which price is all and the supermarkets vie with each other to say, "You can get your products more cheaply here." We want people to consider how and why they are getting products more cheaply and what the cost of that is to third-world countries and to the people who are producing goods in sweatshops. How is it that chicken that comes to Scotland is so cheap, and in what conditions are the people who process it  working? The labels on some of the cheap clothes that are sold in our supermarkets show that they are being produced in third-world countries. It is important for the public to check labels, not just for the Fairtrade logo, but to see where clothes are being made. Is somebody in some far-flung sweatshop earning buttons, as Roseanna Cunningham said, to produce something that, if it cost another two or three pounds, would allow them a decent wage? Although I am delighted that we are having the debate, I sound a note of caution. I welcome the progress that is being made, but a great deal needs to be done so that David overcomes the Goliaths.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that housing associations, such as Scottish Borders Housing Association, should continue to be exempted from the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 and what the reasons are for its position on the matter. (S2O-5551)

I received a letter from the minister's department saying that the consultation document is being prepared. Will the minister advise how she is evaluating the running costs of large housing associations and whether they are truly improving the overall conditions for residents? Does she agree that if a large housing association such as the SBHA were to run into financial difficulties in the next 12 months or so, that would be a matter of public interest for Borders residents?

I am a socialist.

Can Karen Whitefield spell "troglodyte"?

I will not take interventions because I have only four minutes. The Scottish National Party amendment has two strands, neither of which is exclusive of the other. They are fuel poverty and the state of some of our housing stock, both in the public and private sectors. I remind members that the Scottish Labour Party, in its 1999 manifesto for the elections to the Parliament, pledged to end fuel poverty by 2007. The date has now slipped to 2016 but, given the present situation, it seems that even that cannot be attained. My view is endorsed by Friends of the Earth Scotland, which has stated: "Current programmes to tackle fuel poverty will not go far enough". The problem is compounded by the fact that every 5 per cent increase in power prices returns another 30,000 people to fuel poverty. In effect, about 13 per cent of Scottish households still endure fuel poverty, a situation that impacts on about 30,000 children, with implications for decent family life, quality of life, health and, because of days at school that are lost through ill health, educational attainment. Many people who are on low and fixed incomes are located in houses of poor quality with damp and poor insulation, so their misery is compounded—if I have time, I will discuss housing conditions further. In addition, many of those households are in the maze of the benefits system and are the same people who use the metered card system, which further compounds the poverty trap and people's disadvantage in relation to fuel prices. Many pensioners are caught in homes that they cannot afford to repair, although I recognise the value of the recently launched care-and-repair scheme in the Borders. I also welcome the central heating programme, although I would like it to be extended to faulty systems and systems for the disabled—if the minister would listen; it is rude to have one's back to somebody when they are speaking. I also accept the value of the warm deal, although I understand that the scheme has been tailing off. The latest statistics for winter-related deaths among the over-65s show a rise of 400 on the previous year to a figure of 2,500. One in six pensioners admits to failing to keep their home warm. As I said, poor housing often goes hand in hand with fuel poverty. According to the Scottish house condition survey of 2002, at least 102,000 families with children and 98,000 older people live in  houses that are affected by dampness and condensation. Of those, 54,000 are single pensioners, who are often the poorest people. Many are single women who do not even get the basic state pension because they have not paid enough stamps, and many others do not even claim the pension credit. More than 170,000 people rent private accommodation, but there is little or no regulation to ensure that it is fit to let. Many tenants, often people on lower incomes, students and young or vulnerable people, simply put up and shut up. However, when the SNP sought to amend the Housing (Scotland) Bill in 2001 to include a provision on energy efficiency measures among others, the coalition rejected the amendments on the basis that the eradication of fuel poverty would render them superfluous. Given the figures that I have mentioned, the coalition must accept that it was wrong. For many of Scotland's householders, energy efficiency has no relevance. Their homes are poorly insulated and damp, with inefficient and inadequate heating systems. Their involuntary contribution to tackling global warming is that they cannot afford to switch their heating appliances on. The marriage of poor-quality housing with fuel poverty should be brought to an end sooner, rather than later. I move amendment S2M-2462.3, to leave out from "and commends" to end and insert: "while supporting any moves to increase energy efficiency notes that this must be in tandem with eradicating fuel poverty which affects 13% of households involving some 30,000 children; notes that, for every 5% increase in fuel prices, 30,000 are returned to fuel poverty and that one in five pensioners struggle to keep warm, all of which is often compounded by damp and poor housing conditions which is to be deplored in an energy and resources-rich nation; notes that endeavours to amend the Housing (Scotland) Bill in 2001 to raise tolerable standards, including measures to facilitate energy efficiency, were resisted by the Executive on the argument that its fuel poverty strategy would resolve these problems which it singularly is failing to do; calls upon the Executive to raise mandatory housing standards as a matter of urgency, and affirms that only an integrated approach to energy efficiency and fuel poverty can both impact on climate change and improve quality of life."

Fully accepting the constrictions of devolution, does the minister agree that the Northern Ireland model provides an excellent way forward? Can the Executive involve the Benefits Agency in the same way as happens in Northern Ireland, where uptake of benefits has been much better? We need that kind of full-frontal approach. Initiatives with citizens advice bureaux and so on are all very well, but the Benefits Agency is where the great problem lies.

I commend Elaine Smith for lodging this very worthy motion. My colleague Stewart Maxwell, who cannot be here today, launched the Macmillan Cancer Relief campaign on benefits in the Parliament. In November, I took part in a seminar on the subject, which included a workshop on the benefits system and how many cancer patients fail to access it, as Elaine Smith has said. Many cancer patients and carers may be entitled to claim benefits such as disability living allowance, attendance allowance, income support, carers allowance and other benefits. However, a lack of knowledge, embarrassment or the sheer difficulty of claiming may prevent them from accessing those benefits. The statistics show that 64 per cent of those with a terminal cancer diagnosis—nearly 10,000 people in Scotland—did not claim disability benefits last year. That amounts to £15 million that was unclaimed but desperately needed. There is a variety of reasons for that. Elaine Smith referred to the excellent report entitled "Benefits Access for People Affected by Cancer in Northern Ireland", which was the result of the nine-month secondment of a member of staff from Northern Ireland's Social Security Agency—social security is devolved there, which is handy— "to investigate the barriers faced by people affected by cancer in Northern Ireland in accessing benefits." That was the springboard for the excellent leaflets that Macmillan has issued, which are entitled "Affected by cancer? We can stop it spreading to your finances" and "Help with the cost of cancer". The summary of the Northern Ireland report says that the diagnosis of cancer sometimes makes it difficult to claim benefits, because the impact of some cancers is variable and unpredictable—it is cyclical. On one day, people might not feel that they require to claim benefits, but on another day, they might require to claim them. The summary also says: "There are problems associated with people being identified as 'terminally ill'. Being identified as 'terminally ill', as defined in Social Security legislation, entitles an applicant to quick and easy access to certain ... benefits. However, there are different understandings amongst health and social care professionals and the Social Security Agency about the definition". A simple matter such as that can determine whether someone accesses benefits.  All the comments from individuals and the data show that fear of the debt that is incurred from all that lands on people who have cancer is next only to the illness itself as a concern and must exacerbate dealing with the illness. The summary says that many people with cancer do not have a good understanding of how the benefits system works or how to access it. Most health and social care professionals who were interviewed for the survey had limited knowledge about the benefits system. Many knew that they needed to help their patients, but they did not know how to do that. The report also says that "Many key staff working for the Social Security Agency have" little "understanding about the impact of living with cancer" and need specific training in how to deal with such people. It must be extremely difficult to fill in a form with the words "terminally ill" on it when it is about oneself. The report's conclusions and recommendations say that what is needed is improved communication about an advanced disease or poor prognosis, an increase in knowledge and awareness, improved access to benefits and support in the decision-making process. I am taken with the comments of individuals with cancer who have tried to claim benefits. A man from Huntly in Aberdeenshire says: "I found it very hard and stressful to access benefits. My Macmillan social worker told me I was eligible and helped me fill out the forms. Even so I was rejected the first time and so I went to Appeal and won. You have to fight for everything." Such people need support when they deal with the illness. Macmillan Cancer Relief's chief executive, Peter Cardy, says: "It is unacceptable that cancer patients should suffer the huge problem of debt, poverty or financial hardship at a time when they are most vulnerable—especially when help is available if only they knew about it. This is why Macmillan wants a better financial deal for people dealing with cancer and to see changes in the law so that claiming benefit is made much easier." I assume that all of us in the chamber support that. I very much welcome the debate. I do not know how far we have moved on. We have difficulties in Scotland because the Benefits Agency is not devolved, but that does not prevent us from making the most of devolution by ensuring liaison with the Benefits Agency and adopting the Northern Ireland model to ensure that all types of cancer patients are not disadvantaged when they  need financial support.

He did.

As the member's colleague at Westminster, the shadow Attorney-General, has not apologised to the people of Scotland for saying that Scotland is not a place to which people want to come—I paraphrase—will the member take the opportunity to apologise on his behalf?

That is not what I asked about.

I endorse much of what Rosie Kane said and what Donald Gorrie said towards the end of his speech. I share his concern that we are entering a Dutch auction on immigration proposals that has much to do with a phoney election and which will have implications for racial harmony throughout the UK and in Scotland. That is why we have lodged our amendment. Scotland has a distinctive voice and distinctive requirements and needs, as has been recognised by Charles Clarke  with regard to the Labour Party's immigration proposals. As has been stated, Scotland has the most rapidly declining population in Europe due to our low birth rates and net zero immigration rate. By the end of this decade, we will be down below the symbolic 5 million mark and, by 2041, there will have been a further drop of 10 per cent. We are the only component part of the United Kingdom that has a declining population. We need immigrants. Over the same period, the population of England and Wales is predicted to rise by 7 million. The implications for Scotland's economy, both social and financial, are great. There will be a strain on services, with an increase in the number of elderly people being exacerbated by the lower number of people to support those services through work and tax. Much of the cost will be met through the Scottish budget, even if we remain devolved and not independent. That will have huge financial implications for health and housing. In May 2004, it was calculated that only 17 per cent of our population was between 16 and 19. Our population environment is very different from that of the rest of the UK. For example, immigration into Scotland between 1992 and 2001 was 4.7 per cent, which is well below our share—it should be double that figure. We have a crisis that, as I said, puts us in a different position to that of the rest of the UK. We in the SNP fully support the fresh talent initiative as a step in the right direction, but it is wholly inadequate. If I understand the minister's figures, the maximum number of people who can be brought in is about 8,000 per annum. Yet for Scotland's population to stand still at 5 million, we have to attract 10,000 people per annum. I do not mean to suggest that devolution has trapped us in this position for ever. There are solutions, and devolved Governments elsewhere have taken control of immigration policy. We could have a Scottish green card and a targeted approach to immigration that is specifically tailored to meet the undeniable, specific needs of the Scottish economy and our demographics. If we had powers over asylum—if we were able to lift the ban on asylum seekers finding employment—we could do much to redress the balance. I have some examples for the minister. Australia has state-specific migration mechanisms. That is not easy to say but I will explain what it means. It allows state Governments to issue visas to immigrants who fall marginally short of being accepted in an area of high population but who have skills that would be beneficial to that state's economy. There are conditions: an immigrant must be under 45 and live and work in the  specified area, although they can go elsewhere on personal and business trips. The visa lasts for three years, but the immigrant can apply for permanent residency after two. It has been shown that those people are likely to stay in the area that accepted them. The Canada-Quebec accord of 1991 lays out the roles of the federal and state Governments with regard to immigration into Quebec. Quebec sets its own criteria for immigrants based on their potential to integrate into and enhance Quebec's economy and society. When the federal Government sets the annual target for the number of immigrants that it wants to attract, it must take into account the number that the Quebec Government wants to receive. That number can be anything up to 5 per cent above Quebec's proportion of the Canadian population. Such a model could fit into a devolved Scotland. The result is that Quebec has had an extra 11,500 immigrants per year since 1991 in comparison with the 10 years before the accord was signed. Why cannot Scotland have such an accord with Westminster? That would allow us to take the immigrants who the south of England neither wants nor needs but who Scotland sorely needs.

I have grave concerns about the Conservative proposals, one of which is to have asylum seekers and immigrants identified by the United Nations as "genuine". I do not really know what that means. I think that the term "genuine" has a rather sinister effect. We want younger people to come here. The issue is open for debate and I have suggested models. It is not true that we cannot look elsewhere for systems that could operate for Scotland, such as accords between Westminster and Scotland. If we had an imaginative Government in Scotland, we could look at such ideas. We could have a Scottish green card system under which people could move around the UK, although they would have to live and work in Scotland. Such a system would require people, who might have to be below a certain age, to have certain skills that would benefit the Scottish economy. We could set targets for levels of immigration and we could allow asylum seekers—many of whom are highly talented professionals who are languishing in what are really prisons—to work in Scotland. It is a disgrace that Scotland has no control over that. I hope that those ideas can be chewed over and considered seriously by this Government.

To ask the Scottish Executive what confidence it has in the accuracy of the latest figures on youth offending produced by the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration. (S2O-5434)

I refer the minister to the minutes of a meeting on 14 May 2004 at Victoria Quay between her civil servants in the sponsor division and the SCRA's senior management. The minutes state: "A significant gap continues to exist between SCRA and the Minister about the role of SCRA ... Not simply process improvements—must be about improvements in outcomes for children." A later meeting was referred to as being a "make or break meeting" with regard to the role of the SCRA. Is it not the case that the SCRA has lost the battle for taking on a wider role—that is to say, improvements for individual children—and is now skewed to servicing statistical data for the minister, as is evidenced by the resignation of the widely respected Alan Miller?

Does the minister agree that it is an historical anomaly that the River Esk is designated as an English river, unlike the Tweed, which has been a Scottish river since the 1850s act of Parliament that bears its name? Does he share the concerns of the Gala angling association, whose members will have to pay for all 200 of the rod licences? Would a solution not be to devolve the Esk back to Scotland?

Is the minister aware that I have been in correspondence with the First Minister about correspondence that I have had with Premier League club managers on an awards scheme that is based on the Investors in People model? Awards would be made to clubs that take a lead in removing racism and sectarianism from the terraces. I know that a summit is coming up, but  will the minister look favourably on the suggestion, as I have received favourable responses from Premier League managers?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform has had with the Minister for Transport regarding the funding for the Borders railway; when those discussions took place, and whether they have been concluded. (S2O-5081)

The minister will appreciate people's concerns, because it has been requested that the business case be reviewed not to take account of the number of people travelling and travel times, but to examine the revenue from the line. Will he assure me that that is not a negative step in relation to funding the line, as the Borders rail forum is greatly concerned that it is?

Will the member take an intervention?

I rise as an older person—indeed, as a pensioner—to speak to and move the amendment in my name. I advise the chamber that I will start with some quotations from what I think was the first debate in the Parliament on the elderly, which was initiated by the Scottish National Party in December 1999. In doing so, I hope to measure how far the Liberal-Labour coalition has  travelled—although often kicking and screaming—down the road to improving our older people's lives. First, I congratulate the Parliament on the introduction of free personal care and the recent announcement of a nationwide concessionary fare scheme, albeit deferred until 2006. On that point, I ask the minister to see, when conferring with the Minister for Transport, whether the scheme can be extended to the carers of elderly and disabled people, who have to push the wheelchairs. There is no use giving free transport to the person in the wheelchair if their carer does not get it, too. In the 1999 debate, I said in summing up as shadow deputy spokesperson for older people: "On the matter of the Royal Commission on Long Term Care, I was pleased to see movement on Sir Stewart Sutherland's findings." Indeed, my first proposal for a bill in the Parliament was for free personal care in February 2000. However, it took the coalition until July 2002 to make that policy a reality—hence the kicking and screaming. In that same speech, I said: "Of course it is right that we have a national concessionary fare scheme in Scotland—and it is my party's policy."—[ Official Report , 2 December 1999; Vol 3, c 1181-82.] I congratulate the coalition again on taking that up, even if only eventually.

I want to get into my speech. Other issues that were raised in that debate still remain, such as the level of the state pension and pensioner poverty, which can lead ultimately to an untimely death through fuel poverty. I found what the minister said about pensioner poverty extraordinary. In 1999, the basic state pension for a single person was £66.75 a week, when gross average earnings were £364 a week. Today, six years later, the level of that pension is just £79.60. Of course, if one is a woman, one probably will not even get that. My state pension is £72 a week because I took three years out to do a degree and six years out to look after my children. There are many women much worse off than that. Gross average earnings are now £436 a week, compared with the £79 pension a week. Six years on, the pension is just £13 more a week, compared with an increase of £72 a week for the rest of society.

The minister is talking about perceptions; I am giving her facts. Of course, there is always the means-tested pensions credit, which is demeaning and unfair. It penalises people with small occupational pensions, who use that money to subsidise the spitefully small state pension. As a result, some 30 per cent of those who are entitled to claim the credit simply do not do so. However, if those people lived in independent Norway, they would receive a basic pension of £121 a week. If we had an independent Scotland now, pensioners would receive £106 a week. That measure can be paid for. In fact, an independent pensions survey has found that the money is in the Treasury, but the political will is simply not there.

Sit down, Robert. Until the will exists, there is little prospect of the one in five of Scotland's pensioners who live in poverty seeing any real change. As a result of such poverty, in 2003-04, 2,500 people over the age of 65 died from cold-related illnesses, which is 400 more than for the previous year and 1,100 more than for the year before that. In comparison, 66 people of that age group died in road traffic accidents. That means that people over 65 are 38 times more likely to die of cold in Scotland than to be killed on the road. It is a disgrace that we can have such a situation in an energy-rich nation. An National Opinion Polls survey in Scotland found that more than one in six pensioners struggled to keep warm in their own home; one in 10 avoided using certain rooms because they were too cold; and one in three admitted to turning off their central heating in the afternoon to reduce costs. Again, those are not perceptions, but facts. There is little point in having a central heating system if people cannot afford to use it.

Yes.

Oh, sorry. I meant Robert Brown.

Mr Gallie knows that I cannot comment on the matter that he raised. I had meant to let Robert Brown in; he can come back on this next point if he so wishes. In the 1999 debate on pensioners, he said: "there will be further measures beyond what the Government has managed to achieve so far to tackle the scourge of fuel poverty ... and ill health from hypothermia and finally to eliminate fuel poverty in this country."— [ Official Report , 2 December 1999; Vol 3, c 1139.]  Although that was nearly six years ago, the figures are getting worse. Does Mr Brown want to comment now?

It is a pity that I let Robert Brown get up. As other members have pointed out, the burden of council tax compounds the fuel poverty trap. According to a Help the Aged survey, the council tax is, with the exception of the monthly food bill, the largest expenditure that pensioners face. That is no wonder—bills have increased by 50 per cent since Labour came to power. As a result, the £13 increase in the pension that I mentioned earlier has long since been swallowed up by council tax charges. Indeed, four out of 10 pensioners do not even claim council tax benefit, which compounds the situation even more. What is the coalition doing about the matter? It is having a review. I think that we will put that under the working title of "Keeping the Liberal Democrats Quiet". Scotland's pensioners live in an asset-rich nation that has oil, gas and wave and wind power. The country is self-sufficient in food from sea and land, but many pensioners live impoverished lives, shop at the Oxfam shop and buy food that is past its sell-by date. Those impoverished lives are the responsibility of Labour and its partners in crime against the elderly, the Liberal Democrats. They should be thoroughly ashamed. The way forward for older people is independence. Only by that route will we have, as of right, a decent pension that will enable us to lead independent and dignified lives, free from the humiliation and injustice of means testing and secure and warm in our own homes.  I move amendment S2M-2298.1, to leave out from second "recognises" to end and insert: "for example, as role models, carers and volunteers; recognises the progress that has been made through policies such as free personal care, the central heating programme and the commitment to national free bus travel by 2006; considers, however, that the state pension is inadequate for a basic living standard and requires to be supplemented by the means-tested pension credit which some 30% of pensioners fail to claim; notes that one in five pensioners live in poverty, with some 70% in council tax poverty, and that excess winter mortality rates are three times higher in Scotland than in Germany and Sweden, and asserts that, without an increase in the powers of the Parliament to deliver a citizen's pension providing a decent standard of living which will bring security, dignity, independence and choice, improvements to the lives of Scotland's elderly can only be at the margins."

We all seem to have connections with Alloway. My sister lives about two minutes' walk from Burns cottage in the village. One very wet day, we strolled around the cottage yet another time. I was appalled to see the condition in which artefacts such as the family Bible were kept. Various manuscripts had been put in primitive cases in very damp conditions. Security was also casual. These are world treasures, rather than treasures just for Ayrshire or Scotland. I am glad that at the 11 th hour something dramatic is to be done to rescue the artefacts. However, that is not the only thing that we need to do about Burns's heritage. His true heritage is in the words of his poems and songs. He took great trouble to rescue melodies that would otherwise have been lost to the world for ever, putting words to them that emblazoned them on our hearts. I refer to songs such as "Ae Fond Kiss", with its wonderful pathos, "Scots, wha hae" and, of course, "Auld Lang Syne". However, study of Burns is not mandatory in our school curriculum, which is currently under review. I hope that it will become mandatory for pupils as a result of the  review. I remember that, at school, I knew Shakespeare by heart, but we did Burns only in the week before the 25 th and at no other time. I think that that continues, and it must change. The man was not only a poet, but a philosopher. Why was his song "For a' that and a' that" sung at the opening of the Parliament in 1999? It was sung because it spoke of equality. There were some uncomfortable words in there for our monarchical visitors that day. Burns also saw hypocrisy to the core in "Holy Willie's Prayer"; his words are still as true now. The words and songs of Burns unite communities small and large. Like many members, I speak at a lot of Burns suppers. Women are in high demand, but the reply to the toast to the lasses can get a bit tedious. The best Burns supper that I have ever attended was at a wee community at Wanlockhead. It was a moonlit winter's night, with snow piled up at the sides of the road. When I drove in, I could not see a soul and the village was deserted. I thought that the Martians had landed. With my typical lack of direction, it took me ages to find the village hall. However, when I opened the door, I found that everyone was there. There were banners everywhere and we had a wonderful evening. The whole community was drawn together by Burns. In the same way, when we reach hogmanay, communities the world over are drawn together. The one man who does that is a Scotsman—Robert Burns. We have let his heritage dry up, disintegrate, get damp and be distributed. We have been casual about this man who has the status around the world of a colossus in culture. I am glad that the Parliament intends to do something about that. Chris Ballance was right to say that, if we can create something that is worthy of the heritage of Burns and of Scotland, the Parliament will have done one grand job.

My point is that the money that is thrown at health, at education, at bullying and at the justice system deals with the symptoms but not the causes. The Executive will continue to firefight until we deal with the underlying poverty. Of course that poverty is in pockets, because people are driven into ghettos from which they can no longer escape as they once did in the 1950s and 1960s.

I find that an extraordinary interpretation. I will be interested to read the Official Report  to see how that came about. I acknowledged in my speech that there have been minor improvements in addressing some poverty, but we will never tackle the kind of estate that some in here think does not exist any more unless we have the economic power to do so. Many of Robert Brown's colleagues agree with me to a degree.

I note with disappointment that no one from the Scottish Socialist Party is attending the debate, even though the SSP claims to fight for the underprivileged. As far as I can calculate, this is the fourth debate on this issue in as many years. Of course the tragedy is that debating is one thing and delivering is quite another. I make those initial comments because although the odd pocket of change might have been delivered here and there, the reality is that for Scotland's poorer communities life goes on unchanged. An Executive motion from March 2003 on closing the opportunity gap for older people stated that there would be "initiatives ... which will support older people in living healthy, active and independent lives." However, one in five of Scotland's pensioners lives in poverty. Of course the best medicine for that is a decent state pension, not the basic pension of £79 per week for the sole pensioner or £127 per week for the couple. Pensioners have to claim pension credit, but 30 per cent do not, whether for want of will, because they cannot fathom the form or because it is humiliating. The situation is even worse for women pensioners, many of whom do not even reach the giddy heights of £79 per week. With the reality and disgrace of pensioner poverty come pensioner deaths. Scotland has one  of the highest incidences of excess winter deaths in western Europe. It is higher than that of our Scandinavian counterparts, which have a much colder climate. Of course the minister can do nothing about that, because he does not have the power. The Scottish National Party would deliver a citizens pension of at least £106 per week for a single pensioner and £161 per week for couples. That would be a redistribution of wealth. The Executive motion of October 2002 stated: " Building a Better Scotland - Spending Proposals 2003-2006: What the money buys , will deliver a better life for the most disadvantaged people and communities in Scotland". In the motion of September 2003, the Executive aimed to "deliver community regeneration to build strong, safe and attractive communities ... to reduce debt ...to increase participation in the labour market." I wonder how many people have been lifted out of the so-called sink estates and how many such estates are now pleasant and graffiti, hoodlum and drug-free? An article in the Daily Record last June stated: "It takes just 22 minutes to drive ... from the richest streets in Scotland to the poorest"— from Giffnock to the ironically named Wellhouse. The failure is greater still because the minister and his deputy, no matter how well meaning—I view them both as politicians of integrity, who are possibly even old Labour—cannot turn the tide of deprivation, which, other than for the lucky few, discriminates from the moment a child is born to the day it dies. We need serious money and power, which can come only from root-and-branch reforms of taxation and benefits. The best cure of all for deprivation, which the minister acknowledged, is, to paraphrase the head of the Confederation of British Industry Scotland, a well-paid job. The relevant powers are in that other place, but the impact of deprivation and poverty is fundamental, as the minister has acknowledged, to the health, education and law and order of greater society. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation report "Strategies against poverty; a shared road map" has made it plain through research what we all know from anecdotal evidence, which is that if someone is poor, their life expectancy decreases and their chances of illness and serious illness, such as cancer, increase. If someone is poor, their chances of survival are lower. If someone is poor, they will eat badly, their home will not be well heated, if it is heated at all, and it might be endemically damp. Their children are less likely to succeed at school and they are more likely to be victims of crime and to enter lives of crime. They are more likely to become addicts. They will pay  highly for debt because, as we all know, only the rich can afford debt. They will not need a social scientist to determine where they come from and where they belong, from which they are unlikely to escape, because their community, like any habitat, has its distinguishing features. It is drab, with boarded-up shops, a chippy, an ice-cream van circling the greyness of the estate with its jingling melodies, bookies, and shops for the easy cashing of cheques. Collarless dogs wander on scrub grass patches and there is little sight of flower beds or parkland. In swing parks, local gangs swig cheap booze. They are role models for the next generation.

I am making it plain that without fundamental economic power in the Parliament, the picture that I described will remain relatively unchanged. We have had eight years of Labour in power—five years of which have been here with the Liberal Democrats. Token and genuine attempts have been made, but we can only gesture at the edges unless we can turn round the economic situation and redress the balance between taxation and benefits. If we are being honest, until then we cannot change those images. Such situations cost society. Poverty costs not only the lives of the good people who are trapped in such drab ghettos but society at large. Poverty is expensive—it costs us all serious money. Money is thrown at youth offending, the rate of which continues to rise. Money is thrown at reducing waiting lists and times, but they continue to lengthen. Money is thrown at reducing smoking, drinking, truancy, bullying of fellow pupils and bullying of staff. Money is thrown here, there and everywhere but with marginal and often no measurable impact. Even moving to the post of Minister for Communities is seen as downgrading. Moving from health to social justice is not seen as a promotion or even a sideways shift. Becoming the minister for enterprise is a reward—but for what? We can tackle Scotland's poverty only if we have the economic power here. Members have differences over how far that economic power should go, but those differences run throughout the parties. We need to raise taxes and redistribute the wealth in Scotland. When we have tackled the root  causes of Scotland's poverty, we should not be surprised to find that much of the criminality, our appalling health record, damp housing and so on resolves itself and that those communities that were so rosily portrayed in earlier motions become fact, not fiction. I move amendment S2M-2265.2, to leave out from "and extending" to end and insert: "but only in very limited areas; notes that one in three children, one in five working-age adults and one in five pensioners live in relative poverty despite Scotland's wealth; notes the recent report by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, Strategies Against Poverty , published in December 2004 which highlighted the link between deprivation and problems such as crime, poor health, premature death, family breakdown and poor educational attainment; further notes that, according to the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, what is required is a modest redistribution of wealth, and believes that, without power over the macro-economy, tax and benefits, any progress towards eradicating poverty will continue to be minimal so that many of Scotland's children will continue to be born to fail and our pensioners will live in poverty or on its margins."

I recognise the sterling work that is done by many social workers throughout Scotland in difficult and testing circumstances. Those circumstances are becoming even more difficult and testing, as the stark statistic that one in 56 of Scotland's children may have drug-dependent parents illustrates.  One of the huge issues to arise from the various cases that have sensationally and tragically hit the press has been the workload of social workers. I understand that there is still quite a severe shortage of social workers in Scotland. Paragraph 20 of the Education Committee's report states: "The Committee recognises that the Scottish Executive has taken significant steps to address the national shortage of social workers but the fruits of this action will only emerge in the longer term". I do not wish to embarrass the Presiding Officer, Trish Godman, but she managed to elicit, in an answer to a parliamentary question on 27 October 2004, the fact that current vacancies were around 600. Perhaps the minister will advise on another day, if not today, what the current vacancy situation is for social workers. Of course, it is not simply a matter of numbers. In paragraph 18 of its report, the committee noted: "Furthermore, it was noted that although: 'Scottish Executive statistics suggest that the number of social workers in post has grown. These posts are mainly in new initiatives'." Therefore, there is a lack of staff at ground level to deal with the many urgent cases. Prioritisation must be a nightmare for front-line social workers. That said, other issues could be addressed to prevent the kind of tragedies that have occurred in the past. It seems strange to me that there is not a national database. I may be wrong about that, but I do not know why such a database has not been established. The Education Committee's report quotes the view of COSLA and the Association of Directors of Social Work. A representative of ADSW said: "We all hold child protection registers locally, but perhaps a national database would help."—[ Official Report , Education Committee , 24 March 2004; c 1165.] The word "perhaps" is redundant. It must be the case that a national database would help, given the mobility of families. Abusers are often en famille; an abuser might be a boyfriend of a family member. Families could easily drop off the radar screen, and a national database would help to address that. Surely in this age of technology, it is not beyond our wit to deliver such a resource. The report contains other good suggestions. Shared training is mentioned. Many professionals are precious about their remit and what they do; they do not feel that other professionals or members of the voluntary sector are entitled to step over the boundaries. I have been guilty of that in the two professions in which I have worked. Joint training would resolve such difficulties and would increase the sharing of information. In many cases that I have found out about, the information was there, but it was scattered and was not shared. If the jigsaw had been put together, in  many instances the red danger light would have been seen. I will not deal with Disclosure Scotland, because many other members will do that. Instead, I will talk about the children's panel system, for which—in common with many other members—I have a great deal of time. Although the report does not deal with that subject in great detail, it mentions that too many referrals are made to the children's panel system. If I may, I will refer to a parliamentary motion that I have lodged, which raises concerns about the stresses that are put on panel members. That situation was brought to my attention by the chair of the Scottish Borders children's panel advisory committee, who has said that "what is being asked is beyond the voluntary nature of the appointment" and that there are "grave concerns that the current review may not happen soon enough". Because of resignations, the Scottish Borders children's panel is operating with 30 per cent fewer members and is trawling in East Lothian to get people to sit on it. My understanding is that the whole point of having lay members on children's panels is that that allows local people with local knowledge to participate. Many years ago, I asked that people who were over the age of 60 could serve on children's panels. I understood the arguments that were made against the proposal—it might have been considered desirable to have people on the panels who belonged to a more similar age group—but I am glad that the minister has granted my request. Although it is excellent that that has happened, huge issues still face the good people who serve on children's panels, who are often the first port of call for children who are at risk; the children that they deal with are not necessarily offenders. My final point concerns the children about whom we do not hear—the hidden children who need child protection. By supporting a family in which there is substantial drug or alcohol abuse by parents or carers in the family, such children become the parents themselves. We have had debates on the issue. Those young carers are in need of child protection. In dealing with a disastrous, destructive situation within the family, they grow old beyond their years. I welcome the report and acknowledge that, as other members have said, the underlying issues are often deprivation and poverty. That is why, given my portfolio, I asked to speak in the debate. Many of the children who are affected will recycle what has happened in previous generations in their area.

I hear what the minister has said, but does he not agree that much of the Scottish public would be astonished to learn that Watson's, Fettes College and Gordonstoun School are listed as charities, with all the tax benefits that flow from that status? Why does the Executive not take the opportunity of the introduction of the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Bill to end that anachronism?

That is a very different matter.

I am heartened by what the minister says about the localisation of services. I refer him to the vital service that is provided by our cottage hospitals, including those in Jedburgh and Coldstream, which are under threat of closure by NHS Borders, against the express wishes of the entire community. Will the minister confirm that he has been sent a proposal by the Jedburgh general practitioners for redesigning their cottage hospital, which could be a model throughout Scotland? Will he consider that proposal very carefully? Does he agree that, for the time being, it would be imprudent for NHS Borders to close either hospital?

Will the minister consider extending the scheme to disabled people's carers, who are essential to helping them to access transport? What redress will elderly or disabled people have if they simply cannot access the bus fleet in their area because the buses have high steps?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I shall resist the temptation to say anything about meaningful looks. Will the minister acknowledge that, after five years of the Lib-Lab coalition, we have seen a substantial increase in homelessness, which may very well be exacerbated by the recent regulations on the prohibition of bed-and-breakfast accommodation? Given that the right to buy is now seen by many providers as the villain of the piece, will he accelerate review of that policy?

We will see if it is the same speech.

I rise to speak with a social justice hat on. As many people say, the causes of crime are manifold and are often rooted in impoverished societies, where people have little opportunity. For that reason, I think that the Tory motion is simplistic. It states the belief that "the way to reduce reoffending and subsequently the prison population is to reduce the overall incidence of crime in Scotland"— quite, but how is that to be done?—and goes on to say that the Parliament "therefore calls on the Scottish Executive to increase the police presence". That will not get rid of reoffending or of the reasons why crimes are committed.  There are well-documented links between poverty and crime, whether someone is the perpetrator or the victim. There is anecdotal evidence and visible evidence. If people live in one of those awfully described sink estates, they are more likely to be victims of crime and perhaps to be criminals themselves. There is nothing to give people ambition and achievement. There are children living on those estates who are born to fail, not just materially but because the educational opportunities and so on are not there for them. The situation has got worse since the post-war period. Post-war, people could move out of those situations; they could move from their council house schemes, but now people are quite often geographically trapped in those areas for generations. We have to seek serious solutions and have a serious debate about why, five years down the road, we have more people in prison and more crimes. What is being done is obviously wrong in many respects. There are people who must be in prison to protect public safety and sometimes, though not always, property. However, I was on the Justice 1 Committee for four years and I am hearing things said in the chamber today that I heard four years ago. There is not time in prison for the majority of prisoners to undergo any kind of rehabilitation. There is not a substantial throughcare system to prevent prisoners who are released from going straight back into the situations that they were in before. Statistics for poverty are really quite striking. There are nearly twice as many people in the UK who have relatively low incomes as there were 25 years ago. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation's statistics are UK-wide statistics, but they link to Scotland, where we are actually worse off. According to those statistics, one child in five is living in a family that receives means-tested benefits. One child in three in Scotland lives in poverty. As I have said before, they are born to fail—even more so if they live in Glasgow, where there are 28 council wards where more than half of all children are in families receiving out-of-work, means-tested benefits. It is in those areas that we have a culture of drugs and alcoholism. Alcoholism fuels violence and violent crime and drugs fuel the petty crimes of theft, often against people in their own communities who are as poor as the perpetrators themselves are. What I propose is not a soft option. We are not going soft on crime. We are trying to present substantive solutions. I know that the First Minister and the Minister for Justice have recognised that something must be done. "Supporting Safer, Stronger Communities: Scotland's Criminal Justice Plan" states: "We know that an important element of reducing crime is  reducing exclusion and supporting families and children at risk", part of which is to "Prevent individuals or families from falling into poverty." The First Minister did not take that on the chin when I asked him about it at First Minister's question time last week. I quote from the Joseph Rowntree report, which states: "the corrosive effect on society as a whole has become apparent, and tackling disadvantage cannot be seen just as a priority for helping one sectional interest with limited electoral clout." We sometimes target effort in that way and that is wrong. It is not easy to get the papers to report a debate in which we say, "The Scottish Parliament has decided to tackle poverty to reduce crime"—that is not very good for the tabloids—but it is a more substantial way forward than to say, "Let us have more police in the communities," which will not solve the problem.

The minister should give us his summing-up speech.

Like John Home Robertson, I have family connections with the King's Own Scottish Borderers. My father joined the regiment at the start of the second world war, and proceeded most of the time with his friend and colleague Jock  Hunter, who came from Hawick. Unfortunately, Jock did not return from Arnhem, where the KOSBs were parachuted down. I also have connections through having, for a long time, campaigned in the Scottish Borders and in part representing the KSOB, along with other constituents. There is no doubt that there are issues here to do with lack of morale. Morale is not some tenuous thing. Morale is at the heart of a soldier's ability to relate to other troops when they are in the most difficult situations. It cannot always be measured in statistics. Morale is based on having a connection with the regiment that sometimes goes back for generations, and a connection with the area from which the regiment comes. It is essential in dangerous, frontline situations in which soldiers must act almost immediately and as one with the other men and women who are around them. It is embarrassing to say the least—in fact, it is disgraceful—to put at risk the jobs of troops who are in such situations at this moment and to undermine their regiments. The timing could not be worse, but when did Geoff Hoon ever know anything about timing? He turned up earlier this month to flaunt himself in front of the same troops that he is going to cut. Operational difficulties will also arise from the cuts. I am interested in Lord Guthrie's views, which were dismissed by Geoff Hoon. Unlike Elaine Murray, who admits that she knows nothing about military matters, Geoff Hoon seems to know about them, despite what those with experience tell him. Lord Guthrie says that cutbacks have left the Army "dangerously small and over-committed". We know that the nature of military action now is very different to what it was. I support much of what Mark Ruskell said. It is strange for a member who is a pacifist to talk about troops, but, like Mark Ruskell, I envisage the troops performing a humanitarian role, intervening and helping people to get to democracy. I hope that one day we will have no more wars. I support Mark Ruskell's view about getting rid of Trident and other real weapons of mass destruction, which eat into our economy and which we hope that we will never use against people who are vulnerable, as we are. There has also been huge public opposition to cutting and getting rid of our regiments. That is no wonder, because the people know better than Geoff Hoon. I will conclude with the submission that has been made on behalf of the King's Own Scottish Borderers to Geoff Hoon, who is featuring large in the debate. It is called "The KOSB Alternative Proposal" and was submitted on 19 November 2004. It submits  "that the regimental system can be retained, Scottish Regiments preserved, the problems of the arms plot eliminated, recruiting and retention put on a sound basis for the future and public expenditure on defence reduced." I suggest that Elaine Murray reads the document. Being a soldier is not just a job like any other job. To cut a regiment—to take it off the face of the earth and leave it with a cap badge—is a disgrace for which some of our troops might pay in other ways than simply losing their regiments.

Will the minister speak to the Eaga Partnership about an issue that I raised, and to which John Swinburne alluded? Some pensioners have systems that are not just faulty but dangerous, but they are prohibited from accessing the scheme. Will the minister consider investigating that, as it is obviously of great concern?

I congratulate Margaret Ewing on securing the debate. She has an honourable track record. I remember her talking about cold weather payments when nobody else was listening—including me. We have moved so far and she is one of the pioneers. Pensioners form one of the groups that are most vulnerable to fuel poverty. It is reckoned that 58 per cent of Scottish pensioner households live in fuel poverty. Another rather dreadful statistic is that 18 per cent of single pensioner households do not heat their main living-rooms regularly. How many of us go home to that? Even as I speak, my central heating programmer is switching the heating on. I have—fortunately—forgotten what it is like to enter a cold household, but many of our elderly have not. The number of cold-related deaths in winter has risen substantially. Last year, the number was 10 times the figure for deaths on the road. Shock statistics about road deaths prompt a huge reaction, but deaths from simply not having the money to heat a home do not receive the same reaction. Poor housing, poverty, low wages and indoor temperatures that are not high enough have a direct causal link to cold-related deaths. In addition to excess cold-related winter deaths, we should address hypothermia. I have obtained statistics that show that the Executive projects that 239 people will be taken to hospital suffering from hypothermia this year. Not all of them will have come from their homes, but some will. That is another shocking statistic. The central heating programme has much in it that is to be welcomed, but it could go further. For example, the Eaga Partnership Ltd has put it to me that there are some people who are eligible for the programme because of their age, but they have a faulty central heating system. I know that the programme has been extended to very elderly groups, but the Eaga Partnership has been concerned that its hands have been tied and that it  cannot replace systems that might even be dangerous. I ask the minister to consider adapting the central heating programme to allow a heating system to be replaced when the Eaga Partnership carries out an assessment and thinks that a system is dangerous. Similarly, I ask the minister to consider extending the central heating programme to disabled people who are not at the appropriate age to receive help. I am talking about disabled people who are confined to wheelchairs or disabled people who are confined to chairs and have zimmers. They need more substantial heating than we do as a result of their immobility. There are also hard-to-heat homes in Scotland. There is a limit on the money that can be spent on central heating programmes, but there are properties that are so old that there should be flexibility in certain circumstances, particularly for older people who live in such properties. I share Margaret Ewing's concerns about the fuel poverty helpline not being up and running. I know that Energy Action Scotland has recommended it and I support that recommendation. It would be a simple move. Last week was warm homes week. What people are entitled to is quite complex and somebody else should sort out those complexities for them. We should try to prevent some of the 2,510 excess winter deaths that should not happen in Scotland.

This is the third fishing debate in which I have taken part. Each time there are the same worries and the same threats to our fishing communities, reaching their annual peak just before Christmas. I do not agree with Sarah Boyack that the constitutional issue is a distraction. It is at the heart of why Scotland is impotent in protecting its fishing industry. The CFP is a cyclical disaster. It has been operational since 1983 and is an anachronism. I am sorry that Ted Brocklebank is not here, because jurisdiction and sole competency over fishing was signed away in 1971 by the Tories. A recent civil service minute released under the 30-year rule made it plain that Scotland's fishing industry was "expendable". That has been proved true, and shame on the Tories. Still, a sinner who repenteth is to be welcomed. It remains an anomaly that this one resource should be managed in such a fashion. If it is appropriate for us to opt out of the common monetary policy, it must follow that we can opt out of the common fisheries policy, if cause is shown. As other members have said, there is slim chance that Norway, Iceland or the Faroes will join the EU if it tries to sustain exclusive competence over fisheries. I was interested to hear Tavish Scott's speech. He lauded Norway's negotiating capabilities, but refused to admit that Norway's independent status gives it its political punch. It is disingenuous of him to do that. Indeed, it is dancing on the head of the proverbial pin.

I am taking up the point that Tavish Scott made about how Norway, the Faroes and Iceland—very big fishing countries—are able to negotiate for their benefit and the conservation of stocks. However, countries need the power to do that. Seventy per cent of the UK fishing industry is located in Scotland, but the minister with responsibility for fishing, whom we all know is a good minister—informed, able, determined, committed and passionate about fishing communities—cannot go to the top table and open his mouth on behalf of this country. The exclusive competence that the Tories signed away is making life tenuous for fishing communities such as Eyemouth, which has a population of 5,000, 500 of whom rely principally on nephrops and other fish catch. The effect on those 500 people ripples out to the entire community because as fishing jobs go, so do the local shops, the pub and the working people. Those are the real-life consequences of the CFP. It has been said in the debate that nephrops are in a healthy state. I press the minister to argue for a substantial quota to be awarded. Fergus Ewing argued—it was a miracle that I understood him, because the argument was quite technical—that because no management regime will be in place for the bycatch of cod, those nephrops quotas are not secure. Will the minister say when he sums up whether there is any prospect of increasing the nephrops catch without those management measures? Today I spoke to the secretary of the Anglo-Scottish Fishermen's Association, which is located in Eyemouth. In his view, the ridiculously low quota for prawns is not justified, as has been said throughout the chamber. The quota must be increased and there is no reason why it cannot be increased now. The minister knows that the operation of the CFP is flawed and I rely on him to keep his word. He said in a press release: "Early indications suggest that the Commission's Scientific Technical and Economic Committee (STECF) agree with us that the evidence on some stocks is inconclusive." That is ministerial speak for "not persuaded by the scientific evidence". The quality of the scientific evidence is at the core of the matter. It is ironic that the CFP is counterproductive to marine conservation, which we all want and which the fishermen of Scotland want most of all. They are the last people who want the seas to be fished dry. However, for every measure that is taken in one area of the sea—the proposed closed areas—there are knock-on effects on other fish stocks that we all know about. Even the protection of one species can be at the expense, or to the benefit of,  another. More nephrops mean fewer juvenile cod to eat them. The sea is not simple; it is a complicated eco-system that needs complex and subtle solutions. The CFP is a rough and ready tool, which is often politicised and which damages that which it should protect. Its operation is autocratic and without each fishing nation having democratic ownership of decisions about the stewardship of the common seas, its decisions and directions will be skewed and not obtempered. Fishermen will buy into decisions only when they have had a hand in making them. It is time that the CFP, rather than more of our fishing communities, was made redundant.

I refer the First Minister to the consultation on reducing reoffending in Scotland, which was commissioned by the Government. The analysis of responses was published in October. Many agencies dealing with reoffenders and groups representing victims made the case that there is a strong link between reoffending and poverty. Does he share that view? If so, what specific measures is the Government taking to tackle the poverty that fuels so many repeat crimes?

I congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing tonight's debate. As one of those older people, I never feel that I am a demographic time bomb. I can be a time bomb at times, but only if roused to anger, as some will know. It is interesting that, at 30 per cent, the percentage of people who volunteer is very high among those in the 50 to 59 age group; 26 per cent of the 60 to 74 age group and 15 per cent of the over-75 age group volunteer. How often do we see people in their 80s who are as fit as fleas and whose brains are ticking away because they keep themselves active and engaged? Volunteering is good for those whom the volunteers help and it is certainly good for the volunteers. The old adage is that an active mind means an active body. It prevents isolationism and its children, which are depression and general ill health. Older people feel as though they lose their individuality. I have not yet met that feeling myself, although I am sure that it will happen. "Retired" is a label that hangs around people's necks and makes them feel as if they have suddenly become invisible. Pregnant women face the same thing; they have lost their individuality. Older people either lose their individuality or feel that they have become a problem for society. Of course, they are not a problem at all; as Sarah Boyack said, they are a great advantage and resource. I understand that some organisations still veto volunteers who are aged over 70. I hope that such ageism will disappear from those organisations'  rules and regulations in the light of tonight's debate. Until quite recently, children's panels banned anyone over 65. I am glad that that rule has gone; I think that I raised the issue in Parliament many years ago. I suspect that the change has happened because there is a bit of a crisis in getting panel members, but whatever the reason, I am glad that the advantages and talents of people aged over 65 are now being used. Older people have many talents. The talents that are hewn from experience are such things as experience, tolerance, patience, firm kindness and pace. I always like it when there is an older person at the till in Sainsbury's or Safeway because I know that they will give me time to put my messages into the bag. It is very important for vulnerable or anxious people to have that time on their hands and to know that they can take time over things. Older people make valuable and valued volunteers. I think of my brother, who until fairly recently was in senior management. He retired and recently went with John Home Robertson to drive one of those lorries to Palestine to deliver items and goods to schools that have been devastated.

I also think of my father who does a kind of volunteering. He is nearly 90 and every Sunday he cooks Sunday dinner for a very thin and hungry student grandson. That is a major operation. He might only be volunteering to help one, but it has kept him as fit as a flea. There are some barriers to older people volunteering. People might be caring for grandchildren. They might be caring for their parents; it is a long stretch between the ages of 60 and 90 and pensioners can have parents who are also pensioners. I am an example of that. People might also have to keep working because the basic state pension does not give them sufficient to live on, given the rising council tax and energy charges. On that basis, the voluntary resource might not be around. The minister might not be able to deal with that issue, but if people had a decent pension, more of them might be able to volunteer. Without becoming politically controversial and a bit of a time bomb, I would say that it is very important that we recognise the value of older  volunteers. Older volunteers turn around the idea that when people hit the age of 50 or 60, they go through some kind of time warp, they change, and they are no use; in fact, they are an asset.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it has taken to sustain and invigorate Borders communities. (S2O-4408)

I note what the minister says, but does he agree that central to sustaining and invigorating Borders communities is the local primary school? Given that, Borders-wide, schools such as Burnmouth, Hutton, Fountainhall and many others are going to close, that cannot be said to be supporting sustainability or invigorating communities. Will the Minister for Communities liaise with the Minister for Education and Young People to consider providing targeted funding to local authorities such as Scottish Borders Council to enable schools to remain open in the wider  interests of the social and economic well-being of often fragile communities?

I, too, congratulate Dennis Canavan on securing the debate. Along with Donald Gorrie, I was at the launch of the bill. I was amazed at the collection of different people from retail consortia, trade unions such as the Educational Institute of Scotland, schools, churches and St Andrew's societies who have given their support. The launch was most impressive and why not? It is extraordinary that Scotland, as one of the most ancient nations in Europe—we have been a nation since the 11 th century—does not celebrate its nationhood on St Andrew's day. If I may, I will digress a little, as many things that I was going to say have been said in the debate. It is extraordinary that Scotland is a nation that does not proudly fly its flag at every single opportunity. Scotland has had to fight to fly its flag on its public buildings and elsewhere. I will add to what my colleague Bruce Crawford said about Edinburgh Castle. I lodged a motion in September 2001 about the union flag flying over the Army barracks there. When the Army wants to recruit our young men and women to fight in Iraq, it flies the saltire and when they fight in Iraq, they fight under the saltire, because the saltire represents St Andrew and St Andrew represents Scotland, patriotism, heart and all the things that are good about the nation. It is also extraordinary that, although there are saltire societies in Boston and elsewhere in the world, our Saltire Society has to fight to fly Scotland's flag. I say to Dennis Canavan that I am green with envy, because he is putting up a smashing fight for a holiday on St Andrew's day and I am sure that he will succeed. It does not matter if the Scottish Executive is not behind him because the Scottish people are, and that is what counts.

Will the member take an intervention?

Or speaking here.

I too support the efforts of the ESU and anyone else who promotes debating skills in schools. Like you, Presiding Officer, I was a schoolteacher in a previous life. Once, when I looked at my timetable at the beginning of the new term, I saw that Friday was dedicated to a double period of class 3C—35-plus of them, full of testosterone, weekend thoughts and hostility. I thought, what would I do with 3C for 80 minutes on a Friday afternoon? Desperation bred the invention of the debating afternoon. What started out as a rescue package for me became the highlight of the week for those children. It became the carrot that ensured they did their exercises during the week. We had our little ups and downs, of course. When I introduced the debating afternoon I made it a golden rule that I would chair everything, because I had to keep control of proceedings, and I knew that they would be up to mischief and propose topics that might embarrass me. However, as I am sure the Presiding Officer is aware, I could embarrass them before they could embarrass me. I told them so, they believed it, and we progressed quite happily. Those afternoons became quite a star, with the result that, quite unexpectedly, my other classes said, "When are we getting a debate, Miss Grahame?" Miss Grahame found herself having to debate, and it became part of my schedule to have debating periods for all classes. From that grew something for first year, who were of mixed ability. They were not quite up to debating, so I thought, "I'll wean them on to it." Instead of debating, we had afternoon talks. I am moving slightly from the topic of debate, but it is all to do with children gaining confidence, particularly those who are not good at writing.  I remember one afternoon when into the classroom came a slow worm, a ferret and a brick. They were the subject matters of the talks to be given by my pupils. The slow worm was passed around the classroom—first to me. I had to pretend that I was not frightened of it. I hated it but, being the true teacher that I was, I handled it with bravura and passed it round the class. We had a lesson from the pupil about his slow worm. Then the girl brought in her ferret, which I refused to handle. The ferret was entertaining in itself, and we had a long talk all about it and how to care for it. But all eyes were on Brian and his brick. What could he do with a brick that would surpass the slow worm and the ferret? Brian, who was not known for being articulate, came up to the front with his hammer and his brick. I said, "What are you going to do, Brian?" He paused—his delivery was slow—and replied, "Ah'm gonna cut it in half, miss." "You are?" All eyes were now on Brian, his brick and the hammer. So Brian slowly chipped away at the brick with the sharp end of the hammer, and then paused—for he was a bit of a dramatist—with his hammer in the air. He tapped it and, sure enough, the brick fell apart in two halves. There were tiny little crumbs of brick on the floor. The applause was spontaneous. He was top of the class. We then found out that he had followed his brickie father for days. In simple words he said, "And that is how you halve a brick." That was the whole point. The ferret watched the whole proceedings quite happily and probably learned how to do it too. The point is that through using oral communication, which many children are denied in the classroom, they can star and shine. After that, I made a point, when assessing pupils, of giving a substantial number of marks to people based on their oral contribution, whether in talks or debates—in memory of Brian and his brick who, as members will realise, I remember to this day.

I do not think that that is the point. Would Bill Aitken not accept that this is not the time or the place to introduce that debate?  There may be another time and place for that, but not during a debate on the international day for the elimination of violence against women. That is the point that we want to make. There was an issue of abuse in introducing that aspect to speeches, which did the Conservatives no service and no favours.

Thank you.

I rise to speak to my amendment, but the SNP will also support the motion. I am not sure whether the minister will accept our amendment.

I see the minister nodding and I thank her for the Executive's support. As the examples in the United Nations declaration make clear, violence against women can take many forms, including psychological, physical, sexual and financial. Such violence is rooted in and reinforces discrimination. Women in poverty are the ones who find it most difficult to escape abusive circumstances and to exercise even the most basic human rights of freedom of movement and freedom of expression. Such women are trapped and treated as an underclass that is unable to obtain protection from society at large, whose very values often reinforce that societal violence. They are left unable even to access either a criminal justice system to redress the obvious wrongs that are done to them or an education system that would give them the means to articulate those wrongs. In war, rape and sexual mutilation have been a weapon of terror throughout reported history. Today, the situation is no different, as women throughout many countries are the living victims of such brutality. The evidence of that is apparent in their wounds, both physical and emotional, in the children they have conceived and in the AIDS that they have contracted because of such violence, and in the consequent ostracism by their communities, by which they are made victims yet once more. Let me turn to the domestic scene. During our previous debate on violence against women one year ago, the then Minister for Communities advised us that some 100,000 children were estimated to be affected by domestic violence. Such children are also innocent victims. Unfortunately, the fact that they are receptacles for the violence culture might—although I do not wish to play the amateur psychologist—turn them into victims themselves or, indeed, even perpetrators. I found the most recent television ads that highlighted the sinister and pervasive threat of domestic violence to be most effective messages. However, I would like the minister to advise how the Executive monitors their effectiveness.  I note that the Executive intends to pilot a domestic abuse court, but I respectfully suggest that such cases might better be addressed in family law courts. The issue should be considered in the parliamentary debate that is due shortly on family law legislation, in which the definition of family needs to fit more appropriately with the practices of the past few decades. I have a particular interest in the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001, which enacted a committee bill of the Justice 1 Committee. By attaching a power of arrest to common-law interdicts, the act ostensibly gave some protection to women, in particular those who were not married to their partner. However, I have seen the 2003 report on the operation of the act and I am afraid that it has not been very successful. The Executive has been the first to admit that. The report states: "knowledge and awareness of the Act was variable. From our sample of 32 women victims of domestic violence 87% had never heard of the Act indicating a need for awareness raising. Of 8 who could have sought protection under the Act, only one was able to secure a PF interdict and 2 reported negative experiences." Even the comments from professionals about the implications and use of the act are pretty threadbare. I shall move on to something else that we need to address—it is for that reason that it is mentioned in the SNP amendment. The amendment focuses on the media and entertainment industry, which in many respects has much to answer for in the continuing culture of being violent to or violating women, where that is not only acceptable but titillating. There is hypocrisy in the screaming tabloid headlines about the indecencies to women caught up in war, when they are in juxtaposition to a near-naked female, who may be ogled in public on public transport in full view of children, young men and young women. I recognise the work that Elaine Smith will be doing on behalf of the Equal Opportunities Committee in her report on pornography, which I think is long overdue. Violence against women and sex—often related and linked, though they should not be—are, regrettably, the mainstay of soft porn and the print press, and there is a whole issue of access to such material and to hard-core pornography, particularly now through the internet, which I suspect is even less policed by harassed parents than are the television and the video. Although women in Scotland are free from the violence of war that I alluded to earlier, the violence of pornography is there for all to access—on the bus, in videos and magazines and on the web. It is there that young men and women are subjected to the influences that make them  devalue one another sexually, contaminating respect for one another as people, and that cannot be detached from violence, in all its forms, against women. I hear what the Deputy Minister for Communities has said, and she very kindly sent me a letter explaining about the group that she is setting up. I am glad to see that that group will be looking into the influence of pornography, because that must have an impact on some of the statistics that we have before us on rape, sexual assaults and other violent assaults on women. The subject is vast and complex, and I have simply touched on some issues. However, I hope that some of the queries that I have raised will be addressed in the minister's summing-up speech, so that anniversaries of previous debates are not simply marked but mark progress and change. While I am on my feet, I also want to say that I recognise Johann Lamont's personal commitment to the issue and I know that we shall make progress. I move amendment S2M-2059.2 to insert at end: "and, in particular to explore the cultural reasons underlying the recent report that one in five young men and one in ten women thought that violence against women was acceptable and to examine the crucial role that the media and entertainments industry has in compounding such attitudes, and, furth of Scotland, abhors the increased use of violence against women as a weapon of war."

The minister will be aware that the Scottish Borders region has the lowest wages in Scotland. What policies does he have in hand to increase economic growth in the Scottish Borders? Does he think that restoration of the Borders railway line is key to the restoration of economic growth in that area?

I congratulate Irene Oldfather on securing this important debate. I will share two images with members. One is from about a year ago when I shadowed various health professionals in the Borders, including the consultant radiologist at the Borders general hospital. A very fit-looking man who was tanned and cheery went in to be scanned. When he went through the scanning system, the radiologist looked at the material in front of him on the screen and said to me, "That man has three years to live." He had lung cancer. That was scary. The other image is from a cafe next to my constituency office. It is a bit like the cafe in "EastEnders", as it is full of ordinary working folk and almost all of them smoke. An elderly man who had a hacking cough was in there. He was drinking coffee and was into the cigarettes, one after another. Nothing would stop him smoking; I suspect that even if he had stood beside me in the radiology unit, that would not have stopped him  because we are dealing with a horrid addiction. As I have been an addict myself I know how hard it is to kick the habit, but I managed it. Those images of the horrors of lung cancer remain with me. I will focus on the fact that there is an element of social deprivation to cancers. How long someone lives and how soon they die can be a postcode lottery. It is a known fact that middle-class, wealthy women more often get breast cancer than working class women from deprived areas, but working class women from deprived areas are more likely to die from the disease. The same is true of lung cancer. There is no simple answer to the problem; the answers are complex. However, there is definitely a link between socioeconomic deprivation and cancers and survival rates. The link may be to do with diet or with culture, or it may be to do with the fact that there is nothing else for someone to do if they are unemployed and live in what we might call—it is an awful expression—a sink estate. I do not say that in order to criticise. There may be a link to heavy drinking or to the fact that someone's father or mother smoked. In some areas, it may be seen as macho for people to smoke cigarettes on the street or it may be felt that the sooner they smoke behind the legendary bike shed the better. The problem is that not only smoking but deprivation can kill. When anti-smoking and early-intervention campaigns are being run and when treatment is being provided, I ask the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care to consider targeting the funds at the areas in which they are most required. This week, there was a cancer conference, at which I chaired a meeting. At that conference, there was an interesting contribution from Dr Una Macleod, who is doing research into the issue. She said: "The reasons for these inequalities"— in survival, detection and even becoming a cancer victim— "are thought to be complex and may be due to a combination of patient related factors, previous and current health status, specific cancer types and ability of the individual to fight cancer". Therefore, there is no simple solution. Dr Macleod went on to say: "With respect to prevention, specific attempts have been made to address smoking as a cause of cancer and some early positive results have been demonstrated." What follows is important: "However, the assumption that reducing smoking will in itself be sufficient, even for smoking related cancers can be challenged. It can be demonstrated that in poorer communities the negative effects of smoking are greater than in more affluent areas. In addition, delay in presentation is greater in deprived groups for certain  cancers, so issues of access and of timely diagnosis need to be addressed." That is why I, with my social justice remit, came into the debate. Lung cancer is one of those issues that people think must be a health issue, but it is not a health issue alone: in many respects, it is a poverty issue. I would therefore like the minister to advise me in her closing speech—or perhaps later, if she cannot do it then—how she would address lung cancer and whether she and the Scottish Executive Health Department would be sympathetic to targeting resources to those clearly deprived areas of Scotland in which survival and detection rates not only for lung cancer, but for other cancers, are most evidently low. The department might be doing that, but if so, I am not aware of it. If we do that, we will see the outcomes and find out whether the connection between those factors is so radical as to allow such interventions to make a difference.

I congratulate Karen Whitefield and advise her that she should never apologise for emotion that propels political argument. It is one of the best propellers in life. Karen Whitefield and I are both to be vice-conveners of the cross-party group on diabetes— we were dragooned into it by David Davidson, who will be the group's convener. I, too, became involved with diabetes for personal reasons. If someone had asked me 20 years ago whether anyone of my near acquaintance had type 1 or type 2 diabetes, I would have thought it a strange question. Today, however, two of my close friends have type 1 diabetes and two people in my direct family have type 2 diabetes—that is just in my tight circle of friends and family. As Karen Whitefield said, the number of diabetes sufferers who are as yet undiagnosed is 65,000 and that is probably just the tip of the iceberg, with the real figure being much higher. I will focus my comments on early diagnosis and screening. There is much to say about the condition but, as with all illnesses, we know that the sooner it is detected, the better for the individual and society and the cheaper for the national health service. By the time that people are diagnosed with type 2 diabetes, 50 per cent of them have complications. Those complications—they were referred to by Karen Whitefield and will no doubt be listed by David Davidson and others—are distressing. Diabetes has no cure, although it can be managed in different ways; type 2 is sometimes managed by controlling diet and type 1 is managed by insulin. Apart from the importance of screening, I will focus on the reaction to the Executive's consultative review of the "Scottish Diabetes Framework". That document says that the Executive is "setting out current practice in Scotland and options for the future". However, according to Alan McGinlay's background briefing paper, on which I compliment him, "Diabetes Scotland is concerned about the lack of urgency in that approach." The Minister for Health and Community Care is the man who looks after the purse, so the sooner that we get on to screening and early diagnosis the better it will be for the finances of the NHS as well as for individuals. In my final seconds, I mention the young people who are being diagnosed—the figures are quite upsetting. The total number of cases of type 2 diabetes diagnosed in children under the age of 15 has risen from two in 1997 to 21 in 2004. That increase can be linked directly to obesity and lack of exercise by our young people. When we look at screening and early diagnosis, let us also look at the diet of our young people and the exercise that they take. Let us educate them about the fact that they are not immortal, as none of us is. When we  are 15, and even when we are 30, we think that we are immortal. However, young people might be laying the foundations for shortening their lives through the contraction of diabetes.

I refer the minister to a severe flooding incident that took place just over a year ago in the Borders, in the Bannerfield area of Selkirk. Many houses, which had been transferred from the local authority to a housing association, were severely damaged. As the minister is aware, the Bellwin scheme, which provides local authorities with finances to help with repairs under those circumstances, is not available to housing associations. Given the stock transfers that have taken place, will the minister consider extending the Bellwin scheme to housing associations, so that they, too, can access its funds?

As many of us know, we are talking about Burnmouth. When the request from Scottish Borders Council to close the school—in the face of fierce opposition from the entire community—arrives on his desk, will the minister take note of his own objective, which is to put schools "at the heart of the community - meeting the needs of communities"? How on earth can the needs of the community be met if the school is closed?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I wonder whether you would be good enough to review the management of question time. In the first section we reached only question 4 and in the second section we reached only question 5. I hesitate to advise the Presiding Officers, but some of the ministers' answers are very long-winded and eat into time. That is reflected in the fact that many members are not attending the chamber for question time and are not even bothering to submit questions. I ask the Presiding Officers, with respect, whether the management of question time could be reviewed.

I ask the minister to determine for us the situation with regard to police responses to calls made by women whose husbands have exclusion orders against them.

I will keep to that because you are being very fierce, Presiding Officer. The Scottish National Party will accept both the Green and the Conservative amendments. We lodged our amendment because of our genuine concerns over long-term funding.  Of course, this should be a consensual debate. I heard the minister use the expression "just a domestic". That is a phrase from the mists of time when it was often attributed to the police. I am glad to say that that attitude has long since been dispelled, although there are problems with police responses, which I will deal with shortly. There is a cultural issue. It is shocking that a survey that was conducted as recently as 2003 showed that one in five young men thought that it was all right to be violent towards women. It is even more shocking that one in 10 young women thought that violence towards them was acceptable. We have a great deal to do in our schools and elsewhere to turn around that dreadful cultural attitude. I asked the minister about the television campaigns. Perhaps I should have read my papers more closely, because an Executive research finding paper that is entitled "Evaluation of the Scottish Domestic Abuse Helpline" makes it clear that, following the TV campaign that was broadcast between Christmas 2002 and new year 2003, the average number of calls to the helpline went up by an extraordinary amount—972 calls were received in January 2003. The same thing happens when much-maligned programmes such as "EastEnders" or "Coronation Street" deal with domestic abuse issues—the number of calls to the helpline increases. It is unfortunate that such increases seem to occur in spurts. Given the cultural background, there is much work to be done. I have some brief questions for the minister. He mentioned the expert advisory group. I would like to know more about its composition and characteristics. Which areas of society will its members represent? Malcolm Chisholm mentioned that £12 million would be invested as part of the Executive's future development programme. Over how long a period will that money be spent and how will it be allocated? Will there be a bidding war for it? That is what is happening with a great deal of funding for Women's Aid and other agencies. Maureen Macmillan was right to mention the good work that was done on the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001, much of which was instigated by her. We mulled for ages over the attachment of a power of arrest to the common-law interdict in cases of domestic abuse. It is a bit depressing that a measure that we thought would be extremely useful, in that it would no longer be necessary to obtain a domestic interdict or to be in a marital relationship, appears to be withering on a vine somewhere. One of the problems of having an interdict with a power of arrest and exclusion orders is police response times. I do not blame the police for that,  but we cannot have a situation in which a woman who has a court order pinned up beside the telephone phones the local police because the man involved is banging on the door and it takes the police 10 or 15 minutes to get there. The man does not care, because he has been drinking and no court order frightens him. I used to be a lawyer practising in domestic matters and I dealt with cases in which the door was broken down and the woman was assaulted again. That is a huge issue. In rural areas, the problem is even greater, because the police are further away. I can tell Rosie Kane that the difficulties with accommodation are especially severe in rural as opposed to urban areas. People can be 50 or 60 miles away from a refuge. In the Borders, there is only one Women's Aid centre, in Jedburgh. I know that Haddington has to take people from other parts of Scotland because of a lack of accommodation. I turn to the figures on attacks that take place after the breakdown of a relationship. Divorce or separation does not put an end to domestic abuse; in cases involving a determined partner, that often exacerbates the situation. Between 40 and 60 per cent of separated or divorced women continue to experience domestic abuse, in spite of the fact that the marriage is over. What my colleague Andrew Welsh said about the Tayside initiative is very encouraging. We require co-operation across all sectors. For the reasons that I have elucidated, sheriffs, the police, the health boards and all council departments from housing to social work must work together to support people who have been victims of abuse. Domestic abuse often continues after the courts have become involved. Although Mike Rumbles made some interesting points, men are the main perpetrators. Some men are simply not deterred and the woman and her children have to be protected for years.

The recent advertising campaign on the issue seemed to me to be effective, but what were the results? Has an audit been done or have the impacts been measured? Sometimes an advert looks good, but one does not know whether it will have an impact. What analysis has been done of the results of the campaign?

David Davidson gallantly outed me as a recent pensioner, but I was going to do it myself. I am proud to join the rank and file of Scotland's 1 million pensioners, which is more than all the primary and secondary children put together. Something strange happened on 8 September. Like Harry Enfield's Kevin, I went upstairs a fairly independent woman of some intellect, and descended on 9 September with my brain cells reduced and in the lower class of the pensioner underclass that is woman pensioners. I was introduced to the pension not by the state giving me a pension, but by the Inland Revenue sending out a form asking me what I am getting. I did not realise that I had to claim the pension. Oh yes, one does not get it, one receives the first batch of forms and applies for it. One has to send lots of documents. If someone is divorced, like me, they have to speak to their ex-husband because they are supposed to know his national insurance number. The forms are then sent off into the black hole of pension claims, and one has to wait for months. I am now in the world of forms. I spoke to Margaret on the pension helpline. That was when I realised that I had lost some brain cells, because she put on one of those voices and asked, "How are you dear? Can I take  you through the form?" When I tried to show that I was an individual, Margaret kept stoically to her script and plodded on. No wonder pensioners are angered—by the paucity of the pension and by the attitude to us when we get to the age of 60 or 65. I tell members that poverty is not a reserved issue. It is here and now, in ill-heated pensioner households. Last year in Scotland, 2,500 people died from cold-related illnesses. Poverty is here in shopping at discount stores. Members just need to look into the shopping baskets of some pensioners and compare them with what they can buy. Poverty is in the charity shops, where pensioners buy their clothes, and it is sitting at home fretting about the iniquitous council tax, which can amount to one fifth of pensioners' weekly income. Pensioners pay their bills. They are not part of the credit community. Poverty is with us for one third of Scotland's pensioners, and for 250,000 Scots who are living in fuel poverty, many of whom are single pensioners. Means testing has failed. I introduce members to the pension credit form, which has 19 pages of notes and 16 pages of forms. I defy anyone to complete it in the time that we have had for this debate. Members should get their pencils out and tell me all the answers to these questions: "What type of money do I need to tell you about? ...   Money from someone who rents a room in your home or who lives in part of your home ...   Working Tax Credit   Money from a pension paid to victims of Nazi persecution   Royalties or money for a book registered under the Public Lending Rights Scheme   Money from your ex-partner to pay for day-to-day living costs   Social security benefits from abroad   Money from a war disablement pension or war widow's or widower's pension from abroad   Sick pay   Regular payments from a trust   Money from an equity release scheme".    It would take me a while to get through that, let alone find all the documentation. No wonder 48 per cent of Scotland's pensioners who are entitled to a pension credit do not even fill in the form, but abandon it instead. Let us look at the examples of pensioners in the document, which are provided to help people along their weary way when filling out the form. I look forward to answers on a postcard. "Edgar will be 60 in July 2005. He expects to stop work from 15 August 2005 and he has an endowment policy which will pay out on his 60th birthday."  This reminds me of primary school. "He fills in his application form in June 2005. Edgar thinks he will qualify from 15 August 2005. He must tell us about his work in Part 7 of the application form. He must ... tell us" all about other things "in Part 11". No wonder Edgar gave up. Would someone give me the answer?

Can George Lyon work it out for Edgar?

The first part of George Lyon's homework is to fill in my document for me. The second part will be to read the Official Report  and to calculate the figure from there. I quote from the Pensions Policy Institute: "A Citizen's Pension at Guarantee Credit level (what used to be called Minimum Income Guarantee, £105 per week from next April) can be afforded immediately within current government spending on pensions." Away and read that as well. In conclusion, I see the pension credit form not only as a barrier, but as an insult to Scotland's pensioners. It is an absolute insult and we must discard it. Let us take the form—which is 19 pages of notes and 16 pages of forms—and consign it to the dustbin of failed Labour Government policies. Let us put in its place a decent, basic citizens pension that will restore dignity to pensioners and give them their—and this is my favourite word of all—independence.

This is a speech.

That young man never fails to disappoint me.

I never said that there was.

Will Karen Whitefield give way?

I welcome the minister's return to this portfolio. As I look around the chamber this morning, I feel rather anxious to see to the back, the right and the left of me people who have a great deal of housing experience. I feel like the swimmer at the shallow end of the swimming pool with rather a lot of water wings and rubber rings holding me up. However, I intend not to sink but to learn to swim very quickly and to go straight into the deep end of the debate. To that end, I thought that I would familiarise myself with some housing issues by referring to a debate from 13 January 2000 to see what the coalition parties were saying at that time and to compare that with where we are five years later. One finds some interesting nuggets in that debate. At that time, Wendy Alexander was the Minister for Communities and had responsibility for housing. During the debate, she said: "Change is needed. The old ways have failed." She went on to say: "We will confront homelessness. People sleeping on our streets was the enduring symbol of so much that was wrong about the social and economic priorities of the Tory years. Young people curled up in sleeping bags gave the lie to trickle-down economics." She then spoke the crucial words: "The partnership promises that no one should need to sleep rough in Scotland by 2003."—[ Official Report , 13 January 2000; Vol 4, c 66.] I do not think that that has happened. Further on in the same debate, Wendy Alexander said: "There should be no second-class tenants in the new Scotland."—[ Official Report , 13 January; Vol 4, c 69.] There are lots of second-class tenants, many of whom are in the private sector. They have little protection, they find that their housing is inadequate, but they are frightened to speak up because they think that they will lose their tenancy. There are second-class tenants who think that they are tenants but who are not tenants—they are the sofa surfers, who stay on friends' couches. If the friend were to say to them tomorrow, "Get off my couch and get out the door", they would have to go because they have no legal right to be there. They are and continue to be the hidden homeless.

I have no problem with people taking actions if they are effective and funded. The problem is that, in the five years since the statements that I have just repeated were made, the level of homelessness has gone up. I do not want to litter my speech with statistics—I will come to the figures later—but a vast number of young people and people in their mid-30s do not even have a tenancy; they live on sofas in shared accommodation. Indeed, they live the life of students into their 30s, which has a huge impact on their lives, the economy and so on.

I will make a bit of progress and then let the member in. In the January 2000 debate on housing, the Executive promised to build each year "7,000 new and improved homes"— [ Official Report , 13 January 2000; Vol 4, c 71.]  At the time, Fiona Hyslop pointed out that the difference between SNP and Labour is that "we believe that, in a single social tenancy environment, the right to rent is imperative"— [ Official Report , 13 January 2000; Vol 4, c 76.]  We have lost the right to rent because the amount of social rented accommodation has been driven down. I will deal with that when I address the issue of the right to buy. Although a notional right to rent might exist, the properties are just not available for renting. Simply to have somewhere to live, young people and people in the 30s are having to take out mortgages that are four or five times their joint income with the result that homes are being repossessed, couples are deferring having families and so on.

I will give way soon if I can make some progress. In the January 2000 debate, Robert Brown made an interesting comment about rough sleeping. He said: "The commitment that no one should have to sleep rough by 2003 is important and challenging. ... Indeed, it is not too much to say that the reputation of the minister and of the Executive depends on it."— [ Official Report , 13 January 2000; Vol 4, c 86.]  It was good of Robert Brown to make that comment; he might not feel the same way now that I have quoted it. If he does, perhaps he will call the Executive to account, given that some people are still sleeping rough in Scotland's cities and countryside. In the same debate, Robert Brown also said: "I must say to the minister that the right to buy is not a housing strategy. There are a variety of reasons to support it, ranging from populism to fears of social engineering and dislike of socially rented housing." In fact, I would say that there is a stigma attached to such housing. Robert Brown went on to say: "Right to buy involves a transfer of assets—provided by public investment—from the public to a smaller group of individuals at the expense of the community at large."—[ Official Report , 13 January 2000; Vol 4, c 90.]

I hope that I will get time for taking all these interventions. I do not know who wanted to come in first.

Yes, absolutely. However, I should point out that we feel that those who already have the right to buy should retain it. After all, retrospective legislation is an anathema. As for new builds, members on this side of the chamber have absolutely no problem in supporting the stance that Mr Sheridan has outlined. If people retain the right to buy, investment in housing by housing associations or local authorities would be like putting the taps on full blast and leaving the plug out. They simply will not make that investment because they will lose their stock.

Okay.

Absolutely. I thought that I had made that clear in my response. It would be a victory for common sense in the chamber if that policy were accepted. There is no doubt that the right to buy has decimated socially rented housing and has driven many other economic factors in this country.  I am only halfway through my speech, so I will need to time things better. At this point, I want to quote some statistics that highlight areas in which there has been no movement. In 1999, 19,400 new private sector dwellings were completed and the figure was about the same in 2003. However, over the same period, the number of new housing association dwellings fell from 4,911 to just under 4,000. The amount of new public sector housing is, of course, negligible; only 81 new dwellings were built in 1999 and 59 in 2003. There are now 2,031 households with children in temporary accommodation, which is a rise of 52 per cent since 2002. Members will have seen from the Shelter briefing that such a situation impacts on those children's education, health and so on. In fact, it affects their whole life. They are born to fail and the Liberal-Labour Government in Scotland has failed and continues to fail them. It is no wonder that one in five children continues to live in poverty. I should also point out that 192,320 applicants are either on the waiting list or the transfer list for housing. That is an enormous number of people. The impact of the Executive's measures will be a drop in the bucket and will not change what is happening. I think that I have a few minutes left.

Oh, grand. Almost 4,000 children are in bed-and-breakfast or temporary accommodation. I should also point out to Elaine Smith that there has been a record number of applications from homeless people to local councils; indeed, there has been an almost 20 per cent increase on the 1999 figures. Everyone would support any effort to reduce homelessness; however, the measures that have been introduced over the past five years have simply not worked. I want very briefly to examine the budget's impact on this matter. As I have been making my way through the shallow end of the swimming pool, I have looked very carefully at what has been happening. When the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland considered the Executive's announcement on funding additional affordable housing, it said: "Today's announcement will not help the Scottish Executive to address the backlog of housing need in Scotland. In 2003 there were over a quarter of a million households on local authority and housing association waiting lists who cannot get a home because of a shortage ... An investment programme of an average 5,500 houses per year will do little to help them. It is also looking like the Scottish Executive will not meet its current target of delivering 18,000 new and improved  homes by 2006. We estimate that it will miss ... by well over 2,000 homes ... It will not be able to give all homeless people the entitlement to a permanent home by 2012—one of their flagship policy" initiatives. Shelter has pointed out that the overall housing budget is being cut by 1.3 per cent in real terms while the Scottish budget generally is rising by more than 10 per cent through to 2008. It concludes that the extra £100 million pledged for affordable housing must be the result of cuts elsewhere in housing. I am out of time. We might quote figures and statistics; however, we all know that we are talking about individuals who are suffering. Children are being deprived in a rich country simply because they do not have warm, secure and affordable housing. Quite frankly, in the five years that Labour and the Liberals have been in power, they have not changed a thing. I move amendment S2M-1898.1, to leave out from "endorses" to end and insert: "recognises that it is a basic human right to have the comfort, security and stability of a warm affordable home and that decent suitable housing is crucial to the individual's quality of life, whether young or old, and crucial to healthy, thriving communities and the economy at large; notes that, after five years of the Labour/Liberal Democrat coalition, homelessness has increased substantially and that the right to buy has seriously damaged the socially rented sector; therefore calls on the Scottish Executive to revisit its right to buy policy, to utilise the proposed planning and housing legislation to facilitate the provision of affordable housing and to ensure that Scotland's people have access to the homes they deserve across tenures and that the scourge of rooflessness, bed and breakfast and "sofa surfing" is consigned to history."

As Mike Watson knows, I gave evidence to the committee on the Minchmoor petition. I note from recommendation 33 in the committee's report that the committee wants the Executive to take "an active lead and develop a national strategic framework for wind farm applications". Given that the Executive's most recent answer on the national strategic framework says simply that it will respond to the committee's report in due course, that those planning applications are still in train and that there is no national framework, will the committee press for an early response from the Executive so that those applications do not proceed in the meantime?

To ask the Scottish Executive what concerns it has regarding the provision of school playing fields. (S2O-3601)

I refer the minister to Mr Frank McAveety's letter to me on the provision of a playing field at Moat park, which was to be levelled off for pupils of Drumlanrig St Cuthbert's Primary School in Hawick. Helpfully, the letter of the then Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport refers to the community facilities strand of the building for sport programme. It states: "In the main, proposals will be led by local authorities, clubs, trusts and the like." Will the minister advise whether individual schools can apply to the fund, as the website to which the letter refers is currently down?

I congratulate Christine May; I think that I have now endured the longest job application in history. I note that Maureen Macmillan, who congratulated the First Minister on his appointments, supports him, but does not support the proposed cross-party group on hospital closures from which, I understand, she recently withdrew. I hope that the Belford protesters are well aware of that. I say well done to Rhona Brankin, who has worked hard to get back to where she is and to earn a reprieve. I say to other members on the back benches that there is a route: they should do what Rhona Brankin did. I am sure that Christine May is paying attention to that. Frank McAveety's ticket to the front seems to be on a rubber band, so I say to him, "Third time lucky; you never know." To Ted Brocklebank, I say that the exercise is like moving deck chairs on the Titanic. Moving the Minister for Health and Community Care, Malcolm Chisholm, has brought dismay to the professionals.

I am delighted with the vote that I received from SNP members, and when our elected members voted, I came top of the list for the national executive committee, sunshine. We are having this debate and going through all these cosmetic moves because constituents are hammering at the doors of Labour MPs and MSPs; the debate has nothing to do with addressing the concerns of Scotland's patients and professionals. I will pose the real questions. Why is Scotland's health service so sick after seven years of Labour at Westminster and five years of Labour in the Parliament, with the Liberal Democrat lackeys propping it up? Why are there not enough consultants, nurses and dentists? NHS dentists are as scarce as hens' teeth. The list goes on. There are not enough beds. Waiting lists are growing: individuals—real people—are awaiting biopsies for seven months to find out whether they have cancer and people are waiting for seven to nine months for operations that would cure them. Professionals are talking about a crisis. Beleaguered professionals are going public on behalf of their patients. As a former convener of the Health Committee, I have respect for Tom McCabe. He got into the portfolio and worked at it, but he had two agendas. The other agenda was the top job, but he was not going to get that, because of too much talent and—like his colleague, Ms Curran, who is a lady for whom I have great respect—too much ambition. As a result, she has been sidelined into dealing with business motions, which Euan Robson dealt with at one time—need I say more? What a fate for talent. The other matter, of course, is the back benchers—wonderful people, but the problem is, what good is it for Scotland or the Parliament having them all parked on the back benches? In the meantime, Scotland's health service sinks like the Titanic, despite the money invested in it, because team McConnell on the bridge has not simply charted the wrong course, but has charted no course at all. Instead, it has simply tacked this way and that according to the way the political wind is blowing. The national framework should have been started years ago, not delivered next spring. I say to the members of the new ministerial health team that the iceberg is in their sights and they have little time to manoeuvre. In the next few days—not weeks or months—they must prove to the Scottish people that they are listening to the public, to the professionals and to this Parliament. They must apologise for the chaos that they have  caused in the people's national health service, courtesy of the Liberal Democrats. I tell them to listen not to their MPs but to the Scottish public, who will hold them accountable at the next election. To coin a phrase that should come back to haunt them, the ministers have 24 hours to save the health service.

It really is disgraceful that more than 30 years after the Equal Pay Act 1970 we still talk about women not having equal pay and hear that the gap is, in fact, widening. I suspect that we have no doormats present in the debate, but we are lucky and we are the exception—many women do not have the advantages that we have. There are ripple effects of unjust pay throughout. There are gaps between levels of individual poverty among men and women, and in 90 per cent of single-parent families, the woman is the wage earner, so children are also caught in the poverty trap. As Nora Radcliffe said, there is a  knock-on, long-term effect for women pensioners. For women, interrupted work, low pay and the fact that they live longer, rarely have occupational pensions and quite often divorce and so lose rights under their husband's pension payments all mean that, as they hit 60 and apply for a pension, they find that their pension is minimal. Many women who have served a useful life working, bringing up children—I agree that choice is important—or being in and out of work because of family commitments, as has happened to many of us here, are hit by the shock of then finding themselves in poverty. One in five of Scotland's pensioners is in poverty, and many of them are women who hide the fact that they are in poverty. A visit to some of the charity clothes shops, jumble sales and sales of work will show where the poverty is among our older people. That will happen to young women now as well. There is a huge disadvantage to women. In addition, the quality of jobs that women are offered is terrible. In factories, many women work on the factory floor while the middle and senior management are made up of men and the occasional woman. That gives the women low self-esteem. They have no access to training and get into a trap, and there is a sense of devaluation of who they are as people. The position for black and ethnic minority women is even worse. The difference is sometimes cultural, but it is also because of the extra hurdles that they have to overcome. Women's low pay is the tip of the iceberg. I want to offer some solutions to the minister, not all of which are within her portfolio. I would like to see young women in schools made well aware of their position in society and for them to be made the driving force for change, so that the gender gap does not continue through the generations.

Absolutely. My father drove all his daughters to say that there should be equal opportunities for women. He has a lot to answer for—there are another four like me, some of whom are slightly worse. It is not good enough that that happened in my family; we must ensure that it happens in society. As a former teacher, I can say that schools can do something to engender a sense of importance and confidence and a positive attitude in young women, so that they do not see their current position as being all that they are worth. I am astonished at what still happens in 2004. I also think that it is wrong that, when someone  has a problem with equal pay, their only remedy is to go to an industrial tribunal. That is a terrifically frightening thing to do and we must have other ways of dealing with the issue. Perhaps the minister can suggest a way in which women who are not being paid properly do not have to go through court procedures. Finally, what my colleague is looking for is an equal pay audit. That is not a reserved matter but is well within the remit of the Scottish Parliament.

With regard to benefits, no doubt the minister is aware that almost 50 per cent of Scotland's pensioners who are entitled to pensioner credit do not claim it. She will also be aware that the £200 winter fuel payment has not been increased since 2000. Against that background, and given that fuel bills are projected to rise by £60 in the coming year alone, does the minister think that the Scottish Executive's projected figure of 115 for the number of elderly admitted to Scotland's hospitals with hypothermia this year will be exceeded?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are being taken to accelerate sewerage and water provision in the Scottish Borders in order that housing can be built. (S2O-3279)

I thank the minister for that helpful answer. As he is aware, in Peebles, Lauder and elsewhere in the Borders, there has been a 40 per cent increase in applications for social housing and yet we cannot build because of water and sewerage problems. I refer the minister to his consultation paper where local authorities predicted that, up to 2014, they could accommodate 230,000 houses, but half of them cannot be built because of sewerage and water problems. I appreciate that the minister is making representations to Scottish Water, but the matter is of such urgency that Scottish Water needs strong political direction to—if I may use a dreadful pun—undo the blockage.

I am sure that the First Minister agrees that key to the quality of care in our care homes is the quality of staff, and that Disclosure Scotland's role is therefore central. I refer him to the written answer that was given to my colleague Richard Lochhead in August, which revealed the 100 per cent failure to meet the target that 90 per cent of basic applications through Disclosure Scotland should be processed within six calendar weeks. Will the First Minister comment on that failure and on the fact that care homes are now employing some staff without undergoing those procedures?

Will the member take an intervention?

I say to Des McNulty that when an Edinburgh taxi driver asks me for the umpteenth time, "What do you think about the cost of that building?" I say, "It wisnae me." I will tell Des McNulty why I adhere to that shortly, but first I want to pick up on his digression about the building costing so much because of the change in the shape of the chamber. I refer him to paragraph 9.71 of the Fraser report, which states: "I do not consider that the problem with the shape of the Chamber had a major impact on either cost or programme."

The member has said his piece. As for my actions in this chamber, I always thought that collective responsibility was for Cabinets, not for people who voted against things. I find myself in agreement with David McLetchie—this is new politics. In the debate on 5 April 2000, I said: "I know an elephant when I see one and I know a shambles when I see one. This is not an elephant—the Holyrood project is a shambles." I then went on to the Spencely report and said: "Does Spencely think that we should go ahead with Queensberry House? No." I went on to talk about design risk management and quoted the Spencely report, which stated: "It is clearly imperative that the Brief is frozen now". That is plainspeak for "stop". I then went on to say: "We do not have an agreed design, so we do not have a budget that can be approved. To me, those are basic contractual requirements. It is as obvious to me as the effects of the proverbial elephant in the proverbial china shop that to sign up to the motion that is before us today would be to sign a blank cheque for a building without an agreed design."— [ Official Report , 5 April 2000; Vol 15, c 1328-29.]  That was the key—and that was when we were going to cap the cost at £195 million. If the taxi driver is listening, I rest my case. I want to move on from that argument to the lessons to be learned. This is late in the debate and most things have been touched on, but the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 has not. It took an inquiry to elicit data and documents that should have been available in this so-called open and accountable Scotland; the act, which we passed fairly recently, in 2002, could not serve its purpose. I note that my colleagues said that there should be a presumption of access to information and there is a general entitlement under section 1 of the act, but there are so many exemptions under commercial exemptions. The bill's definition of public bodies does not include commercial companies that act with public money on public business, in relation to which we do not have access to documentation. Lord Fraser's recommendation 1.c) is that for contracts there be "A full and transparent record of all aspects of the competition from start to conclusion." I ask the coalition to consider amending the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 to be as strong as the freedom of information legislation in South Africa. Recently I attended a conference  on behalf of the Parliament about the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002, of which I was always proud until I heard that, in South Africa, if a commercial company is engaged in something that impacts on the public purse and public well-being, access to the data—the contracts and the pre-contract information—is there for the politicians. That is what I think the Parliament requires. It is late in the day and I have been briefed to let others in, but I ask the ministerial team present to consider revisiting the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 so that it could be applied to exactly this kind of situation, which would mean that we would not have required this posthumous analysis of what took place, which we have all said has blighted us all—even innocent me. I will say something to all the taxi drivers who may be listening: they should come inside the Parliament. I agree about the outside. I do not understand the revolvers on the walls—I do not know what they are meant to be, but I do not think that it is the Duddingston loch skater; they are just a mystery and I do not like them. However, inside the building we have a proper, decent, interesting and vibrant Parliament. We must first bring all the Edinburgh taxi drivers here to stop them from saying, "What d'ye hink about that building?" The second task is to bring all the tourism managers and tour operators here to see the inside, so that we can cleanse and purge the blight with which we have all had to live.

I sincerely congratulate Trish Godman on her motion, to which she spoke with understated emotion and a great deal of experience. When we talk about misuse of drugs, we are also talking about drink and about a cocktail of the two. Trish Godman eloquently described what happens to children whose parents are substance misusers. I have looked at the Government's good practice guidance for working with children and families and I agree with much of it. One document states: "It is not sufficient to protect children from the serious risks associated with parental substance misuse. It is important to provide for the wider needs of the child". It also states something that we must recognise: "Not all problems can be solved, and no single worker can solve them alone." Another quotation is very telling: "Reaching the children is very difficult. The children who say least are of most concern ... Children in need are likely to include children of parents who have problems associated with their use of either drugs or alcohol or both, and young people who provide care and support for parents who misuse drugs or alcohol, often termed 'young carers'." A destructive cycle will happen in those families.  I will focus on young carers—we have had a debate on the matter before. As Trish Godman said, the statistics are not accurate and the true picture is much larger than they suggest. In an answer to Rhona Brankin on 8 January this year, Tom McCabe said that there are 16,701 young carers, but I believe that that is the tip of an enormous iceberg. The Health Committee had a presentation from young carers from Golspie, who performed a dramatised narrative about various circumstances in which young carers find themselves. There is no doubt that, with the innocence of youth, they were portraying some of their own experiences. We had a young girl who was looking after the rest of the family while her mother drank herself silly and treated the girl as the mother of the family. The knock-on effect of children dealing with parents with drug and alcohol problems, apart from their exposure to violence and deprivation, is that those young people become isolated and introverted. They miss school or misbehave at school; the teachers misunderstand what they are saying and think that they are naughty children because they have not done their homework and they fall asleep. They are bullied by other children at school because they are different. Of course they are different—children who are as young as seven or eight are acting like little adults and little heroes. Apart from the fact that it was difficult for those children to come out and express what was happening, because they felt that that would betray their parents, it is clear that some of them felt that it was their fault that mummy or daddy was drinking or taking drugs. We have to ensure that there is a conduit for such children that they feel is safe and confidential and that is a first contact point for the other agencies, so that the children can express the fact that something is wrong. That is why I welcome the national forum for young carers. I know that it sounds heavy handed, but there has to be a contact point that these young people can use of their own volition so that they can gently be brought in—in some cases, that has to be done very gently—and cared for.

The minister is pushing her luck.

I do not think that I will be part of this love-in. Given that applications for social housing in the Scottish Borders rose from 582 last year to 817 this year, which is an increase of 40 per cent, will the minister consider—for the whole of Scotland,  not just the Borders—introducing the right for local authorities to acquire 20 per cent of development sites purchased by private developers for the provision of affordable housing and requiring that developers who have acquired such zoned land have a time limit for completion of the project?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive has had any discussions with the commissioner for children and young people in Scotland about the health and welfare of children at Dungavel House immigration removal centre. (S2F-1033)

Given the fact that it is plain that the children's commissioner's role in Scotland is severely constricted, despite her comment that children are not a reserved matter, I refer the minister to section 52(2) of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 with which he is, no doubt,  familiar and which self-evidently is not reserved. Does he agree that a referral under that section, regarding individual children in Dungavel, could competently be made to a children's panel by which a determination might be made to remove children from those premises?

I congratulate Bill Butler on lodging this very important and worthy motion. Indeed, it reminds me of a motion that Donald Gorrie lodged two years ago that brought into focus the very worthy work on debt that a huge number of volunteers in citizens advice bureaux carry out. During my disreputable former career as a solicitor, I also acted as a volunteer at the CAB and gave advice on general litigation matters. Members of my ex-profession as well as other professionals give of their time in such a way. In fact, I note that in the Borders even the Faculty of Advocates is using the CAB to provide—freely—advice, information and perhaps representation in cases. That said, I am concerned to hear two years down the line that some of the same funding problems with CABx remain. For example, a very worthy system in East Lothian married the CAB and Macmillan Cancer Relief and helped cancer sufferers and their families to access benefits in order to deal with any employment issues that arose from their illness. That work is no longer funded, which is a very bad thing indeed in both finance and humanity terms. I note the figures for central Borders, Peebles and Penicuik CABx that CAS has given us and I thank it for all the information that it has provided. Apart from handling debt cases that totalled some £3 million in those three areas, the CABx secured more than £1 million for their clients. By doing so, not only have they taken the burden of debt off individuals' shoulders, they have brought money back into the local economy. I will focus on debt as a major issue because a lot of marital break-up is related to debt and I know that CABx handle many problems around that as well. By being there for people, CABx lift the panic of their debt problems from their shoulders and help to structure that debt. We know that creditors will not get blood from a stone. They need the debtor to have their debt structured. A huge problem for this Parliament is that credit control is outwith our control. Consumer credit is rampant. In the afternoons on television we see what I call villainous advertisements for consolidated loans that are brought to vulnerable people. They think that by handing over their debt to a company they are somehow making their debt less, but they are not—they will pay higher premiums and higher interest.  With a different bonnet on, as a member of the Scottish National Party, I recognise the Parliament's current limitations. I hope that the minister is in close liaison with his Westminster colleagues on how to deal with consumer credit in particular.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. We can hear the simultaneous interpretation.

Of course it is the case that after five years of the Liberal Democrats and Labour being in power the health service is in crisis. We can tell that it is in crisis because the Minister for Health and Community Care is looking terrible isolated in the chamber—other ministers have quit the scene. I am grateful to The Herald for running its latest debate on health. I will quote from a letter to the paper, entitled "Price of progress", in which a parent describes how, 20 years ago, their son complained of abdominal pain, which turned out to be a twisted intestine—within 20 minutes, the son had been operated on. The parent states that, because of the lack today of an accident and emergency department nearby, "If my son had suffered his stomach ache today, 20 years and Lord knows how many millions of pounds later, he would be dead. That is progress." That is the touchstone for the health service, which is failing Scotland's public all over. On waiting times, which have been referred to, the Minister for Health and Community Care pledged that no patient would wait more than 26 weeks for their first out-patient consultant  appointment and that he would achieve that by December 2005. Those are worthy words, but there is no prospect whatever of the minister succeeding, because in five years the number of people waiting more than six months has risen from 13,000 to 30,000. In certain specialties, the situation is even more disgraceful. In neurosurgery, there has been a 1,722 per cent increase in the number waiting. In cardiology, the increase has been 793 per cent and, in respiratory medicine, the increase has been 723 per cent.

I do not know what crystal ball the minister is looking into, but what he says is not based on historical evidence. If he will forgive me for saying so, he was not open in his answer, because in order to secure those figures I had to go to the Scottish Parliament information centre. The figures were not provided in the normal manner by being published in the written answers report.

I will accept that with a certain grace. I still think that it is interesting that when an answer is not—how shall we put it?—convenient, it quite often comes in the form of a letter or a long answer placed in SPICe. However, we will pass on, because the information is now in the public domain. Let us consider what is happening in reconfiguring—to use the coalition's language—the delivery of NHS services throughout Scotland. The national framework team that is considering the matter will not report until March 2005, which is an absolute nonsense. Any dog in the street or child in primary 1 would say that to report after services have been closed down throughout  Scotland is a waste of time, space and money and an insult to the public, who are being asked to take part in the consultation. The minister cannot simply dump the issue at the door of the health boards because he does not have a national framework in place to deal with the matter. Why the minister persists in not imposing a moratorium on the closure of services in the meantime is a mystery to me when doing so might just save his political career.

Can I get on? I have taken a lot of interventions, but I will let Duncan McNeil in in a moment, if he reminds me. The minister says that he will take into account "health inequalities and other social factors" in carrying out the national planning exercise. He also says, with regard to rural services, that he will look into "the implications for patients who have to travel to distant sites". Although Mr Rumbles apparently has a contented electorate who have no problems in accessing the NHS, my electorate in the Borders have problems. Several kidney dialysis patients in the Borders have to make round trips of 100 miles several times a week for dialysis treatment. Those people are unwell when they start and they are a lot more unwell when they come back. I do not know how the minister is taking that into account now, let alone in the restructuring.

The point that I am making is that it is nonsense to have a survey into restructuring the NHS Scotland-wide while services are closing at the same time. Of course specific specialties may have to be nationally centred, but we are not even debating or deciding on that. Duncan McNeil knows that from his own neck of the woods. In the meantime, the minister, or whoever is summing up, should say that we will have a moratorium until the framework team's report is issued. That would be a satisfactory starting point. The minister is simply firefighting—he firefights here, he firefights there. In many respects, he reminds me of Callaghan, who came back to the UK from his holidays in the middle of the winter of discontent and said, "Crisis? What crisis?" Well,  Mr Chisholm, there is a crisis. I see that the Minister for Finance and Public Services has come to support the minister—that is very kind of him. The first thing to do to stop the crisis is to have a moratorium on service closures until the national framework strategy has been delivered.

Will the member take an intervention?

There are many problems in the Scottish Borders, and Scotland-wide, with boy and girl racers. I hear what the minister says about antisocial behaviour orders and road traffic legislation, but a vehicle cannot be seized unless there is a breach of that legislation and such people are not in breach of any road traffic regulations. The police tell me that a huge problem is the exhausts that those young men and women put on their cars to soup them up and make them noisy. The police say that a simple measure would be to regulate the souping up of exhausts. Will the minister be in communication with the Minister for Transport, who says that he talks about the issue all the time, to ensure that the situation is changed? That simple action would prevent nuisance in many of our villages and towns.

Is the minister aware that if the prevalence of obesity continues to grow at the same rate as now, by 2010, one in four Scottish adults will be obese? That will have an impact on type II diabetes. Against that background, has he considered the Finnish diabetes prevention study? If so, what comments does he have on it? If not, I will give him the reference later.

I remind the minister of the 1,000-plus patients who are waiting for a first appointment at the sleep centre at the Edinburgh Royal infirmary. That is against a background of a £100,000 drop in funding from NHS Lothian compared with the previous year. Given that the treatment that is provided is effective, will he revisit his decision not to fund the sleep centre centrally and speak to the consultants, who want the centre to be a centre of excellence with satellite provision elsewhere in Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will introduce colonoscopies as the standard test for colorectal cancer as part of the national bowel cancer screening programme, in line with practice in most of the United States of America and Europe. (S2O-2999)

In a parliamentary answer to me, the minister has stated that it would take five years to plan a Scotland-wide colorectal cancer screening programme. If that cancer is detected soon enough, it is curable in 80 per cent of cases. Will the minister say why it will take five years simply to plan a programme? Current tests are inadequate and men who could live are dying.

Will the member take an intervention?

I congratulate Keith Raffan on securing the  debate. We discussed his motion at the launch of the UK hepatitis C resource centre for Scotland, from where much of my information came. Keith Raffan rightly made considerable reference to the "Consensus" conference statement from the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, which makes chilling reading. I will address one or two points, only some of which Keith Raffan addressed. He reckoned that there might be between 45,000 and 65,000 hep C sufferers in Scotland but, of those, only 18,000 are identified. That is a chilling statistic. Those sufferers will, at some point, enter the NHS, which cannot cope now, let alone cope with that time bomb, which is ready to explode. As the minister is aware, I have lodged 10 parliamentary questions that focus on issues that are raised in the consensus statement. I look forward to detailed and specific answers, such as we always receive in the Scottish Parliament. I certainly hope that I will not receive the answer, "That information is not held centrally." Keith Raffan referred to needle exchanges. With regard to the distribution of needles and syringes in Glasgow, the January 2004 issue of the Scottish Drugs Forum bulletin states: "But while almost one million needles and syringes were distributed locally, between seven and 12 million were needed to cope with the estimated number of injecting episodes". That answers in part Keith Raffan's question about why people are sharing needles: there are not enough to exchange. That information "comes as the latest figures show that 259 new cases of HIV"— not hep C, but HIV— "were recorded across Scotland in 2003—their highest annual numbers since the mid-1980s." Some very simple steps can be taken. For example, the Executive must increase needle exchanges. I refer to the Scottish Drugs Forum report of February 2004, "A Brief Survey on Drug Paraphernalia Distribution following Amendments to the Misuse of Drugs Act (1971)". The SDF sent out a questionnaire to various pharmacies, its member organisations and other voluntary sector organisations. Thirty-nine questionnaires were returned, and some of the responses were extremely interesting. The report states: "Almost two thirds would like to supply sterile water and acidifiers, and half would like to supply stericups and filters. It continues: "17 responses cited financial barriers—uncertainty that monies would be available, and additional costs had not been anticipated. One respondent estimated an extra £120,000 would be required annually, within their region."  That is not a lot of money when we consider the latent costs that the NHS will incur in due course. I return to the Scottish Drugs Forum bulletin for a comment on funding, on which I would like the minister to respond, because I do not know where we are with regard to the point that is made. The bulletin states: "Meanwhile, Scottish councils have also been advised that the £6.8 million granted yearly for local authority rehabilitation services will continue—although it will be built into the mainstream revenue grant system permanently and not ring-fenced." Keith Raffan talked about the availability of national money, but not even the money that is available to the Scottish councils is ring fenced. Obviously, fears are growing that that money will be used to alleviate other pressures within the council system. I will finish with a quotation from the Royal College of Physicians, which is not known for being melodramatic in its use of language: "What is certain is that, if we do not invest adequately now, we will not be able to afford the consequences of failing to tackle this epidemic." Those are serious words indeed, minister.

As I am speaking late in the debate, much of what I was going to say has already been said, but I echo the remarks that other members have made about the volunteering that starts at home—that undertaken by carers. It could be the pensioner who looks after their spouse or partner or the young carer who looks after the parent who is unable to look after themselves. I will mention the Golspie young carers who came and performed a dramatised version of what I suspect were some of their own experiences in front of members of the Health Committee and other members of the Parliament, some of whom are here for the debate. We heard about examples of young children supporting an alcoholic mother and managing to keep the other children in the family together. They suffered at school because they were not sleeping. They were tormented—sometimes bullied—and found support and help from the local young carers association, which helped the family to stay together. To watch children who had gone through such experiences was an extremely humbling experience for us.

I am obliged to the member for highlighting that—no doubt the minister will address the matter. I come now to the funding difficulties of some organisations, particularly small organisations, which perhaps do not have the administration or resources to apply through what can often be a quagmire of forms. We really must do something about that. There is a project at a school in Peebles that involves children helping children. Secondary pupils at Peebles High School formed an organisation called Up to You. The young people are trained and go out to primary schools and advise other young people on sexual health, alcohol problems and drug problems. Because the project involves primary 7 pupils listening to third and fourth year pupils, they do listen. The people involved are not fuddy-duddies—whether or not that means the middle-aged ladies about whom Mr Brocklebank knows the statistics—but people of much the same age. Volunteering in the community can be large scale or small scale. On the former, I was involved with Citizens Advice Scotland for many years as a volunteer duty solicitor. I know that solicitors have a bad name, but many of them volunteer unpaid—members might think that the word "unpaid" never comes out of a solicitor's mouth—to give advice at surgeries at CABx on a rota system. CABx do an  excellent job, but I say to the minister that the state of their funding puts them under enormous pressure. I note from the briefing paper that we received from Volunteer Development Scotland that "90% of people involved in Citizens Advice Bureau are volunteers". In this year alone, Roxburgh citizens advice bureau, which has served the community for 30 years, helped the public to claim £800,000 to which people were entitled but which they might not otherwise have scooped. Haddington CAB ran an excellent outreach project called good advice, better health, but it has had to cease it because it has no funding, despite the fact that 76 per cent of the people who it contacted had never used the citizens advice bureau before. The health projects that it did took stress off people, and general practitioners praised it greatly, but it did not have funding. I am not alone. The minister knows that every MSP in the chamber has examples of such projects and, for the life of us, we cannot understand why funding has not been secured for them. That applies also to Independent Special Education Advice at Dalkeith, which does not understand why it does not get funding. I, Donald Gorrie, Robin Harper, Margo MacDonald, James Douglas-Hamilton, Dennis Canavan and Rosemary Byrne—that is some campaign team—asked for a meeting to help us to understand why the organisation, which represents parents throughout Scotland and whose staff started out as volunteers and have children with special needs, cannot get funding for its work. There are problems with how we choose which organisations get funding and with how people access funding. I will give an example of the excellent things that voluntary organisations do. In Jedburgh, young people have set up the dry dock youth project, which has its own management team. They have humble beginnings, although they already have 200 young people on their books and they intend to do outreach projects. As we say, it is important that volunteering starts with young people. The briefing paper from Volunteer Development Scotland lists some issues that MSPs should raise. I agree with them and I will run through them quickly in my last minute. As MSPs, we have a duty to ensure that volunteers are not used in place of paid workers. There is a danger that volunteers can be used as a cost-cutting exercise, and that should not happen. We have a duty to assist with applications for funding in appropriate circumstances. I would like the minister to address the disclosure forms issue, which puts huge pressure on voluntary organisations. That includes payment for disclosure forms and the time that it  takes to comply, quite rightly, with the care commission requirements. There is also the issue of bringing facilities up to date. In my final comment—I am glad that Ted Brocklebank is not here as I can say this behind his back—I notify the ladies and women in the chamber that I am setting up a collection fund to purchase a spade for Ted Brocklebank. I will tell him when, and when not, to use it.

I asked whether, if the Executive was moving towards legislation, the minister could give an idea of the timetable for when legislation might be in place.

I want to talk about delay and then about freedom of choice. A calculation of the possible impact of a ban on smoking in workplaces in Glasgow suggests that up to 1,000 fewer people would die each year of heart disease, respiratory diseases and cancers. The source of that figure is the chief medical officer's annual report of 2003. Therefore, if on the inception of this Parliament in 1999 legislation had been introduced, 5,000 more people might still be alive in Glasgow alone. Delay is an issue. I look forward to being informed of the progress of the smoking atlas that the minister referred to. Many members would find that very useful. When we consider freedom of choice, we have to place the arguments on health against the arguments on personal liberty. Individuals' freedoms function within the context of the greater public good—unless one lives on a desert island and can do what one likes. I wish to drive my Mazda at 128mph. That would be my choice. However, evidence revealed that speed kills and maims on our roads, so we made prohibitive laws, redesigned our roads and made regulations to deter speeding. I concur with those laws and regulations, partly because of the deterrent effect of penalty points or, indeed, a criminal conviction, partly because of consideration of the greater public good and partly because I know the facts. The situation is similar with drink-driving. I remember when society was opposed to any interference with the individual's right to drink socially and then to drive. Over time, statistics exposed the reduced competence to drive of anyone who was under the influence of drink or drugs. Not only is legislation now firmly in place as a regulatory and a preventive measure, but there has been a culture change. Those who drink or take drugs and then drive—whether or not they cause an accident to themselves or others—face the opprobrium of society. If caught, they face an immediate one-year ban, at least, for being over the limit. Against the background of those two issues, I will move on to discuss smoking. Like John Swinburne, I am an ex-smoker. I was a heavy-duty smoker. I am also a libertarian who is pretty tolerant about the choices and pleasures of others as long as they do not inflict harm on society. I am therefore sympathetic to the addictions of smokers. I have trudged through a Fife blizzard for a packet of 10. When I found that there was one packet left in the ciggie machine, I was thrilled—it  was the highlight of my year. I have since stopped smoking but I am still an addict. Even now, after 30 years, I have to resist the urge to "borrow" a cigarette from a friend. I support a ban—at least in public places where people eat. Stewart Maxwell knows that I did not always hold that view. However, recent statistics have revealed the impact of passive smoking. On heart disease, passive smoking has led to an increase in acute coronary event by 25 to 35 per cent. I will give just one more statistic; I do not want to provide too many. It is estimated that, each year in the United Kingdom, more than 17,000 children who are under the age of five are hospitalised because of the effects of passive smoking. That is a disgraceful figure, given that the children concerned have no choice. That said, I acknowledge that such situations are not necessarily the parents' fault—I accept what other members have said about the social reasons for smoking in certain areas. The evidence and the facts are there, as my examples have shown. Asthma UK Scotland made an interesting comment on the balance between the freedom of the individual and health. It said that it believes "that the overwhelming health arguments outweigh these personal liberty arguments put forward by smokers"— or, indeed, by people in the commercial sector. I agree with that. I welcome Stewart Maxwell's bill, which I foresee producing a culture change of the kind that happened with drink-driving. Although smokers might continue to contaminate their own lungs, they will not contaminate the lungs of others. The time for change is short. That is why I urge the minister to support Mr Maxwell's bill as a first step. If he cannot do that but, instead, intends to introduce an Executive bill, I ask him to advise the Parliament when that legislation will be in place.

Do I take it that Nora Radcliffe, like her colleague Mike Rumbles, supports Stewart Maxwell's bill?

I seek the minister's guidance. I am trying to find out what has happened to a document called "Smoking Epidemic" by Laurence Gruer, who gave evidence to the Health Committee yesterday. The Executive was doing a survey with the Public Health Institute for Scotland. It commissioned research, which it was said would result in the production of an atlas showing the estimated prevalence of smoking and smoking-related mortality rates by postcode sector and at local authority, parliamentary constituency and NHS board levels. That work was due for completion in the autumn of last year. I have been unable to trace what happened to that. I wonder whether the minister can assist.

As the minister will recall, I wrote to him about the row between GPs in Edinburgh and Glasgow and the Scottish Executive Health Department over payments for methadone treatment under the GP contract. As the withdrawal of methadone programmes must throw many users back on to heroin, will the minister give the Parliament a progress report on that dispute?

The point that I tried to make was that the Liberal Democrat Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning has not entered the fray to support the important marriage between the college and Heriot-Watt University.

I apologise to the chamber and the minister as I had transport difficulties this morning, hence my lateness. As others have said, adult learners represent a wide range of people in age, ability and ambition. Some of them want to retrain to enter other professions, as I did at 40. When I meet adult learners, I see the difficulties that I faced in looking after a family at the same time as retraining. Some people simply want to get on to the education ladder for the first time, having missed out. I was on a panel that faced questions at an interesting meeting during the 100 learners' voices event this week, at which the issue was raised of adults with undiagnosed dyslexia who missed the boat first time round at school and who did not get to college. When the minister sums up the debate, I would like him to address the problem of diagnosing adults with learning difficulties. Adults with such difficulties who are diagnosed later in life find out that they were not really stupid at all; they just have problems that were not diagnosed. People sometimes undertake adult learning to learn to tap dance. Whatever they do, it makes them happier, cheerier people. I have made the Presiding Officer smile; that is lovely. I am not going to make Jeremy Purvis smile in a moment. I heard all his stuff about Heriot-Watt University,  which was all very worthy, but his colleague Jim Wallace, the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, told me that he will not lift a finger to help Heriot-Watt if it has financial difficulties.

Oh dear, dear, dear, dear. I am quite happy to work with members. In fact, for at least five years I have worked with people from all parties to achieve a Borders railway. That railway will lead to major regeneration of the Borders economy; it is not simply a transport issue. Jeremy Purvis is being rather prickly. I agree that Borderers have skills, but they are not rewarded for them. Their average earnings are £81 per week less than the rest of Scotland. Just 26 miles up the road from Galashiels, in Edinburgh, average earnings are £170 per week more than those of Borderers. There is not a lot to keep people in the Borders if they can live in Edinburgh and earn an extra £170 per week. I also went to the Borders Adult Learner and Students Association—BALSA—conference. I think that I was on after Jeremy Purvis, although the organisers did not have us on the platform at the same time—I do not know why. The people I met were very interesting. The problems that were raised were the same as those raised by the Adult Learners Forum in Edinburgh—ALFiE—and at the event that I was at this week. The issues are simple. For example, child care is one issue. Another issue is adult care, because some people who look after adult members of their family cannot get respite so that they can do some simple studies. There are funding and support issues, and transport is a huge issue, particularly in rural areas. If someone in Hawick wants to study in Galashiels and has to get the bus, they find the services irregular and expensive. There are also contact issues. In rural areas, where people are spread out, one does not know who the other adult learners with the same requirements are. I do not know if it exists already, but I would like the minister to consider establishing an e-index or catalogue of organisations that can be accessed, updated, reviewed and audited, so that people can tap in and see what organisations exist in their area—or anywhere in Scotland—and what their remits are.

I thank the minister for that information. Are organisations such as BALSA on the database?

I can check for myself, now that the minister has been kind enough to tell me about it. I refer the minister to the interesting document "A Bill of Rights for Adult Learners", three points in which I will raise because they are important. The document states that adult learners should have the right to "education which is relevant to their lives" and which addresses "their needs, interests, concerns and motivations." Education should come from the grass roots up. Adult learners should not be talked down to. They should "be involved in the formation of adult education policy at local, national and international levels." That is incredibly important, because adult learners know the issues that they want to address, but they do not feel that they have access to policy, or even to MSPs. Finally, as I have said already, there should be "structures of social support ... dependant care, childcare, travel costs and other financial assistance." Those are practical solutions that can change people's lives and the lives of those around them.

It is strange, but I sometimes see Duncan McNeil with a meat cleaver in his hand. I want to consider the Tory legacy of the internal market and NHS trusts. The internal market led to the privatisation of catering and cleaning services, which had an impact on the delivery of food and cleanliness. There has been an increase in hospital-acquired infections—

I will give way, but I want to get going first. In the Borders general hospital, where services have been maintained in house, there is an esprit de corps—team spirit—and services are of a high standard. The Tories also introduced NHS trusts. Mr McLetchie launches his great campaign to reduce bureaucracy, but his party brought in all those administrators and pen pushers who do not deliver front-line services. Now Mr McLetchie applauds the removal of such people. That is just political opportunism—I suspect that Mrs Thatcher's breath is still on the back of many Tory necks. The Tories offer us a future with foundation hospitals. We know what the BMA thinks of those. Its briefing paper says: "The BMA has real concerns about the consequences of the introduction of Foundation Hospitals in England and would not support their introduction in Scotland." The Tories obviously know better than the BMA.

That is not always the case, as we are now discovering. It is certainly not  the case in relation to catering services—Mike Pringle recently brought that issue to the Parliament's attention. There is no doubt that patient passports will lead to the skewing of local service delivery—which is already skewed enough. It is hypocritical of the Conservatives to propose patient passports at the same time as they campaign to keep hospitals open in Scotland, because patient passports would lead to the closure of local general hospitals. The Labour record over the past seven years is terrible, too. The health gap between the rich and the poor is worse in Scotland than it is in England. A man who is unfortunate enough to live in Glasgow can expect to die some 10 years younger than the average Scot. Strangely enough, Labour has been in power all over Glasgow for decades, but it has hardly delivered there. We all agree that it is a good idea to put more money into the service. However, service delivery has not improved and we must consider why that is the case. During the parliamentary debate last December on the reform of public services, David McLetchie quoted from the Labour Party's 1997 election manifesto, which said: "the level of public spending is no longer the best measure of the effectiveness of government". That is true. The minister keeps telling us about the amount of money that he is spending, but he cannot always tell us where the money is going. I will not go into statistics, which have been dealt with elsewhere but, frankly, when the Health Committee asks the minister how he knows whether the £10 million, for example, that he puts into cancer care services is delivering any improvements, he is unable to tell us. We do not expect the minister to be able to tell us how every penny is spent, but when we are talking about millions of pounds we would like some guidance about where the money has gone.

Although the minister might sometimes know how the money has been spent, he cannot tell us whether the spending has had results. There is no point in investing money if it is not going to change anything. The point is that the money might be better spent elsewhere. When the minister was asked whether the National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Bill—which we supported—would cost money, he said  that it would be cost neutral. He adhered to that position despite the fact that, in its report on the bill's financial memorandum, the Finance Committee said that the bill would not be cost neutral. Costs associated with the reforms are likely to arise against a background in which three health boards are in major financial crisis—one of those is Greater Glasgow NHS Board and I have just mentioned the record of health delivery in Glasgow—and another seven boards are on the cusp of crisis, as has been said. The costs of the reforms can be paid only by using the money that was meant for service delivery, because contracts and staff payments must, quite rightly, be met. The minister must be straight with us when he does not know the answers or when he knows that things will cost money. Unfortunately, I do not think that he has been straight with us. I have a suggestion about data, which I think would assist the minister and his team. When I conducted a search of parliamentary written questions and answers that contained the words "health" and "not held centrally", I got 337 hits, most of which related to the minister's brief. For example, one of my recent questions was: "To ask the Scottish Executive ... which NHS boards automatically offer a second trimester anomaly scan within the recommended 18 to 22 weeks gestation period and, if this is not universally offered, what steps will be taken to ensure that it will be offered". I received a reply two weeks later, which stated that the Executive is aware that such scans are not universal, but added: "we do not hold the requested information centrally. This is a matter for NHS boards."— [ Official Report , Written Answers ; 26 March 2004; S2W-6314.]  The minister sets the targets on waiting times and other matters, so he should know that information and I do not understand why he does not demand that NHS boards make it available to him.

I, too, welcome the report's publication,  which was delayed, and the minister's statement. The delayed publication must have added to the misery of the young lady who is at the centre of the report—I am all too aware that she is a real person—and, indeed, must have affected social workers throughout Scotland, who did not deserve to be blighted by some bad eggs. I also welcome the audit of the guidelines for the protection of vulnerable adults. I first called for that step in October 2002 and it is long overdue. I want to ask the minister, in a constructive manner, three particular questions on whistleblowing. What the minister said has exonerated the whistleblowers, who did not feel that they could go through the local authority's systems. First, what steps will be taken to ensure that whistleblowers are not prosecuted or persecuted—overtly or covertly—when real issues come to light, wherever that may be? I know that the review of the cases involving vulnerable adults is under way and that Scottish Borders Council and the new acting deputy head of social work are seriously determined to cleanse the system. Secondly, will the minister confirm that the inspectorate will have an active role in assisting and examining the review of all the cases? One hates to think about it, but we do not want the particular case involving the young lady to be the tip of a horrible iceberg. Thirdly, does the minister share my concerns that senior managers who might be named in the report as being culpable—I have not had the opportunity to read the report thoroughly because I have just received it—might already have negotiated early-retirement packages and might walk off scot-free?

I refer the minister to a recent report from central Borders citizens advice bureau, which states that 1,000 Borderers owe more than £4 million. That is in an area with the lowest wages in Scotland, being as they are £80 per week less than in the rest of Scotland. The minister will also be aware of advertisements on afternoon television by consolidated loan companies. What representations have been made by this Government to the Westminster Government with  regard to those advertisements which, by using a soft sell, conceal the hard fact that many debtors would be taking on even more interest? If it appears to be too good to be true, it is too good to be true.

Will the member take an intervention?

In the interests of brevity, I will speak only in support of the SNP amendment. As my colleague, Shona Robison, pointed out, the budgets of three health boards are currently in extremis and the budgets of another seven are on the cusp of being so. From the evidence that the Health Committee received on the budget, we are aware that the increase in expenditure for Greater Glasgow NHS Board will cover only inflation, the increased staffing costs arising from the new contracts and the costs of complying with European directives. Therefore, any clinical initiatives that the minister wishes to prioritise will require cuts in other clinical services. Another example of such a situation is provided by Argyll and Clyde NHS Board. The Auditor General's report states: "The auditor considers that NHS Argyll and Clyde's cumulative deficit could reach £60-70 million by 2007/08 and may be irrecoverable." That is the background against which the Scottish National Party challenges the assertions in the financial memorandum to the bill. Our position is corroborated and supported by the Finance Committee's report. The financial memorandum pretty much states that the major changes—which we support—to the structure of the NHS will be cost-neutral. Paragraph 41 of the financial memorandum states: "The Executive is of the view that there will be no impact on other aspects of public expenditure, including local authorities, or on the costs of the voluntary or private  sectors or individuals, as a result of the provisions in the Bill." Perhaps the minister should address that point when he sums up. My comments on the financial memorandum are based mainly on the Finance Committee's report, which makes very interesting reading. The report from that secondary committee provided our committee with important and helpful support for our findings. Indeed, I associate myself with the remarks that the deputy convener and my other colleagues on the Health Committee have made about the evidence that was given by witnesses and about the hard work of the clerks. Paragraph 13 of the Finance Committee's report makes an important point: "The Committee questioned whether the Scottish Executive could have provided a clearer financial assessment of the costs and savings associated with abolishing NHS Trusts, especially in the initial phases, rather than assuming that they would offset each other." At paragraph 17, the report states: "The Committee also received evidence highlighting concerns that until details on the structure, number and scope of CHPs are determined, it is difficult to state whether or not the Financial Memorandum of the Bill is correct." When members introduce members' bills in the Parliament, they need to ensure that their financial memoranda are correct: it seems to me that there is one rule for members' bills and another for Executive bills, because it is still not clear that those questions have been answered. Paragraph 29 of the Finance Committee's report deals with the costs of intervention. The minister said that he would address that issue perhaps by spreading the cost across health boards, but that still does not answer all the questions that the Finance Committee report asks. Paragraph 29 states: "The Committee remains unconvinced that the estimated average cost"— not liability— "associated with the power on intervention is reasonable based on the evidence it received." The Health Committee also pointed out that no assessment has been made of the cost implications of the recommendations that a health board will have to implement following an intervention. Will those costs be paid by the health board in question or will they be spread throughout Scotland? What are the cost implications? Finally, paragraph 43 of the Finance Committee report deals with public consultation, on which the minister has given us some undertakings. The report states:  "The Committee would recommend that the Health Committee further pursue whether the funding provided at present is adequate for carrying out public consultation as detailed in the Bill." The health boards that were mentioned are quite small health boards, but other health boards cover large areas and have major deficits. My party is not convinced that the bill is financially neutral.

The minister said that the Scottish health council could not be included in primary legislation because NHS QIS is not included in primary legislation. I do not understand the rationale for that, because amendment 13 makes no reference to NHS QIS. With respect, the argument is not logical.

I support amendment 13—

My colleague has addressed David Davidson's amendment 13. It is important that the new Scottish health council is put on a statutory basis for the reasons that David Davidson expressed. In evidence to the Health Committee, a recurring theme was the strongly expressed concerns about the independence of such an organisation. The Executive appears to be going for a symbiotic relationship with NHS QIS, but the evidence to the committee shows that there is a strongly perceived conflict of interest, if not an actual one, in relation to the proposal. Dennis Canavan is right. Mr Davidson's amendment 13 states: "The general duties of the Scottish Health Council shall be to ... co-ordinate the work of the local health councils on a national basis." Mr Davidson is trapped by his amendment: he has no option but to support Ms Robison's amendment 14.

Will the minister give way?

I think that the minister has already answered my question. However, for the sake of clarity, is he saying that the waiting time guarantee is not legally enforceable and that, if it were not met in my case, I could not take him, his department or any board to court?

I rise in support of Duncan McNeil's amendments and against David Davidson's amendments. Many of the arguments have already been made; I simply endorse Duncan McNeil's amendments. We are not dealing with a simple matter of providing information—it is also about having equality throughout Scotland. The  key is that we want to embody the waiting times guarantee in regulations to make it legally enforceable. That is what the minister does not want to face—he does not want to deal with litigation based on the regulations. However, it is important to have them because there is no point in having a waiting times guarantee if it is just a piece of paper that one can do nothing about. Much has been said about David Davidson's amendments. I say more kindly than Miss Leckie, with whom I agree entirely, that the amendments represent an unsubtle attempt to take us incrementally down the road of Tory privatisation. We know that some health services have already been purchased outside the NHS, but the Scottish National Party does not want to see that increase—we would like to see a return to a much more public service. David Davidson's amendments are unsubtle and will be rejected by the Scottish National Party.

I refer the minister to the report "Good Advice Better Health" by the citizens advice bureau in Haddington. The CAB has funded an advice surgeries project and home visiting services. According to the report,  "The Project has enabled many patients to be helped by CAB and of course this has an ongoing effect on their health when they are much happier with their financial situation". The positive effects of the project were that clients required less GP time and fewer home visits and prescriptions. Unfortunately, the project will receive no more funding. Does the minister agree that this is the very kind of project that would have a direct impact on GP waiting times and take people out of the surgery and back into happier lifestyles?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether there will, as a matter of urgency, be a  presumption against school closures. (S2O-02170)

As the minister is aware, there is a presumption against the closure of primary schools in England. All proposed closures must be referred to the minister, under guidance from 1999. The Scottish guidance is dated 1988. Does the minister recall his written answer on this issue in 1999? When asked whether he had any plans to change the criteria under which proposed closures of rural schools were referred to ministers, he said: "We have no such plans."— [ Official Report, Written Answers, 2 July 1999; S1O-133.]  In a written answer five years later, he said: "we will prepare guidance".— [ Official Report, Written Answers, 1 April 2004; S2O-1886.]  Given that it took five years to reach that point, and given that 11 schools in the Borders and Midlothian are under threat of closure, will the minister declare a moratorium in case another five years pass before we see the guidance?

The position is that the minister has a responsibility. He has said that he will issue guidance for local authorities. Scotland is  already 10 years behind England. There have been few closures in England, but there have been 35 closures in Scotland per year.

The rural school is the heart of the community. The minister should be ashamed that, five years on, he has had to change his mind—and he still has not delivered the guidance.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive has any concerns over delay in implementation of the ex gratia payment scheme for those infected with hepatitis C through contaminated blood products and, if so, what steps are being taken to address the delay. (S2F-849)

Frankly, that is disgraceful. In October 2001, the Health and Community Care Committee recommended that "the Executive set up a mechanism for providing financial and other appropriate practical support to all hepatitis C sufferers who have contracted the virus as a result of blood transfusions provided by the NHS"  and that that support should come into effect within 12 months. We are more than two and a half years down the line and the forms are not completed. Will the First Minister now take responsibility for delivery of the scheme? His Minister for Health and Community Care might have time on his side, but the claimants do not.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it will take as a result of the findings of the report on the Miss X case. (S2O-2048)

That is no surprise. The minister has an extremely strange definition of the word "shortly". Is he aware that he has made the front page of the Southern Reporter under the headline "A deafening silence"? The article says: "JUSTICE delayed is justice denied", not only to Miss X, but to the good social workers in the Scottish Borders, who are blighted under the current cloud. Why did the minister tell me in a letter of 3 April that he had the report and that he would publish it and make his response soon? Three weeks have passed, but his response is not out and the report has not been published. When will the deafening silence end and when will we hear answers to the very serious questions?

Rushed?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether, in light of recent newspaper reports, it has agreed its share of funding for the Borders railway. (S2O-2049)

Well, there is an honest answer. However, how does that square with other newspaper reports, which I hope the minister has read, that his colleague Jeremy Purvis said—hint, hint—that we should not worry about the funding for the Waverley line because the coalition is committed to it? If Mr Purvis is right, how can the minister say what he just said? I presume that Mr Purvis is wrong and that there is no commitment to fund the Waverley line. Can the minister make the position clear once and for all?

I support amendments 40, 40A, 78 and 79 in the group. I will speak to amendment 40A and the issue of resources, in particular. It is welcome to see the recognition of the importance of advocacy for parents who find themselves in situations of stress and difficulty against professionals. However, we have an example in Independent Special Educational Advice (Scotland). The minister has received a letter that was signed by Donald Gorrie, Margo MacDonald, Dennis Canavan, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Rosemary Byrne and me, which asked him to examine that parent-led advocacy service, which is essential to the very work that is covered in the bill. I hear the cries about funding and resources that have been made in the chamber today; but for the want of £20,000, however, ISEA could have continued in the job that it does at present. I ask the minister when the group of members who signed the letter will receive a substantive reply. I point out that ISEA ran out of funds yesterday.

I add my voice to those of members who want the new guidance to be issued urgently. The minister's own department parked the idea a year  ago, when it was said that the guidance should include a presumption against rural school closure. I heard what the minister said about the differences in England, but I think that such a presumption is essential. Will the minister consider this matter against his own commitment in the Lib-Lab coalition document "Building Our Future" to place "The school at the heart of the community"? How can we support any rural school closure if the community in question opposes it? Surely the minister must issue the guidance with such a presumption soon.

Does the minister agree that, in the context of a falling population, if the school is closed, people with families will simply not move into the area? We are looking at the prospect of the Borders railway line opening up the Borders to help to change the demographics and to bring families back in. As Jeremy Purvis mentioned, young people do not come back after they have been at university because there is nothing for them. We need the schools to build on.

Will Euan Robson give way?

In the gallery today are representatives from several Borders schools that are threatened with closure. Members may have been passed leaflets on their way in at decision time, and the roll call of schools is given on those leaflets. Only one of them—Ednam Primary School—has had a reprieve. I would like to speak about all the schools, but as time is tight I will refer in particular to two schools that cover the spectrum: Newlands Primary School, whose current roll is 80 plus—Ednam's roll, by the way, is only 60—and Roberton Primary School, which has 18 pupils. The extensive and professional document that has been prepared by parents of children at Newlands Primary School shows that 77 per cent of parents voted against closure of the school. Its test results are way above the national average in mathematics, reading and writing. It has an optimum school roll and operates at between 80 and 90 per cent capacity. Its board concedes that the school needs new facilities, such as a bigger gym, a new classroom and a disabled toilet, but it argues rightly that a relatively modest long-term investment—compared with the cost of constructing a new amalgamated school—would  allow their school to continue to deliver high-quality local education and remain "at the heart of the community". That quotation comes from the Executive's document "Building our future: Scotland's school estate". Scottish Borders Council, which is an independent and Conservative coalition, included in its management review of 2003 a list of factors to be considered when deciding on a school's long-term viability. All criteria were valued equally, but it is interesting that the original document included "importance of the local school to the community" as a factor, because that does not appear in the management review. I visited Roberton Primary School, which is four miles from Hawick, earlier this week. It has a school roll of 18 pupils from primary 1 to primary 5. In their latter two years, pupils attend Drumlanrig St Cuthbert's Primary School—that has been the practice for the past 40 years and parents are content with it. In 1999, the school roll had fallen to six, but it is now 18 and there are children in the valley who will soon go to the school. Indeed, there are three children who will travel from as far afield as Qatar in the middle east. An e-mail from a lady there said: "Dear Mrs Grahame, We have a young family of three children, ages 8, 6 and 16 months. We currently live in Qatar in the Middle East, but plan to return to the area (my husband is from Langholm, near Hawick) in the not too distant future. We plan to live at ... Roberton ... where we intend to run a business from home." She also said that she is "not idealising a rural village school because it is small and quaint." She has been thorough; she has visited the school and has examined it for the qualities that we often recognise as being special and good in small rural schools. She said: "I was impressed by the work that I saw, the behaviour of the pupils and the general atmosphere of enthusiasm that prevailed in what was clearly a cosy and secure environment. My eldest ... children also saw the school classroom and are now looking forward to going to the local school and meeting their future playmates there ... Roberton is such a vibrant and living community, we should fight to save the centre of that community, its school." All parents of children at the school are opposed to its closure; some are here tonight. The quality of education in all its roundness—not just academic results—is high. Children socialise, they grow in confidence and they help each other. Bullying and teacher stress are unknown; how many schools with grand buildings can say that? Some children already travel six miles to school. If they are transferred to Hawick, the day for a five- year-old will start at 8 am and end after 4 pm, which will give the young children a 40-hour working week. Like the parents of children at Newlands Primary School, the parents of the children at Roberton school are adamant that the building's space can be increased and that the school that the children are to be transferred to is in no better condition than their current school. Worse still, this is the third time in 12 years that the school has been under threat. Why should parents have to keep battling for a school that is successful? The background to how these Borders schools have found themselves on death row deserves close examination. In September 2003, the Executive published its consultation paper "Building our future: Scotland's school estate". It was that document that compelled local authorities throughout Scotland to produce a picture of their local school estate. Scottish Borders Council, like other councils, did so. However, I submit that the closures in the Borders are additionally related to the council's need to raise funds to add to its public-private partnership/private finance initiative building programme, in which there is a funding gap. To sell off the estate of the schools that are on death row would raise £500,000. What does "Building Our Future" actually say? It says: "The school is a core part of the physical community and should play a role in building strong, confident communities and a safer environment, and contribute to an improved quality of life for the community." It also talks about "the school at the heart of the community". That is what the cry is about. What is the guidance to local authorities on proposed school closures? I will not be able to develop that subject too far, but the legal position is set out in sections of the Education (Scotland) Act 1980. In 2000, the then Education, Culture and Sport Committee considered rural school closures and asked the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to produce a code of practice, which I mentioned at question time today. In 2001, COSLA referred that code to the Executive, asking for a review of the legislation on proposed school closures, and on 12 March 2003, the Executive indicated that it would consider guidance in the light of the school estate strategy, which was published in 2003, and to which I have referred. I will correct the minister's answer to me at question time today when he said that the Executive had not caused the delay. In February 2003, the review of school buildings was put on the agenda and COSLA had still not produced the guidance. A letter of 12 March 2003 makes it clear that the Scottish Executive Education Department  "met the officials from COSLA ... who had been leading on the work on the draft Code of Practice on school rationalisation on 19 December 2002." The Education Department then decided that it would not do anything until the consultation had been produced. Why has the guidance simply drifted when it is most needed? Why has the role of schools that are at the heart of their communities apparently been set aside, and why are buildings more important than 100 per cent parent and staff support for a successful school? Will the minister intervene beyond the strict regulations about referral to ministers, which we know is already provided for, if communities demonstrate their unwavering commitment to their local school? Will he note the agreed presumption in England against the closure of rural schools? To revive our rural communities, we must retain our rural schools at the heart of the community. It is as simple as that.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The motion says at the end that the Parliament "therefore believes that the Executive should adhere to its aforesaid commitments and reject rural school closure proposals", which is fairly general.

I refer the minister to the answer that he gave me yesterday to a parliamentary question, S2W-6845, in which I raised the issue of the swingeing water charges on Stowe Amateur Football Club. I note the provisions of the Water and Sewerage Charges Exemption (Scotland) Regulations 2002; nevertheless, does he recognise that, for example, a £1,000 bill for Coldstream Football Club in the East of Scotland League is way beyond its means? Will he revisit the exemption regulations?

I remind the minister that the previous session's Justice 1 Committee recommended that the distinction between secure units in the remit of social work and secure units in the remit of justice was not helpful and that funding for both classes—if I may call them that—of secure unit should be streamed through the justice budget. Has there been any progress on that unanimous recommendation?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it is taking to support rural schools. (S2O-1704)

Will the minister explain why the proposed code of guidance on school closures from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities was postponed by the Executive until after publication of its "Building our Future: Scotland's School Estate" review in February 2003 and why it is still postponed, so that there is no updated guidance to authorities, such as Scottish Borders Council, that are in sore need of it?

It is not—the Executive postponed it.

I have been privileged in my political career and in my previous careers as a teacher and a solicitor because, in general, I received the same pay as my male colleagues. That was certainly true of my teaching career; it was not as true of my career as a solicitor, when I was paid very nearly the same. However, my experience represents the exception rather than the rule for women in Scotland. Often careers would come to an end when they reached a glass ceiling.

I was coming to that; the member anticipated my next point. There was indeed a glass ceiling for many women in teaching. The great concern was that if a woman took time out of teaching to be with her family—as Nanette Milne suggested that women might want to do—she would somehow come off the treadmill and find that men were ahead of her in the promotion stakes. Certainly, I would qualify what I said about equality in the teaching profession. Of course, as politicians, we are better off, and privileged in comparison with many women who are out there in the work force. I want to focus on the position of women in general, because it is more than 30 years since the Equal Pay Act 1970 was passed—although we might not think so, when we consider what is happening out there. Girls are bright; they do better in education than boys—I hope that Brian Monteith is not going to intervene. Some 83 per cent of the girls who are put forward for standard grades achieve grades at levels 1 to 4 compared with only 79 per cent of boys. Women comprise 56 per cent of students in higher education and account for 57 per cent of higher education graduates, yet when it comes to the work force, the position changes—it is like the difference between night and day. Some 42 per cent of female employees work part time, compared with 9 per cent of male employees. Those figures reflect not necessarily women's choices, but rather the nature of the jobs that are on offer. Women who work full time earn, on average, 19 per cent less per hour than men. For part-time workers, the average wage is £7.40 per hour, which is 41 per cent less than the average full-time wage for men. In part, that is because of the nature of the jobs that are thought to be women's jobs. As Donald Gorrie quite rightly said, women are very disadvantaged when it comes to pensions, not just because of the reduced national insurance stamp—I think that I am coming up to the point when I will find out what happened to mine—but because women who come out of the work force have not worked for enough years to be able to build up a full state pension. When women ask for predictions of the pension that they will receive at 60, they receive a great shock when they find out what awaits them. There are serious issues of poverty among women of retirement age. Unfortunately, we cannot escape the fact that the majority of the solutions to issues of equal pay,  quality of work, status and retirement relate to reserved matters. Until we address that properly in the Parliament and get the powers that we need, we cannot really change things, even with the greatest will in the world—and there are good and sincere people sitting on the other parties' benches who have the cause at heart. What has been done to address sexual assaults against women is commendable and should not be disregarded, but the issues of women who are in poverty, downgraded and in lower-paid jobs can be addressed only when this Parliament has powers over tax, national insurance, pensions and benefits.

I lost by only 500 votes.

The member is frightened of the minister.

Tavish Scott might not be in a rush, except to move to a slow review—he has been in coalition for five years—but the people out there have had enough. I have had a successful series of meetings throughout the Borders, which pensioners attended in large numbers. They are desperate to get rid of the unfair council tax. Their income has stayed still, and I must say to Brian Monteith that his contribution about the value of houses will have turned many pensioners against him. That is particularly so in the Borders, where average earnings are £80 per week less than those in the rest of Scotland and there has been a 57 per cent increase in council tax and water charges in the past five years. There have been 1,000 signatures on a petition to the Scottish Parliament in a few weeks. After five years in power, the minister might not be in a rush, but the people will not wait any longer. I love the internet. It was interesting to trawl again to my favourite site—it is in my favourites—which is the Liberal Democrat "Axe the Tax" website.

Mr Scott should be terribly careful with manifestos. We all know about the Airborne commitment in his party's manifesto, which he dropped at the first whiff of creaks in the partnership. Just like Mr Scott, we have been committed for years to a tax that is based on the ability to pay—only Mr Scott is in power and he is doing nothing about it. He is doing a lot on his website, which says: "As Liberal Democrats, we have campaigned to replace Council Tax with a fairer system ever since we were formed - firstly as a replacement for the rates, then for the Poll Tax, and now to replace Council Tax. We're nothing if not consistent!" That is a new one on me. The website says that people can get involved in the petition and it continues: "The more people who back the campaign to replace the Council Tax, the more pressure the Government will feel. The Tories had to back down on the Poll Tax. It's time Labour did the same over the unfair Council Tax." It is signed, "Ed Davey MP". He goes on to say—

I am on a roll just now, Brian. Yesterday's press release from Ed Davey is headed "£100 for council tax is dishonest gimmick". In it, he says: "Tucked away in the budget is the statement that council tax will increase by 7.4% ... making an average band D property bill £1253.37. This increase is more than three times inflation and amounts to a stealth tax. Although Labour is clearly running scared in the face of the powerful Liberal Democrat campaign to scrap council tax, they still haven't grasped the depth of feeling against this tax from the various groups affected by it. The only fair solution is to scrap council tax and replace it with local income tax, based on the ability to pay." He also says, in brackets—not on that site—that the Liberal Democrats will set up a review. Lastly, on "Why the Council Tax Has to Go", the Liberal Democrats say: "While the Conservatives must take the blame for introducing such an unfair tax, Labour have made it worse, partly by inaction and partly by their over-centralised control of the council grant system." Inaction? Who is being inactive? Ah, the wonderful Liberal Democrats. What would we do without them? They get rid of their principles at the drop of a hat. The list is endless—Airborne, fair voting in local government, local income tax and fisheries. They would do anything to be a deputy minister with a wee caur at the door.

Does the member agree that a large burden of tax comes through stealth  taxes, such as VAT and petrol charges, which are carried by the low paid and those on fixed incomes, who have no way of avoiding them? He is not showing the whole picture.

Will the minister take an intervention?

They are not in a rush.

I remind the minister of the evidence that he gave to the Health Committee on 9 September 2003 in the context of hepatitis C, when he indicated that he would not rule out an inquiry into  blood and blood products if "new evidence" came to light. Therefore, in the context of the new evidence of contamination of blood from new variant CJD, will he undertake to hold an inquiry into the safety of blood and blood products, not only for Scotland's many haemophiliacs, but for the wider Scottish public?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has considered the business case for the Borders  railway and whether it will now fund the line. (S2O-1497)

Is the minister aware that since 1998 more than 4,700 jobs have been lost in the Scottish Borders, that 35 per cent of the remaining 41,000 jobs are part-time and that the average weekly wage in the Borders is £80 less than the average weekly wage in the rest of Scotland? In light of those facts, does the minister agree with Scottish Enterprise Borders that a modern public transport network, including the railway, is crucial to the Borders economy? On that basis, will he confirm that he will look beyond the Scottish transport appraisal group guidelines—which, from a previous reply, appear to be the only test in this respect—and fund the line on the wider and crucial economic case?

My point was that it is not appropriate that such an approach should work. However, if constituents come to us because they are desperate, we have to try to do something for them. My point is that it should not be necessary for an MSP to do that sort of thing.

Idiot.

Please continue.

Although, because the figures state that it is the case, all of us must acknowledge that there has been an increase in staffing, the increase is simply inadequate. I refer to a parliamentary answer that I was given some time ago on the subject of consultant radiologists in which I was told that in September 2002 there were 25 consultant radiologist vacancies. Given that it takes 12 years to become a radiologist and that radiologists are at the front line of the detection of terminal illnesses and severe diseases, the impact on waiting times for individual patients is crucial and can often be fatal. Further to that, when I was thinking about what I would say in the debate today, I decided that I would not look at statistics, which we do all the time. Knowing that all our filing cabinets are full of our case loads, I decided that I would refer to some of the problems that the Executive's national health service causes to individuals. The first case is based on a parliamentary question. I asked "what the waiting times have been from detection of cancerous cells by smear test to colposcopy in each year since 1999-2000, broken down by NHS health board area." Of course, the minister's answer was that the information is "not collected centrally". I was also told that NHS Quality Improvement Scotland, which reports on cervical screening, has a minimum criterion that "90% of all referrals for an abnormal smear should be given an appointment within 40 working days and 90% of referrals with a moderate or severe abnormal smear within 20 working days".— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 16 December 2003; S2W-4707]  That ain't happening out there in the field. A letter that I received said:  "I would like to draw to your attention the fact that despite me having cancer detected on my smear I had to wait 4 months for colposcopy at the hospital. I was originally told two weeks by my GP but this turned into one month, then two months then 4 months. Various excuses were made from staff shortages to holidays to consultants going on conferences ... The wait for the clinic knowing that the cancer was growing was horrible and I don't know how I would have survived without the support of my husband and friends." That case is not special to my filing cabinet; all of us have cases like that.

I did so: I wrote to the minister and submitted supplementary questions, but am left with the information in the parliamentary answer. The second case is that of a gentleman, Mr L, who suffers from a trapped nerve in his back that has escalated in severity. Mr L is registered blind. His consultant referred him to the Western general hospital with the recommendation that he be treated as a priority, but Mr L was told that he would have to wait for 65 weeks. Mr L's dog has been taken from him as he is no longer ambulatory. He is on a major cocktail of drugs, which he was supposed to be on for six weeks only but, as he cannot see a consultant, he will have to continue to take. The list goes on. I have a case of a gentleman who was suffering from severe depression. Although he was suicidal, people cannot see a psychologist on an emergency basis in Scotland; they have to see a psychiatrist. The gentleman's psychologist had to engineer a case meeting with the psychiatrist so that the case could be treated as an emergency. The gentleman in question did not want drugs; he wanted to work his way through the problem. It is all very well to give us the figures, but those are the issues out there for real people in Scotland. Every member in the chamber has cases like those. Although individuals should not have to come to MSPs to get pushed up the queue, it works. If we send out a letter with the Scottish Parliament heading on it, people will get moved up the queue. What about all the other people out there who are not moved up our lengthening queues? I am glad that the Health Committee is to look into the subject. We decided to hold our own inquiry into the recruitment and retention of staff in the NHS. There is a crisis out there and all of us  know that it simply will not do to paper over the cracks. The committee will hold a civic participation event after which we will inform our inquiry and then take a year to carry it out. If the Executive cannot do that, I hope that the committee can.

I refer the minister to his consultation document "Proposals for Maximum Fees to be set  by Scottish Ministers for 2004-05" for the care commission. Under the heading "Unintended consequences", it says: "It is possible that some smaller providers may have to close. It was always accepted that this might happen". How many of those small care homes might have to close? How many elderly people will be displaced and where will they go?

I congratulate my colleague Alasdair Morgan on securing the debate, and I echo many of the points that he made about transport links and age profiles. The situation is even worse in the Scottish Borders, an area that goes from Coldstream in the east to Peebles in the west. The longest travel distance that will be involved in out-of-hours provision is 44 miles, either to Newcastleton or to Eyemouth. The demographics and topography of rural areas make the issue a special one for them. I support Maureen Macmillan's point about the particular difficulties in winter. In fact, just two winters ago, the A68 was closed at Soutra for four days. That gives members an idea of the prevailing conditions in the Borders; it is not only in the north and north-east that there are blizzards and snow-blocked roads. The issues are special to rural areas such as the Borders. When the Health Committee considered the Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill, a GP from the Hay Lodge hospital in Peebles said in evidence: "it is completely unacceptable. Over-tired GPs ... who are probably not even fit to drive, never mind treat patients ... have to go out and treat patients, because there is no alternative. The new contract will offer much greater scope for GPs to limit their working hours, so that they do not turn up at a surgery at 9 o'clock in the morning exhausted and sleep-deprived."—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 2 September 2003; c 74.] Hear, hear. That is a worthy principle and it is what we want to happen. Unfortunately, as many members have said, the working out of the structure of the services that will be put in place has been rushed. The services will require multidisciplinary teams to take over the work that, in some cases, is done by GPs. Some teams are in place already, but the system is still to be developed. The existence of such teams in large areas will create special difficulties for personnel. For instance, it will take pharmacists or practice nurses much longer to reach people than it would in urban areas. I have looked at Borders NHS Board's local health plan, which shows that the board is well aware of the funding difficulties that it will have. At present, the board has an annual budget of £127 million, but it already carries a recurrent £3 million overspend, even though Scottish health authorities  are not allowed to overspend. Of course, as has happened with many other boards, the board has been allowed, with the Executive's consent, to borrow for the next five-year period. However, the board is already in financial difficulties. Its fear is that savings will have to be made—not expenditure, but savings. There are plans to reduce the number of hospital beds in the Borders and hints about the possible reduction of community hospitals. That is not the way we want to go. The concern has been raised elsewhere. The minister must consider the special issues for rural areas and accept that additional funding will be required.

I note what has been said. Perhaps my question is directed more at the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning—certainly, I would be happy to provide him with a copy of my letter regarding In Touch. As my colleague said, In Touch is in danger of losing its funding. However, some £31,000 is left in the new futures fund. Will the minister liaise with the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning to find out whether an  intermediate payment could be made to In Touch until it can secure other funding, perhaps from the communities fund?

Parents who have children with what used to be known as special needs often feel that they are Davids against the Goliath of the education authority. Many of those parents are vulnerable and have felt themselves to be at a considerable disadvantage when in conflict over decisions that the local authority has taken. The bill's developments in mediation, advocacy and the tribunal system are therefore very welcome. As well as discussing those subjects, I wish to touch on schedule 2, which I do not quite understand. The bill is vague on the subject of mediation, as the Education Committee commented, although I note that the minister has developed the subject. There are still problems, however, with firewalls or Chinese walls within local authorities, which will be the mediators and which will be seen to be mediators in their own cause, to an extent.  I was fortunate enough to go to Maryland in the spring of last year to observe mediation in a range of settings, such as neighbourhood disputes, education and criminal activities. Mediation there is carried out in a professional manner. Although mediation services in Scotland are developing, we should be looking to develop them further. Mediation brings the great advantage that nobody wins and nobody loses; both parties concede and agree to the decision that is made, which reinforces that decision. That is only part of the issue, however. I agree with Robert Brown that it seems daft to have mediation coming after tribunal conflict. I do not follow why only parents of children who have co-ordinated support plans can access the tribunal. I understand that the Executive is developing a code of practice, which will be essential to the way in which the tribunal is run. I am concerned by the fact that the minister seemed to suggest that the Executive would dissuade education authorities from having lawyers present at the tribunal—that would be awful hard for local authorities. Moreover, the lack of legal representation for parents at the tribunal might even be subject to a challenge under the article of the European convention on human rights that provides for the right to a fair hearing. If there was legal representation for an authority but not for some parents, that would create an imbalance. Perhaps that is linked to advocacy, an issue that ought to be made clear in the bill. The bill is not redressing the balance for parents in the manner that they deserve. The provision of independent advocacy services would perhaps do that. If local authorities cannot be compelled not to have legal representation present at a tribunal, there would at least be advocacy for the parents. The minister said that two organisations might provide services, but I do not know which organisations they would be.

Perhaps in winding up the minister will explain how the services will operate and under what circumstances parents would be able to access those advocates for their cause. My final point—I do not need to say terribly much on it—is about something that I do not really understand, as a result of my ignorance and the fact that I am not a member of the Education Committee. Schedule 2 is on placing requests for children and young persons with additional support needs. I do not see anything about it in the committee's report. The schedule replaces sections of the Education (Scotland) Act 1980. It provides that, where a local authority refuses a  placing request, a parent may appeal the decision to an appeal committee. Under the current system, the appeal committee sometimes comprises a councillor other than one from the education committee that turned down the placing request in the first place and other parties. I am asking for clarification on the issue. Previously, the parent would turn up with representatives of that wonderful organisation Independent Special Education Advice—Lorraine Dilworth has been mentioned—which represented parents all over Scotland, because the local authority education committee had lawyers present. Will the system still operate in that way? How will it interact with tribunals? The minister looks poised to intervene. I might be out of touch, but I do not think that legal aid is available for parents at education appeal committees. If that is the case, the proposals could breach the European convention on human rights. It cannot be right, given the right to a fair hearing, that the education appeal committee will have lawyers present, or perhaps advocates or even a Queen's counsel if a test case is being heard, whereas the parent who cannot afford to pay—

I am quite happy to take an intervention. I will stop within my time.

As long as the intervention is short.

Yes, I am aware of that and I could say a lot about the underfunding and under-supporting of that organisation. I am glad that the member made the point. I do not think that legal aid is available for parents in the circumstances that I outlined. Will the minister clarify that and explain how the proposals meet ECHR requirements and how the appeal committee interacts with the tribunal?

Are you saying that, if a sheriff grants a residency order to a child's grandparents, that has no weight in providing financial assistance?

Neither am I.

I think that there is provision in existing law whereby any party who can show an interest in the child's welfare can apply to become a party to the litigation. In those circumstances, a grandparent could enter the process and the sheriff might very well take the  view that the grandparent was better than either of the parents.

In my previous life as a family solicitor, I was often involved in cases where it was the grandparents, aunts or uncles who held together the children of a broken relationship—I am sad to say that it was sometimes more than one broken relationship, as the mother and father of the children went through a series of partners. That is just part of life's course these days. I also dealt with cases where grandparents came to my office because their own children were having drug or alcohol difficulties and were therefore incapable for a variety of reasons—they could not look after themselves, let alone their children. Those grandparents, aunts or uncles did not know the terms "kinship care" or "carers"—they were just looking after the children they loved and they did so with responsibility and experience. Therefore, it comes as news to me that there is apparently such discrimination in the way in which those grandparents and other members of the extended family are reimbursed and supported by the state. I am grateful to the Glasgow advice group for providing a briefing note on the subject. I hope that, in summing up, the minister will clarify  the position with regard to the various pieces of legislation that are referred to in that briefing note. For example, the Glasgow advice group is aware of "50 cases where the child, as a result of a Supervision Requirement, imposed by a Children's Panel, resides with a relative, usually the grandparents, as a condition of that Supervision Requirement." The briefing note does not say whether, once such an order is given, there is a financial consequence for the state to meet. I see that Scott Barrie is shaking his head to tell me that there is not and I thank him for that. If such an obligation is imposed, there must be some kind of assistance from the state. There also appears to be a conflict between—or at least a brushing together of—several pieces of legislation. For example, there is the Fostering of Children (Scotland) Regulations 1996, under which discretionary payments are made; such discretionary payments are not usually made to people who have a blood relationship with the child. However, there is also the Children (Scotland) Act 1975, which rightly promotes the idea that the welfare of the child is always paramount. Neither parents' nor grandparents' interests should be taken into account; it should simply be the interests of the children that are considered. It appears that, under that act, there might be scope for making payments to the extended blood family. However, the information seems to be in a bit of a mess and the position seems to depend on which local authority is involved. I would be pleased to know from the minister whether he can advise the chamber of any thoughts that the Executive has about making the situation more uniform throughout Scotland and about recognising the essential role of the blood family. I commend all those grandparents, aunts, uncles, neighbours and others who often bring up without any recognition the many children who are victims of broken marriages. Through their experience, love and kindness, they repair the lives of those children.

To ask the Scottish Executive what concerns it has regarding delay in the publication of the social work services inspectorate's report into the Miss X case in light of the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People's advice that the report would be available in autumn last year. (S2O-1129)

That answer conflicts slightly with an answer that I have had previously, but I will say no more about that. We have already dealt with it. The minister may be aware that the abuse of Miss X first came to light two years ago. This will be the fourth in a line of reports. We still do not have it, although Scottish Borders Council is well aware of its contents. Against that background, does the minister share my concern about the recent award of early-retirement packages to senior members of that council's social work department, some of whom were and are deeply implicated in the case? Does he agree that no one involved should have been allowed to do any deals until publication?

I am sorry if my intervention is not as timeous as it should have been. I thought that when the minister addressed the education issues that Mike Rumbles raised, he might have referred to the McCabe report. I asked the minister how that report fitted into the sexual health strategy and whether his colleague the Minister for Education and Young People will be involved in the same way. It seems to be a worth-while report that has been lying in the background for three years.

I am pleased to take part in this discursive debate. The first of the issues that I want to touch on is probably the most obvious—the reduction in the number of unintended pregnancies. I say that that is the most obvious because young Scottish women have such a bad record in that respect in comparison with the rest of Europe. The summary document makes the interesting comment that "teenage pregnancy is associated with low aspirations, few perceived opportunities, lack of knowledge and skills, and mixed messages that suggest sex is the norm". I completely endorse that view. How often have we seen, as we go around the supermarket, a young girl hardly into her youth pushing a baby around in a buggy with her pal beside her? There is sometimes a young man in tow, but often there is not. We know when we see her that she is in a trap of poverty and hard work. She may have no one to relieve her of the hard work of looking after the child. Although it might have seemed to her at the time that being a mother gave her some kind of status and although she might have enjoyed playing mummy for a bit—buying baby clothes and doing things like that—the situation soon became a harsh reality for her.  That situation has much to do with low aspirations and social background. It is about people not being there to help at the right time, whether that is at school, in church or in the wider community. I am thinking even of young women's parents. The problem is huge and cuts across all portfolios. The document refers to media and mass communications. It says: "Sexual imagery pervades many aspects of modern society and is often used to sell products". How true that is. It continues: "The portrayal of sex and relationships in the media sometimes reinforces stereotypes and ignores risks associated with sexual behaviour." I agree with that, too. However, the problem for the Parliament is that so much of that area is reserved. I am neither a prurient person nor am I a censor, but I believe that images are shown on "Neighbours" and "EastEnders" in order to titillate and to create sexual tension. That is also the case with the voyeurism of the so-called reality programmes, such as "Big Brother". All those programmes shamelessly use sex simply to increase viewing figures. Many of them are shown at times when young people and children are watching television.

I share that view. In programmes such as "Top of the Pops", some of the camera angles leave little to the imagination. However, "Top of the Pops" is on at 7 pm, when many young children—even toddlers—are around. I am not one for censoring things, but the 9 pm watershed has become an absolute nonsense. Much of what is on television nowadays makes one wonder whether the watershed is in place any longer. We cannot even walk along the street without being assailed by sexual images. When we pass a bus shelter, we see a scantily clad woman on a poster selling God knows what, whether we wish to see it or not—we do not have a choice. Young girls and woman see images of sex and not of relationships. Girls as young as seven, eight and  nine buy clothes to dress like their peers and the role models whom they see on "Neighbours", for example. They are losing their childhood before they have even grown out of it. We must consider images and the wider culture. I would like the minister to say how the Executive is co-operating with Westminster on the media, advertising and the use of the watershed. David Davidson talked about parents. I thought that it was disappointing—I am sure that parents did, too—that they were not considered to be experts: in the list of contributors to the expert group, no parent group is mentioned. Mike Rumbles is checking the list, but I am sure that that is the case. Parents are now being asked for their views. All parents are experts, although there are good and bad parents.

With regard to practicalities, perhaps a questionnaire could have been sent to parents who wished to take part, to elicit data on their views without—

I know that it is an expert panel. However, why are parents not considered to be experts in their own way? There is a range of opinion among experts in any field. I do not entirely accept the member's point. There are means of including parents' views. The minister has made an omission, which I hope he will address. Finally, I refer to the McCabe report—it is not by Tom McCabe, but by Mike McCabe, who is the chairperson of the working group on sex education in Scottish schools. The report is extremely useful; a lot of hard work is done in schools on the issue. How does that report fit into the strategy, which cuts across not only health and education, but social work? I would like to know how much cross-referencing has been done with the working group on sex education in schools.

I refer the minister to an e-mail of 24 October 2003, issued by Mr Bruce Rutherford, chair of the Waverley railway working party, which states: "Tomorrow ... I'm through at the Scottish Executive ... and I'll again be asking the Scottish Executive reps to increase their contribution, but we've been stuck on these levels of funding for a while now, so I'm not hopeful of reducing the LA contribution any further"— that is, from £15 million. Will the minister pass to the Minister for Transport my concerns about that and deliver at some point an explanation of whether there have been more such meetings? If the £15 million funding gap remains, will the Executive plug it?

I associate myself with other members' remarks and thank the clerking teams, the Scottish Parliament information centre and members of the Health Committee. Members of the committee scrutinised the bill and raised the spectre of regulations—which I look forward to enjoying when I cannot get to sleep at night. The minister kindly sent the committee a letter on 15 December in answer to our letter about regulations and I will pick up on one or two rather technical points that arise from that.  The first issue, which was raised at a committee meeting by Janis Hughes, is with regard to informing patients when a practice opts out of certain elements. In the minister's letter, he says: "There is no ... duty on Health Boards" to inform patients that a practice has opted out of additional services. He proceeds: "However, work on a further set of regulations will soon begin to prescribe the information that a Health Board must publicise". He states that those regulations are being drafted and that they will be ready early in the new year. In line with David Davidson's comments, I hope that the minister will give an undertaking that the committee will have the opportunity to consider the new regulations—that would resolve the issue. I thank Tom McCabe for coming before the committee with his officials to give us advice on the regulations. The second issue, which I raised, is third-party rights. The draft regulations narrated that no third party would have a right arising from the bill, because the bill simply puts a contract into statutory form. I understand the law of contract and that it is not usual to have third-party rights within contractual terms. However, I am still concerned about what the minister's letter says regarding a person who has been removed from a GP practice list, how that is done, how the person will know about it, and how they can appeal—I use the word "appeal" loosely. In the minister's letter to me, as convener, and to the committee, he says: "Taking the specific example about a person who has been removed from a practice's list, in the first place a contractor would have to demonstrate that it had good reason to remove a patient from its list. If this was judged to be badly founded, the contract terms would provide for sanctions to be imposed by the Health Board." In other words, there would be redress for the wronged patient. "Patients would instigate this process by using the formal complaints procedure set down in the contract regulations as a feature to be included in all GMS contracts." That takes us beyond Scottish statutory instruments into regulations that pertain to a contract. Again, the committee might want to consider that. How does somebody access the information if they find that a doctor has taken them off the list? The doctor might have a bad reason for doing that—for example, the patient might be about to complain about the doctor. I also raised the third issue, which relates to the draft regulations under the heading "Compliance with legislation and guidance", and is the question of how strong the regulations and guidance are in terms of law. I asked the minister what the words  "have regard to" mean, in the phrase "have regard to all relevant guidance". In terms of the force of law, where do the words come on a scale of 0 to 10, if 10 means "shall"? In his answer, the minister says that "this wording is simply included to make it a term of a contract that ... the contractor must have regard to guidance" and that "have regard to" "has its ordinary meaning". I am not satisfied with that. I do not see why the wording could not be "shall comply in so far as is reasonable" or "shall comply in so far as is practicable with the guidance". That would be much stronger. On David Davidson's amendment, I will wait to see the minister's position and I will reserve mine.

What information is given to a potential recipient of a blood transfusion, or to someone who is authorised to consent to one on their behalf, so that consent can be fully informed?

When I was researching for today's debate, I tried to access the Scottish Tories' website, and up came the words, "This page cannot be displayed. Press refresh." Two thoughts occurred to me: "Is this personal or is the great Scottish public also being denied access to the tablets of Tory wisdom?" and "Is it worth pressing the refresh button?" It was probably not worth pressing refresh, and, so far, nothing said by the Tory or Labour members has changed my mind. In 1997, Labour came into power. Before that, we had 18 years of Tory rule. That means that we have so far had 24 years of Tory and neo-Tory rule: a seamless transition from blue to the palest shade of undetectable pink. The current problems of delivery to the Scottish people are a shared unionist liability. The unionists are a coalition of the culpable. The shortage of consultants and lack of access to all specialties—oncology, radiology, psychology and every other ology in the book—does not date from this year or last, but goes back for over a decade. It takes 12 years—

Oh, if Duncan McNeil will let me get into my stride a little bit, I will be delighted to let him in. Successive Westminster Governments have not recognised the status of nurses, which is key to the delivery of a caring and fair health service, where it matters: in the pay cheque. Let us not talk about percentage pay rises, because a 5 per cent pay rise for a fat cat is a damn sight more than a 5 per cent pay rise for a nurse. Forty per cent of our medical graduates leave and they do not come back to Scotland. David McLetchie referred to purchasing power, which is, of course, privatisation. A two-tier service will disintegrate the national health service even more. We have fragmentation of professions and allied professionals. Contracting out of catering and cleaning has not improved delivery: we have dirtier hospitals and 40 per cent of our elderly people leaving hospitals are found to have a degree of malnutrition.

No, I do not agree. It takes 12 years to train a consultant—they do not grow on trees—so we were already losing professionals way back in the time when we had the Tories and before Labour, as the neo-Tories, came into power and picked up half the Tories' blooming policies. Hospitals that are built by PPP/PFI fail—the Edinburgh royal infirmary is a classic case—but Tories and neo-Tories hurtle us down the PPP/PFI brae without brakes.

That is right, because it is cheap build and the contractors make their money on running the contract thereafter—we have been down that road with the private prisons. The money is in having the contract for 25 or 30 years down the line. Later on, the public sector owns the building when it is in a state of decay—if it is not already in such a state when it opens. The NHS bill implodes, morale in the NHS declines and Labour continues with its neo-Tory solutions, which are all in-your-face and behind-your-back privatisation. The hypocrisy of Labour members lambasting Tory policies—when they grub around picking them up, dusting them down and relabelling them—is sweet. PFI becomes PPP, and foundation hospitals, which are Tony's totem, are also a Tory idea. Privatisation, like a rose by any other name, is privatisation.

No. I ask Christine May to let me get on. However, those policies are not a bitter pill for the unreconstructed neo-Tories who, appropriately, sit to my right. I turn from the disciples to the prophets. The Tory solution is to throw more money at the private sector, which will, as it does now, use public facilities. The two-tier Tories promise passports for the privileged, the articulate and the determined—the very people who should stay to defend and use the failing health service and improve it for the less articulate and determined.  Jack the lad's solution is two bills, as if legislation alone will deliver nurses, consultants, general practitioners and dentists. What happened to dentists in Mike Rumbles's speech? He forgot about them. They are either not there, not in training or ready to retire. Scotland—a self-sufficient land rich in food and fuel with a reducing population—is the sick man of Europe. Independence from the union cannot come soon enough for Scotland's pregnant women, elderly people and ill people so that its rich resources can be diverted from war, weapons and dripping roasts for the capitalist fat cats. Nye Bevan is turning in his grave—we should let him rest in peace.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I am always positively trying to help the Liberal Democrats find out which face they have on for the day. The minister should take solace from the fact that the speeches made by Liberal Democrat members today will be sent to the Anglo-Scottish Fishermen's Association. I will let the minister know what the association says about them. It will not be positive.

I have participated in several fisheries debates in the chamber. I am holding up just file 1 of my Eyemouth fisheries files, which shows members how serious the situation is for people in that area. I have listened intently to speeches about other small communities; probably the most articulate and informed speech was made by Margaret Ewing, who has a long history of understanding the soul of the fishing industry. There is no doubt that the common fisheries policy is a continuing disaster for the fishing industry in Scotland. For several years, it has destabilised one of Scotland's major industries. The CFP is a clumsy tool for a complex subject. I will take up what the minister said about scientific evidence, which is not watertight—if I may use that awful pun—because scientific evidence never is. My colleague Richard Lochhead asked in parliamentary question S2W-3651 "what scientific progress has been made in the last 12 months in support of decoupling the management of cod from other white fish stocks in the North Sea." The answer to his question provides a trail of European lethargy, which starts when work was presented to the European Commission from 28 April to 7 May 2003 and runs through other committees to the position now: "Officials continue to discuss these issues with the Commission."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 19 November 2003; p 1148.]  Where is the urgency for Scotland's fishing communities? I would like to know the time scale for the investigations that are going through all the systems in Europe. When will those investigations reach a conclusion, if not result in proposals? I know and understand that the fishermen have a case to argue, but they have evidence, to which Robin Harper and others referred, about the effect of global warming. We agree that cod are temperature sensitive. Fishermen also say that strange fish, such as red mullet, squid and other fish that come from warmer climates, are appearing in areas of Scottish seas where they have never been seen before. We must address that. The problem is not a simple matter of the fishermen being bad and overfishing; other elements are involved.

I concede that cod stocks need to be protected, but that is not the issue. The question is: why are stocks failing so much? Is the cause as simple as overfishing or do other elements require to be addressed? Those points emerge from fishermen anecdotally and from some scientific quarters.

Perhaps we are waiting for an answer on that. The Commission is examining all the scientific evidence and is taking a long time to reach a conclusion. Perhaps we can analyse what the Commission has to say. We must consider the attack on communities. Eyemouth has a population of some 5,000. I note that Euan Robson, who is supposed to represent Eyemouth, is not even present. In Eyemouth, 240 front-line fishermen are employed. However, for each of those fishermen there is one person who works onshore, which means that 500 people rely on nephrops and other fishing in that area. That substantial percentage of the Eyemouth population is at risk. The major catch is nephrops; however, as Phil Gallie—who has left the chamber—pointed out, there might be displacement fishing and overfishing, which might cause the price to fall and make communities even more vulnerable. Indeed, in a speech that I made about six months ago, I highlighted the substantial impact of measures on ice plants that the fishermen have bought and on packing jobs in the area. I should point out that the fishing port is also essential to tourism in Eyemouth. People visit the town to see the fleet and a living, working harbour. If that shuts down, we will have yet another of those industrial museums that seem to be proliferating in Scotland. I have a great deal of respect for Ross Finnie, who has held his brief for a long time and is well informed. His heart is in the right place; he listens and talks to people. However, he has huge problems, one of which is the CFP. No matter what they might say, the Liberal Democrats at Westminster and Tavish Scott want to get rid of it.  As usual, the Liberal Democrats are Janus faced; they go one way in Scotland and another in England. Well, they will be caught out when they vote tonight, as I am going to send their speeches and voting records to the fishermen of Eyemouth.

I have only one minute left. I would have taken Mr Smith's intervention, because I am sure that his comment was worth listening to. That is irony, by the way. The minister's other huge problem is that he is not on the front line. He does not have the status with which to argue Scotland's case. I wish that he would argue our case, because he certainly has the power to do so. After all, under article 203 of the treaty of Rome, it is for the member state to decide who is a member of the delegation. The trouble is that there are Labour ministers at Westminster, and the minister up here is a Liberal Democrat. That is why he is not getting to speak up for 70 per cent of the UK's fishing industry. Finally, as far as the Liberal Democrat position is concerned, fishermen recognise hypocrisy when they see it, in the same way that they recognise cod.

As Iain Smith is quoting from the press, what is his response to this quote from The Press and Journal of 4 November? I note that his colleague, Tavish Scott, has left the chamber. Mr Scott said that the CFP has "failed fishermen, fishing communities and fish stocks and must end ... At its core, the Common Fisheries Policy does not work."

That is not what the article says.

Given that the first motion on the issue was lodged in December 1999—it was signed, incidentally, by the current Minister for Finance and Public Services—and that, in a parliamentary answer last week, I was told that discussions are taking place on a national free concessionary fares scheme for our pensioners, why on earth will it take another four years to deliver?

The minister will be aware of the study trip that I undertook to Maryland with senior members of the judiciary and members of the Legal Aid Board. Is the minister considering following through the model that exists in Maryland?

I, too, declare an interest as a member of the Law Society of Scotland and a non-practising solicitor. I practised in civil legal aid and the main part of my practice was in divorce, family affairs and reparation, so I bring a different slant to the debate. I was interested in what the minister said about access versus exclusion and I will pick up on some of Nicola Sturgeon's comments about the firms that are no longer prepared to take on legal aid work. The situation has not changed in my years in the Parliament. In some circumstances, a firm subsidises legal aid cases. Sometimes, a partner would enter my room to check how many civil legal aid cases I was running, because the fee check at the end of the month showed that I was way down the balance sheet compared with the commercial partners and those who were working on trusts and executries. I did not doubt, and it was made clear to me, that my work was being subsidised not only by the Scottish Legal Aid Board, but by the firm. I am not afraid to say in the chamber that some solicitors out there do a public service and that major firms have taken on legal aid work as a public service, knowing full well that it does not pay its way. That is especially true of an extended reparation action in the Court of Session. Applications can be made to the Scottish Legal Aid Board for interim payment of fees, but if an action continues for four years, it takes a great deal from a firm's funding. At times, when it is in a client's interest, firms fund documents and expert witnesses when the board will not. Some pro bono work may still be undertaken in the middle of a legal aid action. The minister said that legal aid was demand led, but I must cast a shadow of doubt over that. In some cases, when I sought sanction for a costly expert opinion or costly expert advice, the board would not grant it, whereas an insurance company that has limitless funds from insurance premiums could fund that, which puts the pursuer at a disadvantage. In other cases, sanction is sought for senior counsel. I noted what Pauline McNeill said, but the trouble is that small claims can sometimes become complex legally. That is why I mention legal aid in some small claim actions. Such an action might not be for much money, but it might raise an important point of law that is difficult for  an individual to pursue. That may arise in the middle of the facts of a case. In my time as a solicitor, I found that I always had two files: the file for the court case and the legal aid file. The legal aid file was full of forms, applications, opinions of counsel seeking extensions and requests for increases in legal aid. Dealing with those matters had to run in parallel with the aim of doing my best for my client. That is why I suspect that when the minister says that legal aid is demand led, the situation is not quite as it seems. The minister might want to examine the reasons for the refusal of certain aspects of cover in certain legal aid cases.

I accept that that is part of the reason. Perhaps it might also be a result of the tests that solicitors are required to go through either to obtain legal aid in the first instance or to obtain certain extensions of legal aid. We need to remember that there is a substantial recoupment of funds from the Scottish Legal Aid Board in respect of capital and expenses in civil legal aid cases. I do not want to spend the whole of my speech on solicitors, but when solicitors come to settle their account, they have an endless battle with the board about how much it will pay out. Most solicitors do not let the board know this, but I think that, at the end of the day, they come to a compromise. They become fed up writing letters to the board. I want to give a quick mention to the Justice 1 Committee's substantial report on legal aid. I do not know what has happened to it since it was published. We took evidence on a great number of issues and I will raise one of them. The committee wanted to extend the range of tribunals and panels for which legal aid is available. I am thinking of the cases of children with special educational needs who cannot get a place in school, which come before education appeals panels. The local authority turns up with its solicitor, but the parents must have the money to pay for legal representation or they are on their own. Although an organisation such as Independent Special Education Advice (Scotland), which works on a shoestring out of Dalkeith, gives advice and represents parents in such cases, it gets very little funding. When ministers consider  access to justice, rather than exclusion, I would like them to consider the funding of such organisations. The CABx have been mentioned, but ministers should also consider other voluntary organisations. They are doing the job that solicitors should be doing, because there is no legal aid.

Will the member give way?

The member raised the issue of small claims. As long ago as 2001, the previous Justice 1 Committee recommended that the Executive examine how legal aid could be made available to support small claims actions. I take it that the member would support that.

I invite Karen Whitefield to recognise—I know that I will not be popular with the public for saying this—that solicitors volunteer to do service and take on cases at CABx in the evening for nothing. That should be recognised.

Surely not. The debate is thrilling.

When I was convener of the Justice 1 Committee, I went to the United States to observe mediation procedures. Will the minister comment on progress that could be made towards using mediation procedures in civil matters in order to save money and to make resolution easier?

I hear what the minister says about the animal welfare bill. It is my understanding that my bill, the proposal for which I have lodged, will still be required because its provisions could not be dealt with under the Executive's proposed legislation. As I have obtained cross-party co-sponsorship for my proposed bill, which has obtained 30 signatures since it was lodged yesterday, as well as the active support of the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and other canine welfare organisations, will the minister confirm that the Executive will give my bill fair wind to end this miserable trade in an accelerated manner?

I refer the minister to the statement that he issued—rather than the one that he delivered—in which he names the designated areas, one of which is the Scottish Borders. Given that my constituents, from Hawick to Peebles, have like many other people been turned away from NHS dentists, and given that the allowances will not, as I understand it, come into effect until 1 April, can the minister give a time scale for when my constituents will again be able to access NHS dental services?

I seek your guidance, Presiding Officer. I was simply seeking to assist the minister, who referred to designated areas but did not define them, as he did in his speech as issued.

For clarification, I did not have the statement in advance. Statements are available to all members. The rule is that, once the statement has been given by the minister, written copies are available. As has been stated, I was clarifying the position with regard to designated areas. I glanced at the statement, after the minister had sat down, to clarify the position with regard to the Borders. I did not have the statement in my position as the convener of the Health Committee.

I suspect that the situation is worse than that. I think that the Executive is boycotting the debate.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In this very important debate, there is nobody on the Government front bench.

I am very happy to speak in the debate. However, I regret that the SSP motion does not  refer to a large percentage of our population—the pensioners who live in poverty. I note what Des McNulty said about making a difference, but all that I can say to him is that we have had new Labour for six years at Westminster and four and a half years in the Scottish Parliament. I looked again at a speech that I made in the chamber around the same time of year in 1999 and noted how little has changed for Scottish pensioners since then. At that time, the basic state pension for a single person was £66.75. Four years on, the figure is £75.50, which is an increase of a mere £8.75—or £2 per year for each of those years. When council tax rises, fuel cost rises, inflation and so on are taken into account, I would be surprised if Scotland's pensioners are even where they were all those years ago. The statistics from Help the Aged and Age Concern Scotland on the subject are chilling. The number of pensioner households in the United Kingdom who receive means-tested benefit is expected to reach 57 per cent by the end of this year. Indeed, 23 per cent of those aged 60 and over who are entitled to income support will not claim it but will continue to live well below what is a living wage. The figures also show that 41 per cent of single pensioners receive a net reported income that is lower than £6,000 per year. In 1979, 12 per cent of single pensioners were reckoned to be living in poverty. However the figures for 1995-96 show that the percentage increased by 33 per cent. Those are the financial circumstances in which many of our one million Scottish pensioners find themselves. In 1999, I made a speech about access to health care, in which I said: "social work cuts in East Lothian ... caused a home to close down, people to be dispersed, meals on wheels to be stopped and pensioners to be given two week's supply of frozen food." I also raised the issue of the day care centre at Broomhill in Penicuik, which provided respite care for the elderly and which was running out of money. The centre needed just a little bit of money to meet its needs, in comparison with the sums that the Executive was spending on all its shiny brochures. What has changed? The day care centre still struggles for money, homes are still being closed in East Lothian—indeed, a home in Cockenzie is struggling at the moment to stay the course—and pensioners are still being moved from residential home to residential home like bits of furniture in the back of a removal van. Nothing has really changed in all those years. I turn to access to health care in the community. I commend members in the previous session of the Parliament, including members of the Health  and Community Care Committee, for pursuing the issue of free personal care for the elderly in the face of a resistant Executive. However, the delivery on the ground is not what we parliamentarians thought it would be. Instead we have cuts in district nurses and cuts in care. I saw that dreadful "Panorama" programme and I am sure that the way in which the elderly people were shown to be treated is echoed in some care homes in Scotland. In my last few seconds, I want to repeat something that I said about travel in the same debate in 1999: "The three important words in relation to transport and pensioners are: available, accessible and affordable."— [ Official Report , 2 December 1999; Vol 3, c 1181-1182.]  I remember that Sylvia Jackson referred to a national concessionary fare scheme for pensioners. It was announced in time for the first Scottish Parliament elections but is it in place? No. Nearly five years down the line, we still do not have free transport for pensioners in Scotland.

No, I cannot. I am in my last minute. If a pensioner wants to travel from Penicuik to Peebles, they can get as far as Leadburn on their concessionary fare pass. However, from that point onwards, they have to pay £1.50 return to get to Peebles. That is the reality on the ground. I say to Des McNulty that—never mind what the Parliament can do, let alone what Westminster can do—nothing has really changed. It is time that Scotland's pensioners get what they deserve, which is a decent life.

We are in a consensual debate. I am sometimes concerned that women feel that they must use child care and go out to work. I would like some emphasis in this Parliament and in that other place on financial encouragement for women to be at home with their children if they wish to be. Will the minister comment on that?

Will the member take a very quick intervention? He has missed out the washing machine, which is far more important.

You have caught me on the hop writing my speech, Presiding Officer. That shows how busy  women are. Members will be glad to know that I am not going to sing—if I were to let them hear me singing in private, they would understand why. A hundred years on, how much we take for granted and how far we still have to go. Cathy Peattie eloquently described what women went through to get the vote, but we now toss it aside lightly—by "we", I mean society at large—and do not bother to go to the polls or register to vote, which is shameful. I do not quite believe that voting should be made compulsory, but something ought to be done, if only in memory of those people who fought so hard and suffered so much—the force-feeding, humiliation and vilification—to obtain it. My first point is that the vote is precious, but I also want to talk about the young girls of today, who have a much harder time than I had when I was growing up and was liberated, as it were. At the age of seven or eight, young girls are put into clothing that makes them into young teenagers, and they are expected to see Britney Spears or Christina Aguilera as role models. That is not a problem, as we all have flim-flam in our lives—I still have some—but it becomes a problem when there is nothing but flim-flam and all efforts are concentrated on how one looks, how thin one is and whether one can look 35 when one is 55. The pressures on women are outrageous and they must be brought to an end. Mary Scanlon will forgive me, but the only role model that was ever really on the political scene, was, of course, Margaret Thatcher, who had a privileged life, was well-off and had a rich husband—that is where I went wrong in life. She had her children looked after and brought in policies that were anti-family, such as taking milk away from schoolchildren and the introduction of the poll tax, which was both anti-family and anti-poorer people. Many more women than men fall into the category of being poor. Margaret Thatcher was not a good omen for women in politics, although we have redressed the issue, and many better women have been involved in politics since then. At the risk of being obsequious, I point out that some of them are in the chamber now. Practical problems still exist. When I went to university, a grant and other support was available, but people do not have that support now. My parents had four daughters and one son and, given that I am the least troublesome of those four daughters, I think that the son was disadvantaged. That is hard to believe, but true—members should meet my sister who lives in Orkney. We had my father's support to develop careers if we wished although there was no pressure on us to do so. That still does not happen in some households in Scotland. I bet that some girls are still told, "Get away out and get a man  and get settled down," which is what my granny told me many moons ago. Thankfully, I ignored that completely. Apart from cultural issues, there are other practical problems. A mother cannot be wonder woman; it is not easy to arrange child care and have a career or a job. Children are not convenient and do not run to a timetable. When they are sick, it always happens at 4 o'clock in the morning, at which point the mother has to do something about work the next day. Somehow, women are expected to cope with such situations and still look as if they are 35 when they are 45. Some women are under huge pressures, although I am glad to say that I am not under them. Although a lot has happened, I sometimes feel that the wheel has gone a little too far and that we need to backtrack a bit. Men and women are not equal; they are different and different things happen in their lives. People require aid with their differences so that they can have equality of opportunity. By saying that people are not equal, I mean that they are not the same. The Scottish Parliament has done well, but it could do more. Am I running out of time, Presiding Officer?

I will finish on this point, which I already touched on. Let us think of elderly women, many of whom do not get the full state pension because they never paid enough stamps, as they took time off to have children. They are often on benefits and as they live longer they have to rely on society for their care in the community. On those issues, which women understand, we could do more here and at Westminster to ensure that women have a legacy from those fair women of the past so that they do not still find themselves disadvantaged just because of their sex.

I might not need five minutes, because I have pruned my speech so sharply, but I will do my best. When I was 16, an English teacher said to me, "I don't think we'll be putting you forward for higher English—I don't think you're up to it." She had a very tough class; a lot of rammy went on at the back of the classroom and she spent her time trying to hold the fort. By accident, I went to the  library nearby and came across critical works on Shakespeare and Chaucer. I had not known that such things existed. I just stumbled on them, but that opened up a whole new world to me. What the teacher could not provide, the library provided for me. I got my higher English—I got a merit—and the rest, as they say, is history. It is my own, wee, personal history. We must never forget that such things have happened along the way for many people and will continue to happen; however, they should not have to happen accidentally.

I will let David Mundell in later—I have five minutes. Ten years later, I was in the small village of Minigaff in Galloway, where I was marooned with two toddlers. However, I was not quite marooned because, just after I moved there, the mobile library turned up and parked right next to the house. I went out with my toddlers and I had access to all the books there. I was also able to request books from main libraries. The mobile library was also a community waiting point. Everybody came out from their wee houses in the village and crowded into the mobile library and had a chat and got their books. That is an important asset in rural communities. In fact, Scottish Borders Council has six mobile vans, two of which have just been replaced and the four others are to be replaced. The mobile library is an essential thing in rural communities for bringing the community together and for giving access to reading. Later on—if we move on in my personal memory lane—I became a school teacher of English. I was determined not to be taught English in the way that I had been taught and I was determined never to say to children the things that had been said to me those years before. I made it mandatory that we had a library lesson every week. For the first time in that comprehensive school, the librarian and I gave a lesson on how to use the library. We wanted to make the library a place that people would not be frightened of. In due course, we even did the Dewey decimal system, so that young people in first and second year could understand how to use their library. If they then made fools of themselves, through not knowing where books were and everything, it did not really matter. On librarians, I must say that they do not fall into the category of sheepish, mild people. Our librarian had a bun and she had glasses, but she was a wild, wild woman. I cannot tell members her name because she might find out, but she defended her right to have books in her library that others would have banned. She took a stance on  that and was a proud woman. I have met other librarians along the way. If people want an exciting night, then call up a librarian. A more serious issue, which has not been raised in the debate, is the use of our archives. In the Borders, we have the Selkirk archives, which have some interesting wee things in them. They have grocery lists from 200 years ago—as today, one can learn an awful lot about people from 200 years ago from their grocery lists. They have everything there, including famous letters from Buchan, but the archives are in a damp, wee place and they are all disintegrating. None of that will ever be on the internet, thank heavens. Finally, so that others can contribute to the debate, let me just make this point. We may be in the e-mail age and so on, but there is nothing quite like a malt, the fire, the sofa, the pouffe, one's feet up and a good library book in one's hands with three others there to read, two of which might be rubbish but there might be one gem in the middle of it.

Will the member take an intervention?

Although this debate is about child protection, I preface my contribution by saying, as Mary Scanlon said, that all my words could apply equally to vulnerable adults—whether they have learning, mental, emotional or physical difficulties, or are just elderly. I have looked at the Caleb Ness report and parts of it could have applied equally to the Miss X case. I will not dwell on that point but the connection is clear. The report talks about: "Failure to take account of the background information readily available". Ditto, the Miss X Case.  "Social workers allowed themselves to be easily reassured". Ditto, the Miss X case. "The whole Child Protection Case Conference process was flawed." Case conferences for Miss X were also flawed. Scott Barrie's contribution was extremely interesting and I defer to his professional experience. However, there is no doubt that, even when all the professionals are together, information is not shared. To some extent, a bit of professional protectionism is going on. The report also found "several significant problems ... in the recording and sharing of accurate documentation relating to a baby known to be at risk." Ditto, the Miss X case. "The social worker and health visitor ... were supposed to visit" but did not do so "often enough in the circumstances". Ditto, the Miss X case. She was not visited for nearly four months despite the fact that a member of the household had a guardian appointed who could have entered the household at any time. The report continues: "We identified the lack of proactive senior social work involvement in the assessment of risk, in the re-assessment of risk, in decision making" and so on. Ditto, the Miss X case. Tragically, as there are with children, there are many cases in Scotland involving adults. We cannot attribute everything to the systems; it also has to do with the personnel involved. Following the Miss X case, three reports were commissioned by Scottish Borders Council. Only after that did the case go to the social work services inspectorate. That was when I first became interested in the role of the inspectorate. I was pleased to hear what the minister said about taking a multi-agency approach. The inspectorate should be given real teeth. From my experience of the prisons inspectorate for Scotland, I know that, even when there are rigorous and robust reports from the chief inspector of prisons, sometimes things do not change. If we are to have an inspectorate, we want something that can actually change things for people on the ground, including the professionals who are working in the system. I understand, from an answer from Euan Robson, the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People, that the social work services inspectorate report should have been published in August. It has not yet been published, although I  understand that it is with the deputy minister. Perhaps someone will advise me. Does the minister want to intervene?

I thought that the minister wanted to intervene. Ah well. I will move on to whistleblowing. It is terribly serious when people—whether they are members of the public or, in particular, professionals—want to say something but cannot. During the Miss X case, I received a dossier from 10 social workers scattered across the Borders. Since then, other members of the social work department have contacted me on different issues. I do not necessarily want to receive that information but those people felt that they could not—[ Interruption. ] I will not take a sneer from Mr Robson, because I did not seek out those people. In many cases, I do not have their contact numbers—they got in touch with me. They will not use the whistleblowing system within Scottish Borders Council, because they do not feel secure. That is a real issue. Social workers in Scottish Borders Council were issued with a letter that said that, if they got in touch with the press, they would be in breach of their contract. That is fair enough, given that that is in their contract. However, there was also an allusion to the fact that, if they got in touch with me, they would be breaching their contract, because I might go to the press. I am an MSP who represents their area and their interests. As constituents, they have every right to approach their MSP. It is no wonder that those professionals feel that they are being bullied and that they cannot go to other people because, if they do, they will be disciplined for showing weaknesses in the system. That is a serious issue. I have taken up with Scottish Borders Council the nature of the letter that was sent out. Multi-agency working is essential. Housing associations, which are agencies that the minister did not mention, are crucial. A housing association or a housing department will often know that something might be going on in a household. I would add housing associations to the list. I wish that I had before me a document that someone showed me recently. I think that it had just been produced by the City of Edinburgh Council, Scottish Borders Council and West Lothian Council or Midlothian Council. I will track it down for the minister. I discussed it with someone who had been a senior social worker. The system that it contained has already been shelved because, although it was supposed to be about interagency working, it was not about that; it was  simply about social work departments and systems and how they should work. There is a huge cultural barrier to overcome. The word demarcation may be used. There is a preciousness among professionals about their systems interlocking, which affects not only the sharing of information but the sharing of funding. That is a huge hurdle for the Executive to overcome; it is an even bigger hurdle for the individuals concerned. I, too, commend the many grass-roots social workers who are dealing with extremely difficult situations and making very difficult decisions on the front line, day in, day out. Like the vulnerable, they deserve the right systems, funding and leadership. That will ensure that they do not take the blame for things that are not their fault.

The issue is not only about the quantity of social workers, but about their quality. Figures on the social work services inspectorate's website show that the specific grant for training in 1999-2000 was £3.7 million, but that this year it is £2.2 million. To assist social workers in what is an increasingly difficult profession, surely we should spend more money on training them.

I feel a sense of déjà vu to be speaking about justice again. However, it is a subject that I enjoy. The subject of alternatives to custody is a bit of a political hot potato. We all understand why people—particularly victims—feel an immediate sense of justice when an offender is caught, confesses or is tried and is imprisoned. If only things were so simple. The criminal justice system should balance the need to be punitive with the need to rehabilitate. Initially, most people have a very simple idea of the matter. However, the civic participation event that Maureen Macmillan referred to—which the Solicitor General for Scotland also attended—revealed that when people are informed of the complexities of disposing of offenders they realise that the whole issue takes on shades of grey. I am glad that the Parliament is debating the issue and hope that we move on with it, because it has been on the go for four years. Apart from the fact that the matter is not simple, I should point out that prison fails as far as short-term sentences are concerned. The majority of people who serve a six-month prison sentence reoffend and are back in prison six months to two years later. It costs £14,000 to keep someone in prison for six months; however, it costs £1,325 for a community service sentence, £1,250 for probation  and £4,860 for a restriction of liberty order. Alternatives to custody provide a better solution in certain circumstances as far as the public purse is concerned, not to mention the fact that custodial sentences fail. As others have said, it is disgraceful that so many people are in prison on remand. Some 49 per cent of prison receptions are parties who are on remand—they are untried and therefore not convicted. If those people are convicted, many of them do not end up with a custodial sentence. The committee found that, although a wide range of community penalties is available, the prison population continued to rise. It was clear that community disposals were at least as effective as short-term imprisonment. Other members might address the fact that we found the provision of alternatives to be patchy throughout Scotland and that we found funding for the voluntary sector in particular to be very bitty. Some people were seeking funding from five or six sources that came in at different times; they spent their time trying to build funding to continue worthwhile programmes. We suggested in our report that an index be compiled of alternative to custody and diversion from prosecution programmes that worked so that we did not have to keep reinventing the wheel. I heard what the minister had to say about women in custody, which is a great tragedy. One can hardly consider that situation without examining the first preliminary report from the new chief inspector of prisons, in which he comments on Cornton Vale. I cannot remember how often we returned to Cornton Vale when I was the convener and a member of the Justice 1 Committee. The report says: "The joint thematic review "Women Offenders—A Safer Way" had recommended that 'the number of women offenders who are sent to prison could and should be reduced'. The 2001 inspection of Cornton Vale restated this and it was suggested then that 'Restriction of Liberty Orders might be a useful alternative for some petty offenders, who might otherwise be sent to Cornton Vale—especially at a time when numbers were reaching record levels.'" The situation does not seem to have changed. I heard what was said about the time-out centre. The problem is that it is Glasgow-centric and women offenders are scattered throughout the rest of Scotland. We have never resolved the issue that arises at Cornton Vale, which is that many of the women are there because they were soliciting, and they were soliciting because they were on drugs. They are sad, not bad. There are bad people there, but there are many sad people who keep coming through the revolving doors. This Administration has had four years to do something about that and I can see nothing that has changed except the promise of the time-out centre that we  have only just received. It is a huge issue.

I am glad that the centre is going to happen, but I am concerned about the time that it has taken and the fact that it will be based in Glasgow. Women with such problems come from throughout Scotland. Behind just about every such woman is a family of children whose lives are also disrupted. We say in our report that the time-out centre should be made available to women across Scotland. Our report also states that there is a requirement for adequate residential places for women offenders Scotland-wide. That is a huge issue for women who are in prison for different reasons from men. I repeat what I said to the minister about criminal justice social workers—not just social workers. In 2001, there were 612 criminal justice social workers and in 1999 there were 627. Perhaps the minister's researchers will tell us before the end of the debate how many criminal justice social workers there are today.

I think I must have misheard the member. The alternatives to custody inquiry also dealt with remand prisoners who are not convicted.

Many of us share the minister's concern that we should put in prison only those who require it. Criminal justice system social workers are key to any such schemes. I am not sure of the current figures, but the figures for 1999 show that there were 627 such social workers, in 2000 there were 624 and in 2001—the last year for which figures were given to me in a parliamentary answer—there were 612. The minister might not be able to tell me now about the present number of criminal justice social workers, but—if we are considering the alternatives that he mentions—I would like to know whether the figures are going down.

I can tell Alasdair Morrison that it would be difficult to get a cigarette paper between our views on this subject and those expressed in Murdo Fraser's motion, which I signed. The main thrust of the motion is that we should have national guidance and that communities should lead on issues to do with wind farms; the agenda should not be imposed. That does not work, as we keep telling the Executive. There is a huge problem in the Scottish Borders, which could now be considered as being targeted—there are already 33 proposals for wind farms there. The Borders are being targeted because they have open hill ranges, with close connection points on the national electricity grid. It is not that people in the Borders are saying, "Not in my back yard." They already have wind farms at Bowbeat hill and near Peebles. There is also the famous one at Dun law and Soutra hill, which is dramatic and is a tourist attraction. There are lay-bys where people can pull off the road to see the wind farm, so wind farms can work. However, a problem is being faced at an area called Minch moor, where 14 turbines are being installed. They are 100m high and five of them are to be within touching distance of the Southern Upland way, which is not just a national treasure, but an international natural treasure. The people living near there are most alarmed. Although it looks as if the Borders has a series of small string developments, they in fact comprise one huge development, but it is my understanding—and the minister may clarify this—that Scottish Borders  Council will not have to approach the Scottish Executive for planning consents if the developments are below a certain wattage. I, too, have lodged a motion on the subject, and there is a petition about Minch moor. I suggest not only that guidance should be produced—that is called for in a motion in the name of my colleague Roseanna Cunningham—but that planning policy should be reviewed. We should take a look at countries such as Germany, the Netherlands and Denmark, which are way ahead of the game. It is not that one is opposed to renewable energy; it is the manner in which planning is going through, without regard to national guidelines, to which I object. I urge the minister to take on board what I have said and to do something now to satisfy those Scottish communities that are, rightly, most concerned about their heritage because of issues relating to wind farms.

I hear what the minister says, but I refer him to a publication from the National Association of Inspection and Registration Officers in Scotland, whose members inspect care homes. The association's position is that the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care should not be self-funding and it urges that funding should be "spread across the whole community, including funding via direct taxation." Is the minister taking into consideration that comment from experienced people on the ground?

I hope that Jamie Stone will talk about cheese.

Some of the language on these issues is very complex for ordinary members of the public. When asked what was meant by sustainable development, only 27 per cent of people knew what the questioner was talking about. However, more than three quarters of people understood that people in Scotland need to change the way they live so that future generations do not live in a rubbish tip. The environment is terribly important. We do not want a smelly, dirty Scotland. Furthermore, the environment is worth £17 billion a year to the Scottish economy, which is £46 million a day. Let us consider how what we do with waste affects our environment. In Scotland, we recycle less than 7 per cent of our waste. Even with Government targets, it will take 50 years—

I have only four minutes; if I take interventions, I will never get through my speech.

If George Lyon wants the source of my statistics, I will tell him. They are from the Sunday Herald of 13 April 2003. He can look at them for himself.  What do we do with our waste? We put a lot of it in landfill sites, which is one of the most common ways of disposing of it. In Newington and Morningside in Edinburgh, people complain about the big black wheelie bins that are put in their streets and that destroy their environment, but perhaps they should work out why we have to have big black wheelie bins. We should forget about the bins and consider our weekly shop, which we are doing nothing about. We can now buy four baked potatoes on a big blue tray with a plastic top that just about requires a screwdriver to remove it. We could send it into orbit and it would come back intact. We do not need that. What about carrots, cabbages and turnips? If we turn up at the till with loose vegetables, the man or woman there will look at us as if we are in the early stages of Alzheimer's. They then try to put the vegetables in bags. We can say, "No, I don't want them put in bags." If we go to the fish counter—and herring, by the way, is very cheap and a very good meal, so I will advertise it—where we used to get fish with a wee bit of paper wrapped around it, there is now a gadget to put the fish in foil. We can say, "No, don't do that to the fish! I'm taking it home and I will take it right out of that foil. It will not even go in the fridge in that wrapper. I'm going to eat it tonight." We have to stop people using such wrappers, but they look at us as if we are very strange. [ Interruption. ] Members should not comment on that. Don't go there! This is a serious issue. When we put out our rubbish from the Friday or Saturday grocery shop, the bin is full. It is full of stuff that the food was only wrapped in from the moment we bought it until the moment we got to the kitchen. After that, it went straight in the bin. If we try to do something about that, it is impossible. We are thwarted. We all know why that packaging is there: it is to woo the money out of our purses; it is to make us buy the four baked potatoes when we maybe just went into the shop for two. With bags of carrots, it is buy one, get one free. How often do those carrots perish in the fridge because we really did not want two big bags of them? We buy them because of the marketing strategy. However, it is costing us. It costs us at the till and it costs us as members of society to dispose of the waste. We should all pretend that there is a strike of the bucket men for a week so that we have to live without our rubbish being collected. We might have to fight off the foxes and cats. Our bins would be full and we would soon find out what we should be doing about recycling and an environmental strategy. We do not have much power in this chamber. However, we could make a start by putting pressure on companies to reduce the amount of  packaging that they use. Christmas is coming up. How many parents will end up having a bonfire at the bottom of the garden on Christmas day because they cannot move for packaging? We have to do something, right at the beginning, about getting rid of unnecessary packaging. The last thing that society wants—with its pizza containers and its ironically named disposable nappies, which apparently have a lifetime as long as that of the dinosaurs before they died out—is to leave future generations in a dirty Scotland with landfill sites that are full of all the rubbish that we did not need in the first place. Start there. Start with packaging.

I am sure that the minister is familiar with "Have I Got News For You" and the round of the quiz that involves specialist publications. I will give the minister some quotations on his transport consultation and we will see whether he can tell us what magazine they come from. The first quotation is: "The paper is like re-arranging the deckchairs on the Titanic. It is full of contradictions—making it difficult to see how things will be improved." The second quotation is—

I want to read out all the quotations before the minister tells me the publication.

An answer now would spoil things. I will give way to the minister later. The second quotation is: "Ministers have concluded that the establishment of such an agency is not up for consultation. This is despite there being little more to justify it in the paper than that it is easy to set up and there are already a dozen other such agencies in Scotland." I know that the minister is desperate to tell me the answer, so the last quotation is: "Given the new agency is not up for debate, more detailed thought might have been expected on the most suitable powers for it."

Good. Well done. At least the minister takes the trouble to read such publications. The serious point is that the headline  in COSLA's publication says "Transport Plans on the Road to Nowhere". That is COSLA's overview, and much of the responsibility for transport lies with local authorities. Paragraph 23 of the Executive's consultation document, "Scotland's Transport - Proposals for a new approach to transport in Scotland", says: "Although last in the list of desirable qualities", integration, social justice and sustainable development "are absolutely key." Paragraph 24 of the document says: "Transport has to be developed on a sustainable basis, taking resource use and energy consumption as key indicators of progress." I expect a specific answer—as usual—from the minister to my parliamentary question about those paragraphs and about "how tests for resource use and energy consumption as key indicators of progress in the development of transport on a sustainable basis ... are being applied with regard to the" so-called "business case for ... the Borders railway", because I suspect that those tests are not being applied. When I asked whether the business-case test for the Borders railway had been applied to any current ScotRail projects, the minister answered: "In most cases investment in the ScotRail routes was made many decades ago. It is not possible to determine how such investments would perform under current appraisal techniques."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 9 October 2003.]  I bet that no routes, or at the most one—the link between Edinburgh and Glasgow—would pass the test. The minister is asking a line that passes all the tests for integration, social justice and sustainable development to meet a business-case test to which the Executive's document does not refer. Funding has been referred to a few times.

I will give way later. It is clear that the only funding that is in place for the Borders railway is the £15 million from the three relevant councils, to which the bill that will be introduced on the railway will refer. The Scottish Executive must provide £110 million. We have had weasel words and the Executive can play with words as it will. All that the Executive has ever said is that it will support the construction of the Borders railway, whereas it has said that it will construct other lines. No minister uses words  casually. Those words are an out for not funding the line. There is also £4 million to come from the Strategic Rail Authority—

If the minister is going to tell me that the Executive will provide the £110 million, I will listen. Otherwise, I do not really want to hear what he has to say, because he will just say nothing yet again. Will the minister now commit £110 million?

If the minister has one thing, it is nerve. I was a key person in the petition coming to the Parliament and in ensuring that the Public Petitions Committee went down to the Borders. I got the committee on the road and I followed the petition to every parliamentary committee to which it was referred. All that I am saying is that the minister should put his money where his mouth is. Let us hear a commitment to £110 million. We do not even have the £4 million from the Strategic Rail Authority. On the subject of the SRA, when one tries to ask questions about the amount of money that Scotland puts into the pot, one cannot get an answer. When one asks how much money Scotland gets out of the pot, one cannot get an answer, because the SRA does not produce Scotland-only figures. Money can be spent on Docklands and on Railtrack in the south of England, but there is not one bit of affirmation about getting £110 million for a line that is essential to an economy.

In that one minute, let me simply say this about buses. I can tell Chris Ballance that he would need a bike in the Borders because, all over the place, bus services are falling. The Peebles bus service keeps going because the town's common good fund underwrites it. Wee communities fight lock, stock and barrel to keep their bus services. It costs about £7 to get a return from Peebles to Gala—for one day's journey. That is costly. The minister and others might want people to get on their bikes—which sounds like Tebbit long ago—but it is far too far to cycle from Galashiels to  Edinburgh. For a distance of 35 miles, we need a railway line, not a cycle track.

On the aspect of ministerial weight, given that the current waiting time for a hearing test in the Scottish Borders is almost a year, what assistance will the minister give to NHS Borders, which has one of the highest levels of elderly population in Scotland, to reduce that shocking statistic? There is not much point in digital hearing aid programmes if people have to wait a year for a hearing test.

Paragraph 35 of the Health Committee's report states: "The Committee was surprised that the Executive has not undertaken any formal data collection for the projected opt-out rate for practices in Scotland and recommends that this exercise should commence immediately." Has that exercise commenced?

I advise Nanette Milne that if associations such as the Scottish Association of Community Hospitals want to give evidence, they should get in touch with the clerks to the Health Committee and we will hear what they have to say.

I will perhaps repeat much of what others have said. I want to thank all those who gave evidence on the bill. It has already been said that we did not have time to take enough oral evidence, as we had only two oral evidence-taking sessions. One was with representatives of the BMA—more of them later—and another with representatives of the Scottish Association of Health Councils, the Scotland Patients Association and the minister. That did not give the committee sufficient time to consider the important matter of changing the way in which we regulate GPs after many decades. To rely on written submissions cannot be a satisfactory way of taking evidence. Those of us who have been on committees for many years know that it is often far better to get witnesses in before the committee when necessary to test their written evidence a bit more. After all, we had written evidence from the BMA and the Scottish Association of Health Councils, but it was useful to test that. Perhaps that took the BMA into waters it did not want to tread, but that was the evidence that it gave the committee. The minister must have been having nightmares with "regulations, regulations, regulations" ringing in his ears. It became apparent to the committee that we did not know what we were doing. We could not know what was lying ahead for the greater Scottish public without sight of the regulations. The minister, perhaps unfairly, stirred the BMA up a bit for reasons into which we had best not go. I put that at his door. The BMA says: "Scottish ministers have warned of an exodus of family doctors to England if implementation of the new GP contract is delayed north of the border. Health and community care minister Malcolm Chisholm said that he could not guarantee that legislation to enable the new arrangements to be introduced in April 2004 would be passed on time." I understand the minister's difficulty with UK draft regulations, but my understanding is that he had already given an undertaking that we would have the regulations before stage 3. That would mean only weeks of delay, not months at all. That comment has led to many of us having rather hysterical letters on our desks from GPs who think  somehow that the new arrangements will not be introduced in Scotland and that they will all have to rip up their families and move south. That was an unfair portrayal of the evidence.

That is quite true, and I agree with Duncan McNeil. However, the damage was done. I quote from oral evidence taking with the BMA. I asked: "Is it therefore important that the committee see draft regulations that define those services before we deal with primary legislation? If people's livelihoods will be affected by the definition, should not we see that definition?"—[ Official Report, Health Committee , 2 September 2003; c 79.] Dr David Love replied, "Absolutely." That is unequivocal. The point was that the committee and the minister knew that we were talking weeks, not months. I have sympathy with the BMA in that regard. That situation placed committee members in a rather invidious position. After all, we unanimously wished to see the draft regulations. The minister has got caught up in something that was going to become an issue one day before a committee or in the chamber. Committees want to see draft regulations, guidance or codes of practice in appropriate circumstances and if it is important to the proposed legislation that is being dealt with. That might have applied to the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Bill, the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill or the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill, for example—bills dealing with major issues. The Health Committee has written to the Procedures Committee with a view to changing the rules in this regard and if we have to consider touching the Scotland Act 1998, so be it. A committee does no service to ministers or to the Scottish public if it does not take its time and take the measure of what is before it. Even if it causes some temporary hiccups, committees should be able to say that they need the information concerned before they can proceed further. I very much welcome the fact that committee pressure appears to have paid off.

I hope that at some point the minister will address the matter of the funding of CABx, which are under pressure. I believe that there is consensus among members on that point. I do not necessarily expect an answer now, but I hope that the issue will be addressed. If the collaborative idea that we are discussing is an excellent one, we must find the money to fund it.

It has become a matter of form to congratulate members on their motions, but I genuinely congratulate Karen Whitefield on the pivotal role that she has played in bringing together these two groups of people. It is a simple idea, but the simple ideas are always the ones that some of us walk past. The word "partnership" is so overused and overexposed that we think, "Oh, it is just another partnership." However, this one really works and it is extraordinary what has come out of it. I looked up some statistics on cancer and discovered that four in 10 of us will develop cancer at some point. Looking around the chamber, I find it extraordinary to think that of the 10 members who are here, four of us might develop cancer. Then there are the other debilitating illnesses that have been mentioned, which the service deals with. This year, some 25,000 people in Scotland will develop cancer. The disease changes a person's life; their priorities change, they are thrown into turmoil by thinking about their mortality and they are not in a position to consider the practicalities of life. We all know how vital Macmillan Cancer Relief is in giving advice on treatments to control pain and conducting home visits. Macmillan also has a wing of Borders general hospital that is very user-friendly and pleasant. There are quiet rooms, treatment rooms and rooms for information. Most important of all, Macmillan takes away the fear and stigma of cancer—the C-word that people do not like to mention. I used to work for the CABx, at times, when I was a lawyer. It was user-friendly, it was in the high street and it was free. However, nearly all the questions that I got were about benefits and housing problems, about which—after seven years' training and 12 years' practice as a lawyer—I knew nothing. Lawyers know hardly  anything about benefits and we speak a funny language that nobody understands when we give answers. In the CABx, people get straightforward explanations. They are given forms and are helped with them. To bring those two organisations together to deal with people who have a crisis in their lives, so that the burden can be taken off them, is worth while and to be commended throughout Scotland. Nevertheless, I endorse the comments that have been made about funding. CABx are not keeping their offices open all days of the week now, because of a lack of funding, although they do such a worthwhile, on-the-ground job. That must be addressed. I am grateful for the briefing papers that I received from Macmillan Cancer Relief and the CABx. The Macmillan paper says: "Our experience of supporting people affected by cancer has given us clear evidence that the financial needs of some patients and carers are poorly met" and that "welfare benefits is a problem, with many people unaware that they may be entitled to support, or others who simply 'fail' the test of completing lengthy and complex forms." Let us hear what the CABx say about the partnership operation. They say that in Lanarkshire alone, "over 300 individuals have used the service". Advice has been sought on 1,500 issues and £177,000 of benefits has now reached people who did not know they were entitled to them. That is what has been done just on that issue; I am sure that the partnership service is doing other things on housing and other issues. I thoroughly commend the service. The first thing that I will do tomorrow is to ensure that it gets rolled out across parts of the south of Scotland, including the Borders and East Lothian. I see nothing but good in it. It is of such use to people and their families to know that they have medical support from Macmillan and support on all other issues from the expertise of the CABx.

The surrounding villages.

I have had a batch of written answers that tell me nothing about the criteria for assessing the business case for the Borders railway but are merely holding answers. Here is the minister's opportunity. I asked him which ScotRail routes would have passed the business case test that will be applied to the Waverley railway line, to which he answered: "I shall reply to the member as soon as possible."—[ Official Report, Written Answers, 1 October 2003.] The time has come. Will the minister give me an answer?

I think that Nicol Stephen gave an undertaking that the Executive would consider free swimming lessons in Scotland's primary schools, but I cannot recall what happened to it. I know that many local authorities—almost half of them—opted out, but I am not sure what the current position is. What happened to that undertaking?

The current arrangements for European structural funding run out in 2006. What is the minister's response to the view of the south of Scotland alliance on the Department of Trade and Industry's so-called guarantee, which is that it is not sufficiently robust for a well-funded, ring-fenced regional policy that will benefit the south of Scotland?

What the First Minister says about keeping older people in their homes is commendable. However, in April a constituent of mine received medical advice and support to have a shower installed in her home, only to be told that there would be no money for aids and adaptations in the foreseeable future. That situation is reflected throughout Scotland. What are the First Minister and his Labour and Liberal Government doing to reduce the queue for aids and adaptations?

Does the member agree that without the powers of independence and the ability to use all our economic levers, we cannot possibly begin to tackle the inequalities that she has raised?

The member nearly used the I-word.

So far this method of debate has not proved terribly interesting. I am not likely to make it any more so, but I will press on. At least members will have to listen to me for only six minutes. We must address the broad national issue of why other European nations such as Finland have much healthier people than Scotland. I am glad to say that the Health Committee is commissioning research into comparisons with other European nations and the success of those nations' public health programmes. I do not think that I am spilling the beans on that, although colleagues are looking at me with watchful eyes. I will narrow the focus of my contribution to the debate. Janis Hughes talked about carers, but I will focus on volunteers and on local Borders initiatives that are designed to prevent children from becoming unhealthy and which face common difficulties. The initiatives are taking place against the background of the increasing problem of drug and alcohol misuse that was referred to yesterday's debate on the Nicholson report. The  Borders has one of the highest proportions of youngsters who start to use drugs before they are 15. That statistic comes from research by the Prince's Trust. Children's alcohol addiction is the biggest problem in the Borders. Jeremy Purvis and I addressed that issue in yesterday's debate. I want to mention two or three projects that are trying to deal with the problem and which, as I said, are facing common difficulties. The projects are manned by committed and passionate volunteers similar to those whom members will have met elsewhere in Scotland, but they are having increasing difficulty in obtaining funding from various funding streams on an annual basis. Applying for funding takes up a great deal of project workers' time, which they would otherwise use to do the work that they set out to do. I refer first to the reiver project in Galashiels, which is run by Norrie Tate. The project takes in youngsters with alcohol problems who are referred by the reporter to the children's panel and seeks to deal with those problems head-on. It addresses issues of education, poverty and crime and disorder, because they are all linked. Idle hands lead children to use alcohol and drugs and to become involved in mischief and crime, resulting in poor health, early pregnancies and so on—we all know the horrible story. At the reiver project, staff discuss with the youngsters one-to-one the effects that alcohol and drugs have on their health and engage them in strategies for coping with their particular problems. UP2U is a peer education project in Peebles and comes at the issue from a different angle. It was run previously by Liz Anton, whom I must mention, who died young not so long ago, and is now run by her husband David and others. I first became involved by going on a tour with the police in the Borders many years ago. It is a wonderful organisation, because it educates primary school children and young people from Peebles High School. It runs a six-week drug and alcohol education programme with all the local primary schools and is supported by Scottish Borders Council—I must say a good word about it occasionally—the education department and teaching staff. The response from the young people is excellent. The primary 7 pupils enjoy their involvement and have said how they find it much easier to talk to someone who is nearer their age than it is to talk to oldies—that could mean the minister, other members and me, and I can imagine how that could affect them. Some of the project's targets are: to increase knowledge and awareness of the facts about drugs; to increase the number of young people making informed choices; and to reduce the number of young people taking unnecessary risks.  Like the reiver project, UP2U struggled to get funding—it needed £11,000 to rent premises. Shortly after the death of Liz Anton and after a big campaign, the group eventually managed to get the funding from the council and the police, but it had a big battle. Why are such projects not supported, given that they are effective locally? Breaking the cycle is a youth-crime initiative that has a direct link to work on alcohol and drugs. The volunteers there told me that young people are ignorant of the impact of drink and drugs and that physical education has become academic—there is no real continuing physical education in schools. They also told me that their statistics show that 3 per cent of children leaving school do exercise only after they have left. What is the role of physical education teachers? My goodness, in my first year, my PE teacher had me out in hockey shorts in the freezing cold and told me that it was good for me.

I do not think so. I am glad to say that I am reasonably unhealthy now. We were made to take exercise then. The final project that I want to mention is the junior acoustic music project—JAM—of which I am a patron, where there is folk singing and rowdy drumming. I visited it and although it was not my cup of tea, the kids were enthusiastic and healthy, because they were being creative, active and informed. All the projects that I have mentioned, whether to do with physical activity or music, have something in common—they struggle for funding year after year. My suggestion is simple. We should have an index of successful projects and their funding needs, so when they ask the Executive for funding, they do not have to start from scratch every year.

Like others, I welcome the Nicholson committee report, which encourages laws that should lead to the mature and responsible consumption of alcohol and bring an end, we hope, to irresponsible promotional activities within the context of clear policing of the licensing laws in Scotland. I make this speech in the context of the drinking habits of young people, which were alluded to by Jeremy Purvis. I am grateful to the Executive for the research paper by Paul Bradshaw on under-age drinking, which makes clear that more than half of 3,950 young people who responded to questions about purchasing alcohol illegally had done so in the past 12 months. I note what the minister and Donald Gorrie said about training. The ServeWise course was brought to my attention by Lothian and Borders police this week. I never knew about the organisation and I do not know what the course is. Perhaps the minister will be able to tell us what ServeWise is and whether the Scottish Executive supports it. I believe that it trains managers, licensees, the staff of pubs, clubs, restaurants, hotels, bars and off-licences, and doormen about the mature and responsible sale of alcohol. I move on to the importance of policing, to which I alluded and which I support. Chapter 7 of the report refers to liquor licensing standards officers, whose duties are clearly defined. The chapter also refers to licensees having the right to appeal, which is important when they are reported. However, are we using current laws sufficiently? Statistics show that of the 905 licensing offences that were recorded last year, none were for drunkenness. Not one licensee was prosecuted in the past year for serving drink to people who were already intoxicated. I am sure that members have been in places where somebody has been given one or two too many. We should examine how we currently enforce the rules.

Certainly not. I would sit down now, Jamie.

I do not know whether I can give the member a direct answer to that question, but I will check his angle later. My point is not that those licensees have not been prosecuted successfully in the past year, but that they have not been prosecuted at all or taken so far in the legal process. As far as young and under-age drinking is concerned, we cannot let the issue of irresponsible promotional activities pass without remarking on alcopops, which I do not think have been mentioned yet. I know that the matter is reserved. However, I say to the minister that I, too, had a night out—but it was in Galashiels with two burly Borders policemen. I might say more about that later. During that night out, I saw many intoxicated youngsters coming out of clubs at 2 or 3 in the morning and clutching not only their friends to help them to stand up but alcopops. The illusion is that it is dead cool to have such drinks in one's hand. Indeed, children have said that it is cool to drink alcopops, which are fruity and have snazzy names. However, not only are they the gateway to serious drinking, some experts think that drinking alcopops seriously at such an age is the gateway to hard drugs rather than to marijuana. We cannot consider the issue outside the context of youth drinking culture. In my recent meeting with Lothian and Borders police, I had my attention drawn to the changing culture of drinking in the area. For example, the police had a high record of stopping, testing and catching more people in the middle of the day, including professional people who had been drinking heavily. Moreover, they were also catching people in the morning who had obviously been on a heavy binge the night before and were still able to light the red light on the breathalyser on their way to work. We have to examine the whole culture of drinking in Scotland. Indeed, I suspect that if we were to check till rolls from Asda, Tesco, Sainsbury's and other supermarkets, we would have a far better idea of the drinking habits of the Scottish public than we would get from any surveys. That said, I am not suggesting that members look at my till rolls. I shred them.

Aside from the serious point that I have just made, we should also consider our position in Europe. I know that this will sound odd, but there is scientific evidence that northern countries such as the neighbouring countries of Scandinavia that have shorter daylight hours also have heavier drinking habits. That is partly why the culture of drinking is so different in those countries than among the sun-dried tomatoes in the warm climes of Italy. We should add to that mixture—I was about to say "cocktail"—the fact that the bulk of the action in TV series such as "Coronation Street" and "Eastenders" takes place in the pub where drinks are served. In an insidious way, that might compound a national predilection for a certain style of drinking. Although I fully support much of what the Nicholson report says, we must get down to the nitty-gritty of the matter, which is an examination of why we in Scotland drink the way we do.

Donald Gorrie might be interested to know of a training scheme called ServeWise, which is aimed at licensees, the staff of pubs, clubs, restaurants and even doormen. Perhaps such training schemes should be accredited so that people entering the premises could see that the staff had been properly trained and would not allow careless or reckless drinking to take place.

I will press the First Minister on the definition of support. With construction costs rising annually by 10 per cent to 15 per cent, will he confirm today whether there is a Borders rail bank account, whether it is inflation proof, how much is in it and what the conditions of withdrawal are?

Exception.

Will Maureen Macmillan  give way?

I want to test the wording of one of the headings in the Executive's annual social justice report. On a red page with the heading "Every Older Person Matters", the report says that the Executive's vision is of "A Scotland where every person beyond working age has a decent quality of life." I want to address that point on behalf of our older people, focusing on health and general levels of poverty. To give some background, United Kingdom figures show that people over the age of 65 use 40 per cent of our health care resources. In Scotland, nearly 4 million general practitioner consultations are taken by older people. Many over-65s report difficulty with one or more everyday activity—and I think that I am joining their number. There is therefore a huge need for aids and adaptations. Obviously, provision for that need should be in place before someone has an accident. There is a case study in the annual report—one that the Executive was bound to pick. There is a cheery lady with apple-red cheeks. She has her central heating and her cup of tea, and her grandchildren love her. That is absolutely fine. I am sure that the lady exists and that there are others like her. However, there are other case studies that are not in this report. I will give members an example. I know of an elderly lady in the Scottish Borders who broke her back in December. She was brought home and is wheelchair-bound. Medical reports have gone to her housing association asking for a walk-in shower. She has not got a walk-in shower. She is washed where she sits and she will continue to be washed where she sits because the housing  association has told her that it has no capital to make that adaptation to her house. That case study is not in the report.

The tax-raising powers of this Parliament can be used but they will not redistribute wealth in any meaningful way until we are in charge. Ms Curran is a serious contender for the title of a responsible minister, but until we are in charge of tax-raising powers and the redistribution of wealth to help the needy in our community, we will be tinkering at the edges. We need independence, my dear.

Let me proceed. We cannot deal with problems until we are in charge. Until then, it will all be red, shiny brochures. The lady I mentioned is just one example. I suggest to all the elderly people who are in queues for aids and adaptations that they write a little case study to the minister, including a picture. An alternative brochure could then be produced of what is actually happening to our elderly people out in the community—for want of a handrail, for want of a walk-in shower, for want of some assistance. Those people usually end up back in hospital having come out far too soon. In the brochure, the Executive says: "We have introduced Free Personal Care for older people to take away the burden of financial worry so they can be confident they will receive the personal care and support that they deserve." The truth is that care homes are closing. There is a raw crisis out there. Families are worried sick about what is happening to their elderly parents, and not only when they are actually in care homes. I have learned a terrible thing: unless GPs have a patient in a care home, the review of the medication of the residents of that home does not necessarily take place. Some of those souls have been in there for years on the same prescriptions, and nobody is reviewing their prescriptions. For some of them, the use of the term "care home" is an abuse of the definition of the word "care". That is the reality. The minister is pulling faces, but the brochure says:  "We are ensuring higher standards of care in both care homes and at home". That is simply not true in many cases. I turn to the poverty of health provision. I have here the words of a respondent to a test on how people were being cared for. The respondent says: "Thank you very much for my TV licence but I'd really like to have my cataracts done so that I can see the TV in the first place." Let us consider the real things in life. Let us consider the poverty of older people. Let us look at what happens to older people who have very low pensions. On pensioner poverty, the Executive's figures show that 200,000 pensioners are in poverty. Those figures are in the brochure. John Swinburne is right: poverty is poverty. If someone is in a supermarket queue with a wee basket that has only odds and ends in it and they look at others who have their wine for the weekend and their barbecue and everything else, they are poor. They are worried only about getting food to do to the end of the week and about paying the rent. They are not interested in whether their poverty is absolute or relative—it is poverty. A report on Scottish poverty by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation in 2002 concluded that, in the seven years since 1994, the overall sense was one of little change. I say to Margaret Curran that nothing will change until we have control of tax, benefits, pensions and the redistribution of wealth. Without those things, all we will get are shiny wee pink or purple brochures that do not reflect the grim reality and the greyness that people experience. Nothing will change until we are in charge of our economy.

The south of Scotland alliance hoped that, if funds were repatriated to the Treasury, the money that would come to Scotland would be ring fenced. Does the minister support that view?

I congratulate Jeremy Purvis on securing this first members' business debate following the recess. My connection with the south of Scotland goes back more than 30 years, to when I was a teacher in Newton Stewart. I campaigned for many years in the Scottish Borders, and have served four years here as a member for South of Scotland. My perspective on, and concerns about, the demise of the economy in the south of Scotland connected with the changes in European structural funding, now and post 2006, are both personal and political. Although Jeremy Purvis is quite right to highlight projects that have benefited from European funding, the big picture shows that funding to be drops in proverbial buckets. The Borders lacks decent roads and through rail for passengers and freight, for which no one seems to have any funds. The Borders comes bottom in Scotland for average weekly earnings, the average weekly wage being £346.20, which is £80 below the Scottish average. In the Borders, 95.7 per cent of female manual workers earn less than £280 per week, which is the Scottish low pay threshold. I am much indebted to the South of Scotland alliance, which in June this year held a seminar on its concerns. That led to a series of parliamentary  questions, which I lodged on the subjects of those concerns. The alliance includes representatives from all over the south of Scotland, including councillors and members of local enterprise boards. Some of their concerns are consequences of the enlargement by 10 countries of the EU, of the changes to funding that will be made in 2006, and of the recent DTI proposals, which I understand would involve repatriation of funding to the Treasury and which might also mean any funding's being allocated via the block grant. I am not surprised that the South of Scotland alliance is worried and I am pleased that it took the opportunity that I suggested at the seminar: to brief our European and External Relations Committee, which is chaired by my colleague, Richard Lochhead. I note that a letter from that committee to Patricia Hewitt—for therein lies the power—expressed concerns about consultation. The letter stated the committee's disappointment with the timing of the consultation, which was launched in March 2003 with a closing date of early July 2003. That period covered the time when the Scottish Parliament was dissolved for elections and its first days afterwards. As the letter went on to point out, that meant that Parliament and its committees had been somewhat disadvantaged in their ability to conduct inquiries and to consult throughout Scotland—one of the founding principles of the way we work. That is much to be regretted. If Richard Lochhead is present for the debate, I am sure that he will say something further on the matter.

Yes, I am aware of that. I was going to leave those points to Richard Lochhead to cover in his speech, which I do not wish to pre-empt. Let me put on record the Scottish National Party's response on the matter, which was launched by Sir Neil MacCormick MEP. It contains some interesting comments with regard not just to changes to structural funding, but to the whole system. I quote from the response: "The SNP supports increased flexibility and simplification of regional funding, and recognises that there will be increased demand placed on the structural funds with the accession of ten new Member States. We are strongly of the view that Scotland should be included in the allocation of structural funds after the present programming period ends in 2006." Do I have another minute left, Presiding Officer?

I will curtail my quotation in order to let other members in. The response continues: "The SNP is of the view that either structural funds or any successor scheme, whether at EU level or Member State level, should be directed at funding infrastructure projects rather than by way of direct payments to foreign companies." I will not return to the issue of Viasystems and the £17 million that was clawed back by the DTI and which will never see the light of day. However, we must change the rules, because the way to regenerate the Borders economy is to ensure that we have good transport links—good rail and road links. That is the issue on which we must focus.

To ask the Scottish Executive what concerns it has about withdrawal of bus services in the Scottish Borders. (S2O-273)

I note what the minister says, but in a recent parliamentary answer he stated: "The Executive provides substantial financial support for the operation of subsidised local bus services through the local government Grant Aided Expenditure mechanism ... There are currently no plans to increase this support."— [ Official Report, Written Answers, 16 June 2003; p 177.]  Who is to blame for the crisis of essential Borders bus services being cut right, left and centre—Scottish Borders Council or the Liberal Democrat Minister for Transport?

I remind the minister of his cheery and upbeat wee speech in the transport debate last week, and in particular of what he said about buses. Given that Peebles, along with other Borders towns, is to lose its town service, which will isolate the elderly and disabled in particular from the local health centre and post office, will he explain to Borderers why he is so cheery and upbeat?

There are no buses.

Will Nanette Milne support our call for the reallocation to Scotland of the benefits funds that were clawed back to Westminster as a result of implementation of free personal care for the elderly?

Four years ago, I was my party's spokesperson for older people. There was a crisis for elderly people in care at that time; the crisis has simply worsened. There is no time for reviews. We have been in this chamber for four years and things are getting worse for Scotland's elderly people. We do not need to look at the statistics. Members should read the petitions that come to the Parliament from people who are concerned about their elderly relatives. St Meddan's in Ayr has closed. Cockenzie House in Prestonpans is threatened with closure. Human misery is the result. There are people in Cockenzie House who have been moved twice already from other homes that have closed and now they are under threat of it happening again. They are frail, elderly people. The benefit for the establishment is that those people might die off and solve the problem for them. That often happens when people are decanted. I come to the question of the discrepancy between local authority payments and private sector payments. The private sector alone provides nursing care that is more intensive and that costs more, yet they get less money. I have never yet heard an explanation of that differential of £50 a week. However, I know that when a private nursing home does not have enough money, it often has to approach the families to make up the difference. That subsidy should not come from taxpayers. There are horrific stories on my desk about what is going on in some of the care homes in Scotland. There is a home in the Borders where, if half the stories are true, it will be closed. I will not go into the details because they have to be corroborated elsewhere, but the home has already been reported to the care commission. Carolyn Leckie referred to part of the problem. People are being  taken off the streets to work in care homes for low pay. They act as care assistants, but they are not able to do the work; they know nothing about caring for the elderly and certainly not for those with dementia.

I never thought that I would defend private enterprise in this way, but the only place that people can get nursing care is in the private sector because local authorities do not provide it. They have been left with a dirty deal. We could have used the benefits clawback from implementing free personal care. It was an absolute disgrace that Westminster got all that money that could have been retained for Scotland and distributed to elderly people who want to stay at home. Let us get the money back, let us fight for it. Westminster has no right to keep that money. It came from Scottish taxpayers, and our elderly people must get it back to ensure that they receive the care that they have earned and deserve.

Will the minister give way?

I will pick up on some phrases that have been used in the debate so far. The motion talks of "greater patient engagement"; the minister said that people should be "treated as individuals" and that there should be "better communication" with patients; and Duncan McNeil referred to "putting patients first". I will consider how those ideas are illustrated in relation to three issues and how the situation might be changed. The issues are the complaints procedure, access to medical records, and advocacy, which are basic issues for patients in the NHS at all levels. The complaints procedure has been addressed  in some detail by my colleague Shona Robison. The Executive's own findings are that the procedure is cumbersome and does not appear to offer independent advice, and that 75 per cent of those who go through the system are dissatisfied and believe that the current procedure is biased. Six years ago, there was a consultation on the complaints procedure—members of the previous Justice 1 Committee know the troubles that we had with complaints about professionals. I suggest that the area should be addressed urgently. Most members receive complaints of different natures in their constituency mailboxes that should never have come to an MSP as the court of last resort. Rather than simply having a complaints officer in each NHS organisation, someone should be on the spot in hospitals to listen to people who want to complain. When people who are visiting their granny or mother find that the situation is not right and want to make a complaint, a named person to whom the complaint can be made should be available. People should not have to go through the labyrinths of the national health service structure. I also suggest the early use of independent trained mediators to deal with patients, carers, families and professionals to try to find a resolution to problems. Complaints might be small—for example, a mother's buzzer alarm hangs on the wall and she cannot reach it when she needs help. If somebody complained about that, the situation might be dealt with without there being a full-blown problem that gives rise to a blame culture and a situation in which harassed staff feel that they are taking the buck for the problems in a system that is under stress. I am also interested in the comment in "Partnership for Care" that a failure in the complaints procedure could trigger "an investigation by NHS Quality Improvement Scotland and possible Executive intervention." I presume that that relates to serious flaws in the complaints procedure or a serious complaint. The document continues: "If these new arrangements do not lead to significant improvements in complaints performance, we will take all necessary steps including legislation." I wonder how far that legislation has got on the drawing board. People often feel that, although they have been through the complaints procedure, nothing has changed. People should know that, at the end of the procedure, there is a statutory resort. The second matter that I will touch on is access to medical records. It is astonishing that people do not know that they are entitled to see their medical records when they have been entitled to do so since 1990. If that is not common knowledge, what  is wrong with the system? People are also entitled to see medical reports that are written about them, although such reports are sometimes withheld. Constituents often tell members that they have not seen a medical report because it was produced for another body. However, the Access to Medical Reports Act 1988 gives patients the right to see any medical report that a doctor has written, whether it is for an insurance company or an employer. People do not know that, but informing them would be a simple matter. Such matters do not require fancy research and words—they are practical issues that could be resolved easily. The third matter that I will touch on is advocacy. Paragraph 45 of the paper "A New Public Involvement Structure for NHSScotland", which deals with advocacy, states: "Some patients and carers may need help of a more intensive kind or over an extended period of time. In these circumstances it may be appropriate to enlist more specialist advocacy support". The paper continues: "NHS Boards are already required to commission independent advocacy arrangements". Who knows about that? There are many elderly people languishing in hospital who do not understand what is being said to them and who have simple problems such as having nobody to open the top of their drinking bottle to allow them to drink. Some people are left sitting in a chair for two or three hours because they have been parked there by harassed staff. Who speaks up and acts as an advocate for such people if they have no family? One of the many briefing papers that members receive from Age Concern Scotland states: "older people's advocacy only receives around 8% of the total advocacy budget", although, as the paper points out, people older than 65 consume "around 40% of total health care and social care costs". That needs redressed. The issues are simple, and we could start by setting up a one-stop shop. I endorse my colleague Shona Robison's move for a statutory independent patient body, to which people would be directed if they ask where to find out about something. The body would be separate from the system itself and would inform them in a way that they understand about advocacy, access to their medical records and all the other things they need to know, including the person to complain to.

It is appropriate that I am speaking at the tail-end of the debate. I am an incorrigible pet owner—I have had one dog and six cats in my adult lifetime. The only animal I purchased was the dog; the cats were either rescued or were literally left on the doorstep. Contrary to my image in here, I am a kind person and a responsible pet owner. As we know, unfortunately, many people are not. Sometimes I cannot bring myself to look at the pictures that are sent by the SSPCA and other animal welfare organisations. The cruelty shown to the animals concerned is just too horrific. I put down a marker for Mellerstain in the Borders, the first SSPCA welfare centre, which was opened in 1992. It is a small place, but it is part of support services for animal welfare in the Borders. It supports the work of inspectors, so if it goes, there will be no central place for them. It takes in animals that are subject to cruelty and that are unwanted in the area.

I would love to, but I have only three minutes. Can I get a bit of extra time, Presiding Officer?

I will take an intervention.

Yes, I know that there are issues to be considered in small centres. I was going to mention the fact that the manager at Mellerstain, a lovely lady called Mary Thomson, is not well just now and that means that the animals have had to be decanted elsewhere. That is  unfortunate, but there is a dependence on one person at the centre. It is dreadful that 4,500 animals have gone through the centre since 1992. The centre has a policy—as, I am thankful, have many—of not putting animals down just because they have nowhere to go. Some animals are difficult to rehome, because of the life that they have had. I will finish with a little story, which cheered me up immensely. It just goes to show the little touches that there are in small centres. I was told the story of a dog that nobody would take, because it suffered from severe separation anxiety—I think I know the feeling. The centre eventually found someone to take it who suffered from agoraphobia—it was a marriage of animal and person made in heaven. It is those wee touches that make the small welfare centres worth while. On a serious note, I support the mainstreaming of funding for the SSPCA. For goodness' sake let us educate people that an animal is not a thing; as they say, an animal is with you for the whole of its life.

Will the minister take a brief intervention?

rose  —

Will the minister take an intervention?

I would like to clarify this important point. I have in front of me a press release from Michael Moore, the Liberal Democrat MP for Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale. He is one of the vice-chairs of the all-party group on rail in the House of Commons. He showed great concern that the Strategic Rail Authority is not committed to funding the whole line. Michael Moore said: "We cannot let this happen as the full route is crucial to the future of the Borders." Michael Moore and Archy Kirkwood were most anxious about the fact that there is no commitment to the line on the part of the SRA. Will the minister confirm whether any money at all is coming from the Strategic Rail Authority to fund the total length of the Borders rail line?

Will the member give way?

We can hardly say the words "rural" and "trains" without talking about the Borders railway line again. It is almost three years to the day since the Parliament voted unanimously in Glasgow for reinstatement of the Borders railway line from Edinburgh to Carlisle, which I thought was excellent on the part of the Parliament. Some 20,000 people had signed a petition, which passed via the Public Petitions Committee to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, the Transport and the Environment Committee, the Rural Development Committee and the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee. As Jeremy Purvis rightly said, it is not just enterprise and tourism that are affected, as people in the Borders are socially excluded because they do not have a railway line on their terrain. I welcome the debate, which has allowed me to piggyback, as it were, and bring back to the chamber the issue of the Borders railway line. There are concerns. Yesterday, at a meeting of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on Borders rail, when we had a presentation by the non-Executive bills unit, it became apparent that a bill on the Borders railway will not be introduced before September. That is not the fault of any member, as the matter is for the bill's promoters. The bill will be kicked into touch until September. The group was also advised that it will be about June next year when—if members will forgive the pun—the proposed train hits the buffers. Then, the minister will have to come clean and tell us what funding the Scottish Executive will contribute. The Executive has been like a bagful of eels in dealing with the matter over the years. We still do not have a commitment on the £130 million. If hardly anything is provided by the so-called partners, we want to know that the Executive will fill the gap, whatever it is. I leave a space in my speech in the hope that the minister will fill it.

I am glad that Jamie Stone read the SNP's manifesto, which did not refer to specific lines. What we have said about the Borders railway line is that we will need the money from the Strategic Rail Authority, which Michael Moore, the MP for Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale, has acknowledged. He is most concerned that the SRA does not have the funding  and has not made a commitment to provide funding, which is why the line must go all the way from Edinburgh to Carlisle. [ Interruption. ] I will give Liberal Democrat members Michael Moore's press release.

I cannot take an intervention as I have little time.

The line is proposed to be single track. That is a serious issue, because having a single-track line with only passing loops pretty well excludes the possibility of freight, Mr Rumbles, or express lines, which are required.

Going cheapskate at this stage will mean expense later. I would like the minister to consider the additional cost of sophisticated signalling if the line is single track. The Parliament must be aware of a range of issues. Although three years have elapsed, the matter is not resolved. A single track is not good, and we do not have a funding pledge.

Your—

I heard the minister's comments about funding, so I should remind him of the Liberal Democrats' manifesto pledge to fund and build the Borders railway if it got into Government. In the light of his reply, do I take it that they will not fund it? After all, the partnership agreement—[ Interruption. ] Hurts, does it? The partnership agreement merely mentions "Supporting construction of the Borders ... Line". Does the word "supporting" mean "funding and constructing"?

I wish to make a statement that I make the affirmation under duress, believing as I do in the sovereignty of the Scottish people and the Scottish people alone.  The following member made a solemn affirmation:  Christine Grahame (South of Scotland) (SNP)  The following members took the oath:  Karen Gillon (Clydesdale) (Lab) Hugh Henry (Paisley South) (Lab)

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it has taken to promote the economic  well-being of the Scottish Borders. (S1O-6709)

As the minister is aware, the draft bill for the Borders rail link was lodged this week. Given that the Borders has suffered a net loss of 500 jobs since Labour came to power and that the modest projection is that even a partial reinstatement of the line to Galashiels would result in the Borders gaining 900 jobs, does he accept that the business case for the railway is staring him in the face? The railway should simply now be built. At a stroke, that would secure the economic well-being of the Scottish Borders.

I send my best wishes to all the retirees, in particular Dorothy-Grace Elder, whose passion and wit I will miss, and Dr Winnie Ewing, who was my political mentor for many years and remains  so. I also give my best wishes to Ian Jenkins, who has been my sweet and dear adversary—or perhaps I have been his. I will cheer him up with the news that, in a recent questionnaire, Borders schoolchildren thought that I was a member of the Liberal Democrats. I have obviously mentioned them once too often. Listening to the debate, I have been wondering who these older people are. Colin Campbell was quite right: it all depends on one's position on the timeline of life. I think that I am pretty young, although I am sure that lots of people think that I am no spring chicken and wonder why I am still here. Well, I intend to be here for a very long time. For the purposes of many organisations, older people are classed as those who are over 50—which takes in my sweet young man Alex Neil. More than 1 million people in Scotland are over 50—indeed, one can hear them casting their votes based on what we have or have not done for them. Age Concern Scotland's slogan is "Age counts". We should all watch the ballot boxes to find out how politicians have let down Scotland's elderly. We are not monotypical; we are all different and difficult and have all the usual virtues and vices. We are not simply older people. For example, my father is 88 on 1 April. He e-mails me his message list, but even that does not guarantee that I will come back with the right type of cabbage. He is truly an individual. As we grow older, we rely more on public transport. To quote a famous film, I do not think that we should rely on "the kindness of strangers". We need public transport and a reliable health service and have to know that, when all is done, there is proper nursing care. As far as transport is concerned, mobility is at the heart of keeping one's health, psychological well-being and friends. Free bus passes might be all right, but they work only in one's own area. Someone in Penicuik can go to Leadburn, which is a couple of miles up the road, but if they want to go to Peebles, they must pay £4.50.

I will take the minister's intervention in a minute. I hope that he is on his feet to announce that the Executive will make the scheme national, as we have suggested all along. We are behind Wales and a national scheme is needed.

The minister got there—better late than never. At least the scheme has got there; some buses do not get there. There is no point in having a free bus pass if no buses operate. In Galashiels in the Borders, Meigle Street loses all its buses on 31 March. Many elderly people who live up the hills will have nothing after that and they will knock on Scottish Borders Council's door. The bus services for those who live in Ladywood in Penicuik stop at 7.30 pm. People are supposed to be in bed with their knitted bedsocks on and are not supposed to be out gallivanting, doing internetting business and meeting friends. Many older people are frightened to go into hospital because they think that doing so will make their health worse. Their operations might be successful, but they might catch infections while in hospital. My colleague Kay Ullrich mentioned a situation that I saw when my mother was terminally ill in hospital two years ago. Food trays that are put in front of patients have cups with lids that older people cannot open and the trays are taken away before the food has been eaten. Not a nurse is in sight to help those people to eat their meals. Some kind of resolution has been reached to the nursing home crisis, but elderly people and their families have been put through trouble in thinking that elderly people would be decanted and shifted like bits of furniture. Growing old is not always a happy prospect, but I intend to grow old disgracefully. I will take a line from a poem that Ian Jenkins quoted: I shall "learn to spit".

I also intend to hone my skill at drinking malt while gardening. There is fun at 50—I know, I have been there; there is sex at 60—I hope so, I am going there; there is sin at 70, and I am looking forward to it; and at 80 and 90, there is upholstery. If members want to know the answer to that conundrum, they should read a previous speech of mine.

I was waiting for the joke.

This issue has been raised with me by a farmer with 130 ewes who says that, during the coming months, he anticipates a 10 per cent loss of ewes as well as some lambs. As the minister knows, in April that farmer will be left with no option, as he will not be able to bury them. I support the cross-party calls for as much consultation as possible, as soon as possible, so that the issue can be resolved before the end of April, when that farmer will no longer be allowed to bury dead animals on his land.

To ask the Scottish Executive what commitment it has made to finance the proposed Borders railway. (S1O-6610)

That is a rather more heartening answer. As the minister will be aware, £150 million has been committed to the Glasgow airport link, £500 million to the Edinburgh airport link and £375 million to a tramline in Edinburgh. [ Applause. ] They are not clapping in the Borders. Only £2 million has been committed to the railway line that, three years ago, the Parliament debated and voted unanimously to restore. Subject to what he said previously, can he give a further commitment that the proposed Borders line will be paid for, notwithstanding a business case, which he has not demanded from the projects to which I referred?

Is the minister aware that ward 1 of Belhaven hospital, Dunbar, is currently being operated as a nursing home? Is that where some of the 53 residents of Cockenzie House are to be placed if their nursing home closes? If not, where else are those 53 people to go? Their families and friends are desperate to know.

Three mentions!

Rather than dealing in rhetoric, I want to do a reality check and to mark a report card on the Lib-Lab coalition, which will apply to their achievements in that Liberal fiefdom, the Scottish Borders. In the Scottish Borders, 1999 began well, with  the loss of 1,200 jobs and the closure of Viasystems. The jobs were transferred to north Tyneside. The plant has now closed and the £12 million that the Department of Trade and Industry gave to Viasystems will never be recovered. The first instalment payment is due in 2007, but few believe that the money will ever be seen. In the same year, there was a fig-leaf announcement about a call centre in the Scottish Borders. After first being announced by the late Donald Dewar, it was reannounced by Wendy Alexander and subsequent enterprise ministers. It was claimed that it would create 250 jobs in the Scottish Borders, but it has not done that. To date, only 100 jobs have been created there. The lethal decommissioning proposals for the fishing fleet and the possibility of displacement to prawn fishing represent a huge threat to about 300 jobs in Eyemouth. Over the past seven years, the net loss of jobs in the Scottish Borders has been 500. That does not take into account the transfer of jobs from manufacturing to service industries, which reduces the income. The average weekly wage in a Scottish Borders household is £50 per week less than it is in the rest of Scotland, and the population is aging—in the next 10 years, 50 per cent of those in work will retire. Transport is at the core of economic development. There has been practically no investment in roads in the Scottish Borders—the A68, the A7 and the A702 have been untouched. Only the A1 is having part of the road dualled, but that is because the relevant part is in a Labour constituency and Labour looks after its own. In 2002, the A6 closed for four days, because of a snowfall. In 2003, the A72—the main road from Gala and Peebles to Glasgow—has closed for two weeks, because of a landslip. The A6 and the A72 are main Borders roads. Trains do not stop in the Borders. There is an overwhelming case for the Waverley line, as an economic necessity, as an investment in the community and as a development that would help social inclusion. The minister has put only £2 million into the Borders railway line, to promote the private bill. There is no commitment to funding the railway line. The private bill will be introduced during March, just in time for dissolution, and there will be no need to attach a financial memorandum to it. It is interesting that it is proposed that there will be four stops in Midlothian and just one in the Borders. Midlothian is a Labour seat. There are always the buses. The Tories promoted good old deregulation and the Liberals and Labour have endorsed it. With courtesy breakdowns, it can take two hours to travel from Peebles to Edinburgh on buses that are often  between 15 and 20 years old—so much for public transport. Rather than being driven to use public transport, the Borders public are being driven to get back into their cars to pay the imminent congestion charges in Edinburgh. Free travel for the elderly is not much use if there is no bus service. In Gala, the number 6 is being taken off. As its route goes up a steep incline, it is usually full of elderly people. From March 31, there will be no bus service. At Ladywood in Penicuik, where there is a big elderly population, there is no bus service in the evening or on a Sunday. Elderly people have bus passes, but there ain't no buses. That saves everyone money. Free personal care for the elderly is being rationed. There are huge delays in the central heating programme and a faulty service. On nursing care, people are losing nursing home places because they are not being funded. Local authorities give their homes £70 per week more for residential care than they pay to private nursing homes. Thirty thousand Scottish pensioners are in poverty. The Executive has failed the Borders and it has failed the elderly, so I mark "failed" on its report card.

What is Mike Rumbles's response to Tony Blair's claim that the fees have not been lost, but are postponed?

The deputy minister may be aware that one aspect of "The Right Medicine", which was the department's review of the care strategy of the pharmaceutical services, was about improving community pharmacy services. Is the deputy minister aware that community pharmacists, such as the 25 throughout the Scottish Borders, provide invaluable local knowledge and services? For instance, at Duns and Newtown St Boswells, pharmacists have recently extended their premises to include the privacy of a consulting room. Will the deputy minister confirm that the OFT proposals fly in the face of the minister's own strategy, and that they will be resisted accordingly?

The Scottish Parliament information centre's overview of the bill states: "The Bill represents an important piece of property law reform and is arguably of greater practical significance than the Feudal Act that preceded it." That is certainly true. The next sentence goes on to say: "Yet it is also a complicated and technical Bill that can appear daunting for the layperson to tackle." How very true. The jury is out on whether it is more daunting than the Leasehold Casualties (Scotland) Act 2001, but I thank the expert advisers and witnesses who came before the committee and led us through the legal maze. That is important when there is such confusion about what burdens exist, what they mean and who can enforce them. When I get lost, I think of my own extant title deeds, which prohibit me from keeping pigs, sheep and other farm animals, but allow me to bleach linen. I have found the latter quite useful. I think that those title conditions were breached during the war, when somebody kept hens and ducks for food. Unfortunately, we did not know who could take me to court if I breached the conditions and kept a few pigs at 6 Baronscourt Road; however, I found out that it was the Earl of Willowbrae. I do not know whether he still exists, but he is on my title deeds. To be serious, the previous situation meant that no one knew who could enforce burdens against whom. The Title Conditions (Scotland) Bill was therefore essential when we got rid of feudal superiority; people know where they are now. They know what a burden is and the bill tells them who can enforce a title condition and what rights they have. It represents a modernising of the Scottish legal system, in keeping with the fact that we now have planning regulations to prevent people like me from setting up little farms. However, the issue of sheltered accommodation is important and has been highlighted by several members. I am delighted that the minister will monitor what happens with regard to title that is still retained by developers. That is a good example in support of the argument for having post-legislative scrutiny by the Justice Committees. If we can envisage a problem like that, we should be able to examine whether an act is doing what it was intended to do when it has been running for some time.

I am all ears.

I heard what the minister said about physical activity. Does she agree that the provision throughout Scotland of swimming as part of the curriculum in primary schools would be an enormous step towards healthy living? If so, can she explain why it has taken nearly two years to complete the audit of swimming provision that was first announced by her colleague, Nicol Stephen, in May 2001?

Members have already mentioned that the two pathfinder areas for broadband are the Highlands and Islands and the south of Scotland. However, I understand that there has to be a 50 per cent trigger for commercial companies to bring in broadband. Such a target cannot always be met, particularly in certain parts of the Scottish Borders. In such rural areas, commercial forces might not deliver in that respect. However, broadband is as much a part of the commercial infrastructure as are good roads or railway links. That fact was reflected at a meeting that several members had this week in Eyemouth with the Federation of Small Businesses. As a result, I support Kenny MacAskill in his attempt to empower ministers in this regard because that would assist economic development where there is new build or, more important, where there are conversions. For example, such a conversion was carried out at the Ettrick Riverside business centre, which is struggling to deal with e-commerce. The minister should also note that we are talking about a discretionary power rather than a mandatory power to make building regulations. On that basis and on the basis of Mr MacAskill's comments, I ask the minister to reconsider his attitude to amendment 1.

That last speech rather reminds me of the phrase: "full of sound and fury, Signifying nothing." I will quote from Franz Fischler's open letter to the fishing industry. He said to the fishermen: "We are not forcing anyone to scrap their boats or to give up fishing. We are making an offer to those fishermen who can no longer make a reasonable living from fishing to leave the industry, in dignity and with appropriate ... support." He went on to say: "I am convinced that it makes no sense to spend money with one hand for scrapping vessels and with the other to finance new ones." Well, well. He finishes the letter by saying "Best regards". That man had no regard for the fishing industry. I have some other quotes. As Margaret Ewing said, communities are being destroyed. In Eyemouth, two years ago, £5 million was spent on the harbour and an ice plant. A recent report from  the Liberal Democrat-led Scottish Borders Council said that, on that basis, between 500 and 600 jobs are being threatened by the recent draconian proposals that are being proposed as part of the CFP. I will quote what fishermen and the people working there said in an article in the Daily Mail on Saturday 25 January. Robert Mitchell, boat welder, said: "These latest cuts are bound to affect boat building, and what really gets to me is the way we let all the foreign trawlers into our waters. My wife packs prawns and she makes more money than I do but, of course, her job will be affected too." Robbie Walker, fish auctioneer, said: "My hair is going to turn grey very quickly this year, because it's make or break now." Robin Aitchison, ice plant boss, said: "The ice factory is owned by a co-op of fishermen and was built about the same time as the new harbour two years ago. The cuts are going to devastate the whole thing. The boats will keep taking ice as long as they go to sea but will it be worth while to keep this going. I was a deep-sea fisherman for 12 years. It runs right through my life."

No. I have only three minutes. Graham Dench, charity worker, said: "Scots fishermen tend to be different from English; they have a lot of pride here and a determination to sort their own problems out. Men have been going to sea for seven days and coming home to find they've lost money and are further in debt." The quotations go on and on. Johnny Johnston, harbour master, said: "The harbour is the hub of the community and if nothing's happening there, nothing's happening in the town." We are talking about the destruction of Scottish communities. Elliot Morley suggested yesterday in the Rural Development Committee that we should treat the situation as just another major industry closure. It is that, but it is more; it is a fatal blow to our sea-coast communities and their way of life. The Executive does not understand that.

To ask the Scottish Executive what statutory measures it has introduced to reduce litter pollution. (S1O-6355)

I refer the minister to motion S1M-3783, which is in my name, on litter-louts. The motion was inspired by the pupils of Chirnside Primary School in Duns, who want something to be done about the broken glass, pizza boxes, polythene bags and general detritus that pollutes our towns, countryside and seashore. Will he tell those pupils why Scotland is in a bigger mess since Labour and the Liberals took office four years ago?

The issue is, of course, all about breaking the cycle of dependency that keeps the dealers in business. I commend the work of the drugs court in Glasgow, which the Justice 1 Committee recently visited—the idea for the court was pioneered by the Scottish National Party. Why has such provision not been extended to alcohol abuse, which is a far greater catalyst for crime in the community?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with Scottish Borders Council regarding any application by the council under the Bellwin scheme and any other sources of funding for repairs to the A72. (S1O-6289)

Is the minister aware that the A72 is the main road across the central  Borders to Glasgow and that it was completely closed for two and half weeks because of a landslide? It now operates on a single lane with traffic lights and it is not projected to open until the end of the month—that is four weeks for repairs to a main road. Given his recent announcement of millions for central Scotland for the reopening of the Bathgate line and for roads, what commitment will he give, if any, on capital expenditure for roads or rail in the Borders, or does he get the support of his Liberal Democrat colleagues there gratis?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had, or is currently having, with the Borders railways forum. (S1O-6230)

I know of that. Does the minister care to agree with recent media comments and with his predecessor, Sarah Boyack? Sarah Boyack said in a debate in June 2000 on the reinstatement of the Borders railway line: "I accept without reservation that improving the transport links between the Borders and the rest of the country is a prerequisite to the area's economic regeneration".— [ Official Report , 1 June 2000; Vol 6, c 1218.]  Given that the forum proposes only four stops in Midlothian and one stop in the Borders with another for turnaround, will the minister confirm that he will ensure that the Borders railway line remains just that and does not end—as rumours would have it—at Gorebridge?

Members will not be surprised to hear that I intend to return to the issue of the Borders railway line. It is extremely disappointing—not for me, but for the many people who signed the petition for reinstatement of a Borders rail line and for the many businesses in the Borders who require it as a matter of extreme economic necessity—that paragraph 80 of the report, on key priorities, does not mention the Borders railway line. The Executive response to the report states that a central Borders rail link—we are talking about a line to Tweedbank at the most—is "likely to become operational towards the end of the decade." That is far too long to wait to put an economic artery back in place. I refer back to the debate that took place on the Borders railway line nearly three years ago. Our heart and soul is with the reinstatement of the line, but the money has not been invested and there is a lack of vision. This is not just a transport issue, but an economic issue, as is so often the case with transport. In the debate three years ago, Sarah Boyack said: "I accept without reservation that improving the transport links between the Borders and the rest of the country is a prerequisite to the area's economic regeneration and for its social and environmental well-being."— [ Official Report , 1 June 2000; Vol 6, c 1218.]  Why is the railway line not a priority? If there is one priority for all the hundreds of thousands of people who live in the Borders, it is that line.

I am coming to that issue. It is a great sadness that the Executive is leaving it to three local authorities to grub around to raise funds for an essential economic link. The investment should be made by the Strategic Rail Authority. I support what Kenny MacAskill said about its being imperative, as paragraph 119 of the report suggests, "that the major driver in improvements across Scotland should be the Scottish Executive working in conjunction with the SRA". I do not see that push happening. Paragraph 149 of the report states:  "The Scottish Executive should act to ensure Scottish interests are fully represented by the Strategic Rail Authority (SRA)." I do not think that that is happening. It is not good enough to expect three local authorities to put together £170 million to lay down a railway that should be laid down from UK funds, to which all taxpayers in Scotland contribute. My second point relates to freight. I am glad that Iain Smith raised that key issue. Sometimes I agree with the member—although he is telling me not to. For the southern half of the Borders rail line, freight would be the way into Strategic Rail Authority funds. In the debate that took place way back in June 2000—

I apologise to the member, but I must continue. I have received a letter from Scottish Enterprise Borders that refers to a LAMA. I found out that that is not an animal, but a local area modelling assessment. The timber transport forum received a request from the Borders timber transport group for a local area modelling assessment to be carried out. The group is examining the implications of taking timber from the Kielder forest, which is the largest forest in the UK, along trembling little Borders roads to trembling little Borders villages and putting it on to a railway line. It will report in March and I hope that the Transport and the Environment Committee is listening to this, because I am referring to a way of getting to the honey pot of the funds. I come to my last point in the dying seconds of my time. Way back in 1999, the Scottish Executive's central research unit said of the Borders: "The most pressing issue for the Council is the economic imperative against a background of large-scale job losses, with remaining jobs largely in depressed sectors with declining incomes." The plus ça change is that the situation is getting worse. The railway line is an imperative and it should be top of the Executive's priorities.

I refer the minister to a constituency case, in which worried parents have found that their 15-year-old son, whom the children's panel placed in a local residential unit, regularly absconds and reunites with his peers, who are integral to his drink and drugs problem. The young man thereby causes havoc to himself, his family and the community. All that happens because—according to the panel decision, which I will quote from—the hearing felt that a lack of resources made the unit "the only available option", despite the disadvantages of the proximity of this young man to his friends. What is the minister doing to address that situation, which is replicated daily throughout Scotland and affects people like that young man? For want of properly resourced and suitable accommodation, that young man may well, given his current behaviour—the latest example of which took place last night—graduate to appear in the criminal courts.

To which of the committee's reports was the minister referring when he mentioned the timetable for responding? Did he mean the Justice 1 Committee's report on the regulation of the legal profession or our report on the bill?

As every politician knows that no one reads their leaflets, Donald Gorrie's remarks about pamphlets were very apt. I declare an interest as a  member of the Law Society of Scotland and mention that I have been a non-practising solicitor since I entered the Parliament. I should say in passing that pretty well every reasonable solicitor I know has even less time than the general public for bad and corrupt solicitors, who bring the profession into disrepute in the same way that bad and corrupt people bring disrepute to the plumbing and brickie trades, to farming and so on. None of us feels differently about that. I speak as convener of the Justice 1 Committee and will refer both to the committee's report on the bill and to our legal profession inquiry, which should address some of the questions that Helen Eadie asked. After all, the larger issues in question centre on the disaffection of people who have been treated in a certain way by the legal profession's complaints procedure, or who have a certain perception of that procedure. I include in that the Faculty of Advocates, because I see some members who are former advocates. The Justice 1 Committee's report on the bill does not usurp or pre-empt the committee's very full report on the legal profession. Although our inquiry concerned regulation of the legal profession, it also focused on the complaints procedure. The larger issue, which was the one that the public was understandably most concerned about, was too great for the committee to address at one step. However, committee members and I believe that our inquiry prompted the bill and that it oiled the wheels of this enabling change within what one might call the constitution of the Law Society's functions. I should point out that the Justice 1 Committee had no hand in the bill or in the procedures that it proposes. Those who believe that there is a conspiracy in that respect might wonder why the bill was referred to the Justice 1 Committee—after all, its convener is a former solicitor. I declare that I had nothing to do with the bill. It is a member's bill, and the procedures for such bills and their allocation are matters for Parliament. The committee just did the same job with this bill as it does with any other bill that comes before it. Indeed, I sometimes think that committee members who were previously in the legal profession bend over backwards to attack our former colleagues and to ensure that we are seen to do justice. Perhaps I defend myself too rigorously in that respect. As a result, I will abandon that line of argument to say that I am grateful to David McLetchie for picking up and addressing some of our recommendations, for example that it should be stipulated that 50 per cent of the membership of complaints committees be lay representatives and that it should be ensured that honorariums are  paid to lay members, among other matters. It is also terribly important to point out that the bill's enabling measures will speed up the complaints procedure. Perhaps Mr McLetchie will assist me, but I understand that the introduction of the procedures will knock some six to eight weeks off the time that it takes to proceed with a complaint. That must be a good thing, because many substantive complaints are directed at that matter. Some people think that the Justice 1 Committee can act as a court of final appeal in individual cases, which it cannot. However, the committee is aware—because of cases that have been raised with it—that the time that it takes to proceed with a complaint is one of the general problems that has arisen. That said, we want certain other matters to be addressed in due course. Brian Fitzpatrick quite rightly drew, as I do, attention to the implementation plan. If the full plan cannot be submitted to the Justice 1 Committee before stage 2, the committee would at the very least wish to see the firm principles of the plan at that point and see the full plan itself before stage 3. That is essential, because the plan will deal with many important issues. As far as lay membership of the council is concerned, I think that we should consider representatives from the Scottish Consumer Council, Citizens Advice Scotland and so on. Such people understand what is happening at grass-roots level and are articulate about matters, so they could represent clients who are ordinary people on the complaints committees. However, that will be a matter for the Law Society. As I said, the report on our inquiry into the regulation of the legal profession deals with the complaints procedure and in fact recommends a single gateway for complaints. After all, a complaint is a complaint because ordinary people say so. People do not understand the difference between professional misconduct and inadequate professional service. As a result, those matters should be simplified. Furthermore, we want the role of the legal ombudsperson—who, as Roseanna Cunningham pointed out, is currently a woman—to be strengthened to ensure that they can consider the substance of complaints as well as the complaints procedure itself. He or she should also be able to nip in and out of cases if he or she feels that they are not being adequately dealt with. However, that issue will be our legacy to the next Parliament's Justice 1 Committee, who will no doubt proceed with it. The bill is a first stage in that process and is welcomed by the committee.

When will the implementation plan be published?

On difficulties relating to information, I am concerned by an answer to a parliamentary question that Irene Oldfather lodged. She asked about the percentage of drivers who had been tested who had failed the voluntary physical co-ordination test. As usual, she was told that "The information requested is not held centrally" —which it ought to be—but I am concerned that she was also told that "the level and manner of testing is an operational matter for Chief Constables."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 19 September 2001; p 86.]  Does that mean that there is not a standard manner of testing? If the minister cannot answer that today, perhaps he could give me an answer at some point. It concerns me that we are not even looking at similar data.

I do not wish to erode Nora Radcliffe's time. I take the point that she makes about legal drugs, but the parliamentary answer to which I referred indicated that there had been no change in the percentage of people who were killed in road accidents and who were found to have medicinal drugs in their system—the figure was 6 per cent. In contrast, the figure for illegal drugs had increased six-fold, so the focus is still on illegal drugs.

Tonight's debate is indeed valuable, because our society overlooks the fact that drugs are as important—and perhaps gaining in importance—as alcohol in terms of their effects on people's driving. Attitudes towards drinking and driving have completely changed and it is time that we addressed taking drugs and driving. The legal position is stated under section 4 of the Road Traffic Act 1988: "A person who, when driving or attempting to drive a motor vehicle on a road or other public place, is unfit to drive through drink or drugs is guilty of an offence." There is no difference between drink and drugs in that context. The penalties are the same. "At the very least you will be disqualified from driving for a year and be heavily fined, with the option of imprisonment. If you cause death by careless driving while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, you can spend up to ten years in prison and have to pay an unlimited fine." I wonder how many people are aware that that is the position with drugs, even though they might well be aware of the legal position with regard to drink-driving. I am grateful to Irene Oldfather for obtaining figures on the incidence of drug-driving. Figures published by the UK in 2001 indicated that "18% of people killed in road accidents had used illegal drugs." Of course, often one should not make a distinction between illegal and legal drugs that people did not understand would impair their judgment. "This represented a six-fold increase in the incidence of such drugs since a similar survey in the mid-1980s. There was no change in the incidence of medicinal drugs (6%) since the previous survey." Obviously, one cannot say that it is therefore the case that people were killed because they had drugs in their system, but the statistic cannot be ignored. Other statistics obtained by Irene Oldfather showed that "nearly 10% of drivers aged 17 to 39 have driven under the influence of illegal drugs; cannabis is the most common drug to have been used by drug drivers; drug driving is more prevalent among 20- to 24-year-old age group, and  driving after recreational drug use is widespread among people attending night-clubs and dance venues."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 3 December 2002; p 2433.]  Some 69 per cent of one sample of people said that they had taken cannabis during the year; of that figure, 85 per cent had driven afterwards. The BMA website is extremely useful and it was invaluable that Michael Matheson should have highlighted it. Keith Raffan mentioned hard drugs, but the BMA website says: "Cannabis can impair co-ordination, visual perception, tracking and vigilance."

I am coming to that valid point. I am just drawing attention to the fact that young people do not seem to be aware of that and think that cannabis is perfectly okay because it is not a hard drug. I will take a description of driving from the BMA's website. "Driving is a complex task where the driver continuously receives information, analyses it and reacts. Substances that have an influence on brain function or on mental processes involved in driving will clearly affect driving performance." That fact cannot be avoided. On the difficulties in detecting drugs in someone's system, I refer members to the website of the International Council on Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic Safety. The IACDTS is currently conducting a study of clinical signs of impairment in relation to drugs. It is also trying to find out how drugs can be detected in the system so that a link can be more clearly established. I say that we do not need to do that. We need to say to young people who are out clubbing—not with Bill Aitken, because he leads a quiet life in his slippers—and who take cannabis and perhaps alcohol, as I have seen them do in Gala, then come out of the club and get into their cars, that they might well have impaired their driving ability and one day that might cost them their life.

I am still a bit mystified by the nine days and 15 days. My question is straightforward and simple. On 1 February this year, if there is no additional decommissioning in the Scottish fleet, how many days at sea are guaranteed?

Stuart Graham, Robert Scott, Gordon Matthews, John Gibson, Colin Easton and Jacqui Renton—that is a roll call of the Gala firefighters picket line. Doreen Tait, Dave Hardy, Dick Polson, James Thomson and Roy Barrie—that is a roll call of the Hawick picket line. As Bill Butler said, those decent and committed people are standing on picket lines on cold December days to campaign for a decent wage for a professional life-saving job; they are not to be demonised, as much of the press has done. Other members have addressed that point. Firefighters have modernised year on year. A firefighting appliance now carries radiation equipment, modern hydraulic equipment, modern pneumatic lifting equipment, oxy-acetylene cutting equipment, an emergency speedboat and line rescue equipment.

I will, if time will allow it.

I am sorry, Helen. I was present at an incident at Hawick in which a woman had thrown herself from a bridge. Firefighters lifted her from a freezing river using some of the modern equipment to which I referred. Firefighters have modernised. Firefighters also undertake fire prevention work in schools and in nurseries, telling children about the problems and dangers of fire. However, talk of modernisation is a red herring. It is very wrong to treat those valuable men and women as outcasts and it is wrong to demonise them. Their strike has been dignified, although it should never have happened in the first place. As Dennis Canavan rightly said, it has been 30 years since firefighters were driven to take strike action. It would be a disaster to cut night services in rural areas because of the size of the areas that must be covered. If that was to happen, firefighters could not get to the scenes of fires on time. Of course we should support them and of course they should have a decent living wage, but that has to be dealt with through negotiating, not by driving them back on to the picket line.

I support what the minister said about credit unions, but I would like him to address the fact that, in some ways, prevention is better than cure. Does he think that there is merit in his colleague the Minister for Education and Young People's department educating children at primary school about managing their money?

I, too, congratulate Donald Gorrie. Alex Neil and I have launched a cross-party group that will attempt to deal with reserved issues such as consumer credit. It will address where we pick up the tab for the impact of debt on society. I also refer to my humble bah humbug motion, which is a serious motion concerned with the commercial pressures that are put on parents at this time of the year. It is no coincidence that the problems for people who have debt on credit cards  land on their doormats in February, which is also a time when a high number of people seek a divorce. The commercial pressures for people to get everything that is on television, no matter what their income, are severe. That is something that must be addressed.

No. I do not have an other half. I have three cats. The Bank of England today raised a serious issue about people borrowing against the equity in their house, if they have any. That is a serious issue. The property market is highly inflated, especially in Edinburgh, and all that needs to happen is for the market to deflate, or for a couple to split, for the whole house of cards to come tumbling down, credit cards being the cards in question. Let me give an example that I gave when we launched the cross-party group. I had a client who was on the point of divorce. The solicitor said, "Right, we must see what the assets are and what the liabilities are, so that we can make an equitable division between yourself and your spouse." I asked her, "Have you any debts?" No, she did not have any debts. I said, "Wait a minute. Do you have a mortgage?" Yes, she had a mortgage, so we put that on the debit side. "What else do you have?" I asked. "I've no debts," she replied. I said, "Do you have credit cards?" Yes, she had loads of credit cards but, she said, "I'm paying them all as I go." In her head, she did not have any debts, because she was managing to pay them every month. However, we added up the amount due at any time on the credit cards, and so liable for demand, and it came to a startling £30,000. Those were very ordinary people, but, by juggling along, they had just managed to keep going while both of them were working. Sometimes all it takes is a divorce, somebody losing their job or sickness, and that is it. It all falls down on them. My client astonished me even further when she returned to the office and said to me, "Well, it's all right, Ms Grahame. It's all sorted out. I've taken a consolidated loan." In her mind, because somebody had offered to purchase the debts and put them into one big debt, and because she was paying less per month, she thought that everything was all right. She was actually paying even more. On television there is now an increase in advertisements with suave, civilised voices giving examples of people who are paying less and saying, "If you've got debts, bring them to us. We'll take the load off your back and we will manage it." That is basically another horrific trap for the poor.  I would like to mention a few other points that the CAB at Peebles raised with me, some of which are very important. They relate to front-line stuff, which we all know about. I used to work as a solicitor giving advice in a CAB. The Peebles record for multiple card debt was held by one client—an ordinary person—who held seven cards. No doubt there were balances on every single one, and some were from the same bank. The CAB sees young people who have absolutely no idea about how to budget or who, like my client, have no idea what debt actually means. The CABx want budgeting to be introduced in the education process. Way back in the dark days—almost before gas—when I was at school, we did exercises in household budgeting. We would work out problems such as, "If you have £20 per week coming in, what would you need for food and for rent?" We had to do that as a serious exercise. I do not know whether today's youngsters have those lessons or understand the problems that they can get themselves into. The CAB figures also show that, in the Border region, there are debts totalling £2.5 million for 258 live cases. The Peebles CAB alone sees one or two new cases every week. There will be lots of others who do not turn up at the CAB but who turn up at the solicitor's door saying, "What can I do? The sheriff officers are at the door." At that stage, CAB staff and solicitors are trying to firefight for them. There are huge issues surrounding debt. It is very important that—until such time as we are independent—the two Parliaments work together. We cannot always deal with the debris and disaster in people's lives, while having no control over the piranhas who provide dear credit to the very people who cannot afford to service it.

You could set fire to your credit cards.

I am pleased to hear that. Does the member agree that there could be displacement in places such as Eyemouth, which is also dependent on the nephrops fishery? I am glad that the member acknowledges the dangers of displacement and of driving prices down. We should emphasise that collectively to the minister.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. You are normally very fair at First Minister's questions. Can I ask why no Scottish National Party members were called to ask supplementary questions?

Before I ask my question, I declare an interest as a patron of the Borders-based charity, Scottish HART, which stands for Scottish Heart at Risk Testing. To ask the Scottish Executive what public facilities, other than hospital buildings, are required under statute to provide defibrillators. (S1O-6086)

I thank the deputy minister for that answer. In his absence, I also thank the Minister for Health and Community Care for the meetings that he has had with Mrs Wilma Gunn in relation to Scottish HART. I am worried that the minister is not concerned that defibrillators are not provided in places such as the Edinburgh royal commonwealth pool and Waverley station. Will he investigate that situation and will he support Scottish HART and other charities that seek to provide defibrillators in places to which many members of the public have access.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I have made my position clear, and I wish Ms Baillie to withdraw those remarks. I assure the chamber that at no time have I spoken to the press or have they spoken to me on this issue.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Will the member give way?

Brian Fitzpatrick's misguided and spiteful remarks are worthy of no more response than that which I have just given them. I have been in touch with no members of the press; no members of the press have been in touch with me. I assure members that the decision was watertight. However, as my colleague, Duncan Hamilton, said, it is for the Parliament to decide who should be the Scottish information commissioner. That is why the decision is being brought back to the Parliament. It is with great regret that I find myself speaking against the appointment of Kevin Dunion as Scotland's first information commissioner. I like Mr Dunion; he is affable and enthusiastic. However, he is not the man for the job. I had the benefit of convening the Justice 1 Committee, which heard all the evidence on the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill and on the role of the Scottish information commissioner. I took part in all the debates. It is against that  background, and against the background of reading the CVs and hearing all the interviews, that I have come to the view that he is not the best man for the job.

Presiding Officer, I assure you that I am being very circumspect and know that this is a delicate area—

This is filibustering.

It should be made clear that, after that second interview, there was no confirmation of the candidate; the meeting simply broke up and did not come to a conclusion. I refer back to the stage 1 debate on the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill. During that debate, the Minister for Justice made an important point about the role of the Scottish information commissioner. He said: "The bill provides that the commissioner be appointed by the Queen, on the nomination not of ministers, but of the Parliament." That is why we are debating the issue. He then went on to say that it was the "third, and perhaps the most important, feature of the bill ... that the commissioner should be fully independent."— [ Official Report , 17 January 2002; c 5458.]  The key to the success of the job is not simply its independence but the perceived—I emphasise the word perceived—independence of the commissioner. If we add to that track record of perceived independence the authority of recognised and tested independence of spirit, we would have the ideal candidate. In my view, the interview panel had that candidate before it and he narrowly lost out to Mr Dunion. As I have said, the panel did not endorse the decision.

I like Mr Dunion. He has excellent presentation qualities and would be a good manager.

I am concluding, Presiding Officer. It is obvious that Scotland's first information commissioner must command the confidence of Scotland's public and the entire chamber. He or she must have that confidence from the moment that the appointment is confirmed. I do not think that I can support the nomination. I put these serious comments, which are not made on a party-political basis—[ Interruption. ] How dare members. I heard all the evidence on the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill in committee. I heard the candidates. I was asked to put my honest opinion to the chamber, and I am doing that. I will not be put down for that. I ask members to consider seriously the reservations that have been expressed by members of the panel. The issue is not hostility to one candidate; we have serious reservations that the wrong appointment is being made. I ask members to weigh up those reservations and to vote freely and independently—for once—on this issue.

To ask the Scottish Executive what concerns it has in respect of the delivery of general dental services in the Scottish Borders. (S1O-6029)

I refer the minister to a report of 24 September to the Borders NHS Board executive team. The report, which postdates the allocation of the money to which the minister referred, makes it clear that it is becoming more difficult to access general dental services in the Borders. I refer the minister to the case of a woman in Kelso, who after scouring the Borders for NHS treatment was forced to go to England as a private patient, because no care was available in the Borders. If the minister agrees that that is a disgrace, what does she intend to do about it?

If the Executive had the choice and it wants to do as much as it can, should not we be going for the third option? That would allow automatic implementation of requests from foreign investigators to monitor bank accounts.

Of course, I share fully Pauline McNeill's sentiments about tackling international crime. The Scottish National Party supports measures to tackle international crime, which knows no boundaries. The problem with the Sewel motion is that Scotland will not have the opportunity to scrutinise the Crime (International Co-operation) Bill. My colleague Michael Matheson told members that the Minister for Justice has attended seven out of 184 meetings on justice matters in Europe. We do not have the opportunity to scrutinise the proposals, because we are not represented directly at the Council of Ministers. The Minister for Justice cannot give the distinctive Scottish input on criminal matters, because an English minister goes to the Council. That is a huge problem, particularly for criminal law in Scotland. I say to Pauline McNeill that the Executive says: "the purpose of this Bill is to implement binding international obligations. There would therefore be little or no scope for the Scottish Parliament to legislate in a way which was significantly different to the provisions" in the bill. What the Executive says is not the case. As my colleague Michael Matheson said, framework decisions are binding on member states as to the results to be achieved, but leave the form and method of implementation to states. I will develop briefly Michael Matheson's argument. The Home Office has issued a document on the protocol that requires European Union member  states to locate and provide details of all bank accounts and transactions of a person who is the subject of a serious crime investigation and to monitor the activity of any account that they hold. The Home Office suggests three options for implementing the protocol. The first option is to rely on existing legislation, which would not allow the protocol to be ratified. The UK would be under no obligation to help foreign investigators and they would not have to help the UK. The second option is to legislate in accordance with a minimalist interpretation of the protocol and to allow judges discretion as to whether to grant a warrant for monitoring bank accounts. The third option is to require automatic implementation of requests from foreign investigators to monitor bank accounts. The Home Office suggests choosing the second, discretionary, option, because it would have lower compliance costs for banks than the third option, as fewer warrants would be granted. Unlike the first option, the second option would allow the protocol to be ratified, so the UK would have reciprocal investigation from other authorities. The Home Office says that, as far as possible, the UK should go for the low-cost option for reciprocal investigation by other countries. The choice about implementing the protocol is plainly substantial and moral and falls within devolved areas. Given the chance to examine the proposals, Scotland might want to be more helpful to our European partners than the Home Office intends to be and to go for automatic implementation of requests. By not having input, we have surrendered that moral choice and given our power to England, which has chosen the lesser option. That is why we oppose the Sewel motion. Of course we support international co-operation on criminal matters, but Scotland had the choice to do even more than England appears to be doing.

The Conservatives have only one MP in Scotland.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Well, here we are again. We missed a birthday last week: it was happy 40 th birthday to Sewel motions. I have a list of Sewel motions from the Scottish Parliament information centre website; it comprises sheets and sheets. What Donald Dewar thought would be a trickle has become a veritable flood. The SPICe website says that a Sewel convention is "A colloquial term sometimes used". Well, it is used very frequently in this chamber. There are problems with Sewel motions. First, I will tackle the jurisdictional and constitutional issues that arise. One issue arose from a question that I asked ministers about which court would deal with the appeal process. I was told that it would be the Court of Appeal. If that court is the final court of appeal for anything, that will be in breach of the treaty of union, because the final court of appeal in Scotland on criminal matters is the High Court, sitting as the court of appeal. That is the first issue that arises from the Criminal Justice Bill. The unionists say that the bill does not impact on Scots law, but it goes to the heart of the treaty of union. I would like some answers.  Secondly, on reporting restrictions, it seems that the law of the—I always forget the English word for it.

Brian Fitzpatrick can call it that if he likes; my mum was English, and she was not my enemy. The bill encroaches on the Scots law of the interdict by the back door. At the moment, injunctions—that is the word—in England do not apply to Scotland. That has been a problem for English jurisdiction in relation to Scottish newspapers based in Scotland. By extending the law to Scotland, the bill will encroach on the interdict procedure in Scotland. That is another jurisdictional issue.

No, I have no time for Mr Fitzpatrick at any time. I do not want to hear from him. We have problems with the scrutiny of the Criminal Justice Bill. I have hardly had an opportunity to look at the bill, because it has been rushed to this Parliament. It is being put through in England in a rush. There is no chance to look at it. Legislation in Scotland goes to a committee; it has a stage 1 procedure, a stage 2 procedure and a stage 3 procedure. There is also the opportunity to take written and oral evidence. What evidence have we had in this chamber about how our courts feel about the Criminal Justice Bill, how our sheriffs feel about it and how the Faculty of Advocates feels about it? We do not know how they feel. There are huge problems with scrutinising the bill. We should not just sit here rubber-stamping Sewel motion after Sewel motion. Of course, I expect nothing else from Bill Aitken, who does not want us to do anything here. He wants us to pack up and go back to his home, which is Westminster. As for George Lyon, he speaks for the Janus-like Liberal Democrats, who have two faces: a face for Westminster and a face for here. They are in opposition down the road but they are going to get married up here. They can face both ways, but neither way is worth listening to. As for the Executive, it is letting the little independence that we have with devolution trickle through our fingers because of the flood of Sewel motions back to Westminster. Before the end of the debate, I want an answer to the question about the treaty of union.

Oh God.

Only when Brian Fitzpatrick is speaking.

I seek clarification on part 9. I am reading the Executive's memorandum on the bill, which says: "Both the trial judge and the Court of Appeal will have power to vary the restriction"— on reporting— "after taking into account any objections from the defendant." Is it the Court of Appeal in England that is being referred to?

Keith Harding and others have hit the nail on the head. This is Tory policy, whole-heartedly adopted by the Labour party, and no amount of renaming it as PPP instead of PFI will conceal the truth—just as Labour members call themselves new Labour when they are just old Tories.

After 20 seconds? The minister is getting quicker. How much do we recall Tony Blair, son of Thatcher, opposing private finance for prisons? "There will be no more new private prisons", he said. As soon as he was in power, that worm turned, and has turned and turned again. The politics are dogma driven, not pragmatic. Before I move on to the pragmatic, I want to congratulate the Liberal Democrat Donald Gorrie on telling us Liberal Democrat policy, courtesy of the party's 2002 conference. I love the Liberal Democrat website. It is very informative and says that the party will campaign "to change Treasury rules to allow public authorities to borrow money and issue bonds". We are considering PFI/PPP from the Labour party because of Treasury rules to keep down public sector borrowing. Local authorities are hidebound in borrowing. That does not mean that they may not commission private-build public-operate schools, but that is not the way that we are going. The cost, of course, is in the running. I will not waste my time on anecdotal evidence, but pray in aid an Audit Scotland report: "The analysis for PFI School projects most often resulted in a set of costings which indicated that the PFI solution was more economic but without any good analysis of why. In fact, Audit Scotland's analysis is that in most cases the main elements of costs underlying the PFI option are higher than the equivalent forecasts under the PSC. Thus in five cases out of six the PFI construction costs were higher than the PSC, in all six cases the operating costs of the PFI were higher than the PSC."

The member should not throw quotations across the chamber and distort the issue.  This time, I pray in aid an independent report. According to Scotland on Sunday , Maurice Fitzpatrick, who is the head of economics at Tenon Group, has produced a "detailed independent study" that shows "that the private financing of public projects will cost Scots £33m a year more in interest payments than if the Treasury had picked up the tab. Scots will be paying the extra sum for the next three decades." Mr Fitzpatrick "has used official Executive figures which disclose that £2.7bn of PFI projects are underway or in the pipeline in Scotland" and "that Scots are losing out to the tune of £1bn because PFI contractors are likely to require a rate of return from local authorities and NHS boards of 7.5% on their investments".

No, I have only another minute. As for the minister's flexibility, I should point out that I have been dealing with Scottish Borders Council. Unfortunately, the council thinks that PPP is the only game in town, despite Liberal Democrat policy and the fact that that party is in power. However, the council is beginning to see the light. The leader of the council told me in a letter: "I would agree that the 'Not for Profit Trust' principle appears interesting, and may be the way for the future." However, he goes on to say: "In the absence of any official advice from the Scottish Executive we have concluded that the Council should pursue our Outline Business Case on a conventional PFI basis." In other words, the council has received no advice from the Liberal-Labour coalition Executive about other routes that would save the taxpayer money. I am glad to see that Andy Kerr has returned to the chamber, because I want to tell him that he is not open minded. The policy is dogma driven. Indeed, it is simply old Toryism, and the Executive is pretending that it is something else.

Keith Harding can come and campaign for me.

Where is Alex Johnstone now?

When the Justice 1 Committee undertook an inquiry into the prison estates review and considered privately built and privately run prisons, we found that the Executive explained that running costs are a significant element in the differences in costs between public-public and private-private projects. The Executive stated: "terms and conditions offered by private prisons are 'less generous' than the public sector." Was that evidence not given to the Finance Committee? Does the minister agree that that is how the savings are made? They are made on the pensions and the pay and conditions of workers.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any concerns regarding the future provision of further education in the Borders. (S1O-5983)

Is the minister aware of the impact that the closure of the Borders College campus at Hawick will have not only on the staff and the 670 students there, but on a vulnerable economy that is already reeling from the demise of the textile industry and the effects of the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak? Will the minister consider carefully the submissions in the community's petition and those that were made by me in yesterday's debate on further education; look into the issues that are raised in the funding of rural colleges; and, in the interim, intervene to prevent the closure of the college campus at Hawick?

That is correct. First, I take the opportunity to put the record straight on the SNP policy on the prosecution of drug dealers. I refer to the Official Report of last Thursday's First Minister's question time. The First Minister said: "Silly proposals about sending drug dealers to drugs courts do not help that debate. I want to ensure that, in Scotland, we get the dealers and get people off drugs too." He prayed in aid a quotation: "I will quote from the Scottish National Party's press release from this morning, which says that the SNP pledges to introduce drugs courts 'to use the full force of the law on those individuals who are profiting from drugs.'"— [ Official Report , 21 November 2002; c 15651.]  The press release actually says: "Mr Swinney said the SNP will roll out drugs courts across the country so denying dealers a market by giving addicts the help they need to get off drugs while also using the full force of the law to put the producers and dealers in jail. Commenting he said: 'In 1999 the SNP pledged that we would introduce special drug courts to firstly break the cycle of drug taking and crime and secondly to use the full force of the law on those individuals who are profiting from drugs.'" That is not quite the same thing. I know that the First Minister is a man of integrity—he tells us so—and I am sure that he will be pleased to endorse that correction on the record. Let me tell him, too, that I have booked an appointment for him with an optometrist, so that he can deal with any problems that he has in reading press releases. I refer to the Scottish Executive's press release of 14 May 2002, which is headed, "Drug courts judged a success". It goes on to say that the then Deputy Minister for Justice "praised the work of the team set up to oversee the court and the effectiveness of inter-agency working that has become its hallmark ... The drug court is supported by seven different agencies who contribute to a dedicated team that attempts to ensure the smooth working of the new procedures". The team is undoubtedly dedicated and certainly attempts to ensure smooth working of procedures, but it is not having much help with resources. I refer members to the Executive's own research, which says: "The existing demands placed by Drug Court Orders and by a perceived increase in DTTOs made by the Sheriff Court were contributing to low morale and a feeling of being overloaded by the frequency of client appointments required. This resulted in staff taking 'shortcuts', such as using information directly from reports prepared by other professionals rather than providing an integrated summary of the relevant material." That has been endorsed by recent reports in the Sunday papers of the state of distress and anxiety among social workers who feel that they cannot cope. They want to cope and the system to work, as we and others do, but they are not being resourced. The research goes on to say: "There was a feeling, throughout most of the interviews, of what one respondent described as, 'that bit of, my bit being more important than your bit.' Whilst a certain amount of professional jealously provides a useful stimulus to multi-agency working, the views recorded during this evaluation suggest a more unhealthy inter-disciplinary rivalry." There will always be problems when one pilots something as revolutionary as the drugs courts, which was recommended by the SNP as long ago as 1999. However, we must not draw a veil over  the initiative. If the Executive is planning to resource drugs courts for other areas, will it please examine the existing difficulties? We do not want the scheme to fail for the want of resources. As we know, the background to that is the fact that 20 per cent of social work places advertised in the criminal justice system are unfilled. It is unfair to the professionals not to provide them with resources or to recognise their problems. I do not say that to undermine drugs courts, but to be honest about them. The principle is excellent. Anyone who has served on the Parliament's justice committees from the beginning, as I have done, knows that prisons often contain very sad people who have offended against society and who have stolen, but only to pay dealers. The statistics show that, as soon as they come out of prison and return to the communities in which the dealers live, they go back to crime and back into prison. It is a waste of people's lives and resources. I cannot use up all my time, but I have made my point. I want the minister to examine clearly and be honest about the resourcing of the current pilot projects. He must ensure that the front-line workers who try to help drug addicts are supported and know that the Parliament recognises the stresses that they are under.

I declare an historic interest, as I am a former secondary teacher. I was a product of pre-comprehensive education. I was educated in the local authority high school—taught to the test and invited to sit highers, no doubt to obtain a 100 per cent pass rate, which impressed many. I was selected at age 11. I left my community and saw my friends disperse throughout Edinburgh. In contrast, the first school in which I taught after qualification as a secondary teacher was one of that new breed, the comprehensive. I went in determined to be unimpressed, but that did not last long. I saw the enormous advantages of comprehensive education, which helped my teaching. In developing programmes to engage the less-able pupil, there was cross-fertilisation to the more-able child who just as often has to be entertained as educated. For example, I portrayed Macbeth to a less-able class as a latter-day business tycoon with a ruthless but ultimately vulnerable wife who pushed him to the top of the commercial pyramid. That approach was for the less able, but taking it over to the more-able pupils engaged their interest in the nature of ambition and the ultimate price that is paid in the moral tales of Shakespeare. I saw the fluidity of movement. The child who was good at mathematics could be set to deal with mathematics at that level, while still being with his or her friends when studying other subjects. Education was, and still is, about the whole person, as Ian Jenkins said. The children of doctors and MSPs go to school with the children of plumbers and company directors. That is as it should be; that is inclusivity. That is what puts children in Scotland and Scottish schools in a special category. Scottish schools are not educating just to the test so that children can pass exams. That is why lists are an anathema and are completely misleading. Scottish schools are educating the citizens of Scotland, whose individuality is to be nurtured within the context of their own community and the larger Scottish community and the European and world community beyond. The Tory motion represents an English version of education, which thankfully has been rejected by Scotland for generations. I no longer teach, but because I have siblings who are teachers I can tell Brian Monteith that they are sick of political interference. They want less paperwork, fewer assessments, better funding, smaller classes, and more help with disruptive pupils. We have reached the stage at which one of my sisters cannot separate warring primary 1 pupils for fear that she would be charged with assault. These are ridiculous days for primary teachers.  As a secondary teacher, I once taught a class of 40. Those days have gone, but class sizes are the key. How can an English teacher who has about 150 pupils passing through the classroom door each day give adequate attention to each individual child? Reduced class sizes would, at a stroke, improve dramatically the quality of Scottish education for individual children and across the board.

I have finished.

I congratulate the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee on its report. I will focus on the structure and methodology for funding further and higher education colleges, particularly in rural areas. I do that against the background of the Audit Scotland report that says that two thirds of colleges in Scotland are in financial difficulties. We all want education to be a lifelong experience, but the practicalities are making that extremely difficult. I say that in the context of the situation in the Borders with the Heriot-Watt University campus at Galashiels and Borders College—particularly its campus in Hawick. It is proposed that Borders College should centralise its facilities in Galashiels and close the Hawick campus. That flies in the face of the worthy sentiments about social inclusion. That proposal comes on the back of general financial difficulties throughout the area and particular difficulties in Borders College. I understand that, from 1976 to 1995, the unit of resource—what the college receives per student—lost 40 per cent of its value in real terms. The college now has 800-plus students, but less funding. Social inclusion also seems to work against rural colleges. I understand that Borders College received £3,800 for that plus a remoteness component of £250,000. Social inclusion payments are calculated on a postcode basis. In Glasgow, each college will receive £330,000. The committee's report addressed some of those issues, which I will come to. Borders College has had to make people redundant. The number of teaching staff has reduced from 105 to 72. Despite a petition with 8,000 signatures, retaining the Hawick campus will be difficult. That petition is winging its way to the minister with comments for his support. I understand that the weighting system also works against rural colleges. For instance, 14 students are needed for a bricklayers course, 15 for hairdressing and 10 to 11 for land-based courses. When that is combined with the effect of higher still in rural areas, the result is fewer students. Unless Borders College can cross-subsidise, such courses will go, because the college cannot draw down the funding. That is why I fully support recommendation 180, which says: "We recommend that the development of a future funding system for learning providers includes weighting to adequately reflect the costs of provision in remote and island areas." That issue was also brought to my attention by Heriot-Watt University, which is trying to share  facilities with Borders College. A bit of territoriality is involved in that, but the university acknowledges that it requires to co-ordinate more, because the institutions are complementary, not in competition with each other. The Heriot-Watt campus in the Borders has had to reduce its capacity. It has 650 students. Its senior academics told me about the 40 per cent reduction in the unit of resource, which will mean 15 to 18 staff redundancies. The university has difficulties because of the way in which it runs its courses. It provides tuition on the basis of one tutor to one student, but the funding supposes one teacher to a number of students, so the university loses out. Those concerns are great and present difficulties in a rural area that has the highest proportion of elderly people in its population, as has been said. Fifty per cent of people there will retire by 2010 and they will require to be retained. If young people leave the Borders to attend college or university elsewhere, the situation is simple: they do not return. I repeat that they do not come back—they stay where they are and, even worse, they emigrate, either south to England or to other countries. I make a plea to the minister for funding for rural colleges and the campuses of universities in rural areas, both of which have particular difficulties.

We must not forget the human disaster that foot-and-mouth disease was and still is. I have three comments from Borders farmers. The first is that farmers who return to farming try to look forward rather than back, but they found it hard to make the decision to return. The first farmer said that if they had not had a son who wished to continue the farming tradition the probability is that they would have said that enough was enough. The second farmer was in a closedown area, as he was close to the infected area around Moffat. Since then he has had a small amount of help with business rates, but nothing else. His accountant  has said that the farmer would have been better off had his farm been infected. The third farmer felt that, nationally, farmers were being made scapegoats and that the problem lay with poor import controls, which led to infected products getting into the system. That is rightly where much of the debate has been directed. I refer to the House of Commons report, "Illegal Meat Imports", which was published on 17 July. The summary states: "The illegal importation of meat into the United Kingdom is the most likely cause of the outbreaks of classical swine fever in 2000 and foot and mouth in 2001." As Fergus Ewing said, foot-and-mouth disease knows no boundaries. The report goes on to make some recommendations. Page 13 of the report states: "The Government has also announced 'other specific measures'". Of course, I have to mention the sniffer dogs—everybody else has. The first specific measure is: "Pilot use of detector dogs to be underway by summer 2002." I will be interested to know how many, minister, and whether they are in quarantine. Another measure is: "Examination of the potential benefits of using x-ray equipment to scan containers and personal baggage to detect illegal imports, leading if successful to a trial." What has happened to that measure? The next one is: "Provision of 'amnesty bins' or equivalent measure to encourage the surrender of unintended illegal personal imports." What has happened to that measure? The final one is: "Research into available technologies which might help detect illegal imports." What has happened to that? A further important recommendation, because of the multiplicity of agencies involved in such an outbreak, was the recommendation that "In the longer term there is a case for greater integration of agencies and management, and we recommend that Government", that is the Westminster Government, "bring forward a model of a single agency." What has happened to that recommendation? We do not want to be in a position, in a year or two, in which no progress has been made after a great deal of serious, heavy-duty research has gone into ensuring, so far as possible, that foot-and-mouth  disease does not return to the UK. Page 5 of the Executive's response of November 2002 states: "Scrutiny of imported product has been stepped up. Enhanced checks and controls have been put in place and more staff have been recruited to police the controls." Can we have the numbers, please? The Executive response states: "Public awareness campaigns have been stepped up at ports and airports to ensure that all concerned are much more aware of the risks involved." Richard Lochhead has given us his experience. I would like details. The response also states: "The Veterinary Laboratory Agency has been commissioned to conduct a detailed risk assessment, which will help enforcement agencies target resources in an effort to raise seizure levels." What is the time scale for that assessment? Finally, the response states: "A review of the whole system of import controls and the role of the Agencies responsible is underway by the Machinery of Government Secretariat." When will that report, minister?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek your guidance on the comments that the First Minister made with regard to the SNP's press statement.

I seek your guidance, Presiding Officer. The press statement—

It is an important point relating to—

You do not know what I was going to say, Presiding Officer.

Does the minister agree that failure to grit roads in the Scottish Borders timeously last winter was both unacceptable and dangerous? Does he further agree that the solution lies in deprivatising trunk roads maintenance, ripping up the Amey contract and providing proper funding for local authorities to do the job, so that they can be held democratically accountable when the job is not properly done?

Will the minister give way?

It is a very brief point.

Will the minister give way?

I thought that I had expounded my explanation fairly thoroughly when I began. I take the opportunity to rebuke one of the speakers for attacking the SNP on its views on catching criminals, which was outrageous.

My answer to Donald Gorrie is that there is no political involvement in European arrest warrants; there is an entirely efficacious warrant and arrestment procedure, which is not extradition. Extradition is defined narrowly in the Scotland Act 1998. It cannot be redefined retrospectively.

Will the member take an intervention?

The SNP has not automatically amended the motion in the name of the minister. Not all Sewel motions are bad, although we have had too many. There have been, I think, 38 Sewel motions  to date. That flies in the face of the late Donald Dewar's words on devolved matters. He said: "there is a possibility ... of the United Kingdom Parliament legislating across those areas, but it is not one which we anticipate or expect."—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 28 January 1998; Vol 305, c 402-3.] How wrong that turned out to be. However, the SNP amendment has not been lodged for that reason—it is not a wrecking amendment—but because the basis on which the minister seeks the Parliament's support is fundamentally flawed. The Executive motion states: "conferring Executive functions on the Scottish Ministers in relation to extradition should be considered by the UK Parliament." The SNP amendment would add to that: "with the exception of provisions implementing the European Framework Decision on the European Arrest Warrant in the Extradition Bill which should be dealt with by the Scottish Parliament". I know that members in the chamber have looked at the bill, but I am referring to part 1, not part 2. Part 1 deals with the new creature that is the European arrest warrant. There is a crucial distinction to be made. Extradition orders lie within the jurisdiction of politicians and politicians take the final decisions on them; European arrest warrants would lie within the jurisdiction of the courts alone—in this case, the Scottish courts—and no political fingers would poke into that particular jurisdictional pie.

No, we are talking about the implementation of warrants and I will develop the argument. The SNP is not accepting the Sewel motion as it stands because it is not competent. Under the European framework decision, it is not a Sewel motion and I will develop that argument. In the EC framework decision, from which I will now quote, it is plain that the European arrest warrant is a substitute for extradition and therefore a completely different creature. Recital (5) of the EC framework decision states: "The objective set for the Union to become an area of freedom, security and justice leads to abolishing extradition between Member States and replacing it by a system of surrender between judicial authorities. Further, the introduction of a new simplified system of surrender of  sentenced or suspected persons for the purposes of execution or prosecution of criminal sentences makes it possible to remove the complexity and potential for delay inherent in the present extradition procedures." We are therefore talking about the implementation of warrants, not extradition. Extradition is dealt with in part 2 of the Extradition Bill. It is therefore my contention that we are not dealing with a wholly reserved matter. It is a core distinction, because extradition is completely reserved. Processes and procedures such as shrieval and judicial warrants are not reserved. There is also another distinction between those two legal creatures. There is no requirement that the crime alleged in the European arrest warrant by the state issuing that warrant is a crime in the state executing that warrant. That is a requirement of extradition. Under the Sewel convention, the consent of the Scottish Parliament is required to any provisions of a UK bill that confer executive functions on Scottish ministers. The Extradition Bill does more than that and makes provision for wholly devolved matters relating to criminal procedures that have remained clear and independent in Scots law, despite the Treaty on European Union, such as the implementation of the European arrest warrant. We cannot simply glide over that distinction and argue that extradition has been redefined and therefore brought within the reserved areas of the Scotland Act 1998. One cannot amend legislation, certainly not constitutional legislation, by inference or import. It would require primary amending legislation. In support, I will quote Lord Sewel's statement on Sewel motions. He said: "we would expect a convention to be established that Westminster would not normally legislate with regard to devolved matters in Scotland without the consent of the Scottish parliament. If problems do arise the solution is for the Scottish executive and the United Kingdom Government to resolve the matter through political dialogue ... If this Parliament thought the situation had got to a stage of total impasse, it would be possible to look again at the Bill and enact primary legislation affecting the reserved matters." My argument is that the European arrest warrant is not reserved. Lord Sewel went on: "There should be mature political dialogue to resolve a difference, which is better than legislative tennis. If an impasse results there is the ultimate fallback position of looking at Schedule 5 and changing the devolved powers."—[ Official Report, House of Lords , 21 July 1998; Vol 592, c 791.] Primary legislation can be used to alter the Scotland Act 1998 in this regard. I have a few more points to make, Presiding Officer, because these are important constitutional arguments that underpin the SNP amendment. We  also have civil liberty concerns. I quote: "The Eurowarrant is based upon the presumption that EU countries all have fair systems of justice which should remove the need for any country to scrutinise the fairness of extradition to such a country. This presumption is seriously open to question." One only has to consider the recent case of the plane spotters in Greece. "With the current European arrest warrant, any one of the English planespotters could have been arrested in England on a warrant from an English court at the request of a Greek prosecutor and sent to Greece for trial, without the current political protections or the safeguard of habeas corpus" or, in a Scottish case, without the protection of the 110-day rule. Those issues were raised by Neil MacCormick at the European Parliament. The Liberal Democrat response at Westminster to the draft Extradition Bill said: "we believe it would be wrong to implement changes on extradition before the European Commission's review of minimum procedural safeguards for suspects and defendants has been completed ... Common standards in relation to the presumption of innocence, the right to legal advice and representation, rules of evidence and the practice of custodial remands should be established and applied before common judicial procedures are adopted." "The European Commission has not completed its review of minimum procedural safeguards and common standards." I come to my final point, Presiding Officer. The bill has been published only for a week and there is no immediate need for the Executive to pursue the motion. If the SNP amendment is not acceptable—as it will probably not be—I respectfully submit that the Executive should seek the leave of the chamber to withdraw its motion, examine the constitutional issues that have been raised and either give the Parliament or the justice committees the opportunity to examine the issues raised or return to the chamber with a revised motion to reflect what is really happening. I move amendment S1M-3608.1, to insert at end: "with the exception of provisions implementing the European Framework Decision on the European Arrest Warrant in the Extradition Bill which should be dealt with by the Scottish Parliament, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to bring forward legislation implementing the Framework Decision that reflects the particular nature of the Scottish legal system."

I thank the Justice 1 Committee clerking team for their stalwart efforts, which go on in the background. I also thank Scott Wortley, who was so enthusiastic that it was almost contagious. I say "almost", but I could not quite join in. When Donald Gorrie, the man himself, expressed his dismay that the debate was originally scheduled to last for three hours—dismay that was shared by all committee members—I knew that I had to move to truncate it. My clerks, who helpfully bullet-pointed the issues associated with the bill, began, with the honesty of clerks, by saying that the bill is complex and technical. Indeed it is. Worthy the bill undoubtedly is, but, my goodness, apart from a few excited academics, it was a test of our concentration and stamina, but the Justice 1 Committee came through. It surprised me to learn that the stage 1 report has been a sell-out, with 38 copies gone and 10 on order. Those who replied to my e-mail yesterday about who possesses that worthy work can be assured that I will not out them. I will proceed to the bill's merits, fellow anoraks. The bill is complex and technical and seeks to update the law relating to property. It is intended to make conveyancing simpler and to make it easier for people to alter title conditions relating to their property. Without its passage, the comparatively more exciting Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000, to which the minister referred, would not reach its appointed day. I note the date 28 November 2004 and share my colleague Fergus Ewing's concerns about the delay and the fact that there will be money to be made in the intervening two years. Fergus Ewing will no doubt develop that point. A remarkably high number of submissions—486—were received as a result of the committee's general call for evidence; that gives members a measure of the clerking work that was involved. Admittedly, that number was due substantially to fierce lobbying by those living in sheltered housing or retirement developments. I note the minister's remarks in that regard. The committee thoroughly scrutinised the bill, which is densely woven—to some of us, it is sometimes more dense than it is woven. Through their oral evidence, academics, practitioners, housing associations, property managers, public  bodies and representative groups such as Age Concern Scotland helped the committee to de-layer the bill and measure its practical effects. We published our stage 1 report on Monday 18 November. Despite the bill's technicalities, it is a human bill. The bill could be described as non-contentious, as it received widespread support, but members considered a number of smaller issues that divided the individuals and groups who were interested in the bill. Although the committee considers that there was general support for the principles of the bill, it is incumbent on the committee to delve further, as the bill is far reaching and will affect many people in Scotland. The bill will affect not just property owners, but tenants and non-entitled spouses—a complex term that usually means a wife who does not have her name on the title deeds. How will the bill affect people? Most properties have conditions attached to them that are set down in the deed of conditions. Previously, people could enforce burdens only if they were the registered owners of the property. The committee is pleased that the Executive has extended that right to non-owners, such as non-entitled spouses and tenants. The Deputy First Minister ably explained the matter in trying to jolly us along through the densely woven bill. He gave an example of "a tenant who happens to have a family with young children and whose burden says that they cannot keep pet dogs or Rottweilers. If the person next door decides to keep Rottweilers, the tenant probably has much more direct interest in enforcing that condition, or burden, than the landlord or the owner."——[ Official Report , Justice 1 Committee, 1 Oct 2002; c 4071.] The committee wrestled with many of the legal concepts in the bill, such as acquiescence. I am reasonably familiar with that concept, as are some colleagues from another committee who are here today. I will explain. Imagine the benefited proprietor in the red corner—I have to use such technical terms—who is the property owner and is entitled to enforce a burden. Imagine the burdened property owner in the blue corner—the burden is that he cannot keep homing pigeons. In the red corner, the person does nothing for years and the pigeon fancier may live happily ever after with his billing and cooing companions. I am trying to make the bill interesting. On the other hand, he might not. The question may have been asked, "Have I acquiesced or have I not acquiesced to his pigeon loft and its contents?" By the insertion of time limits to object, the pigeon fancier will know where he stands. That is what the bill seeks to do with regard to rights and duties: it seeks to avoid unnecessary stairheid rammies, although I suspect that there are no pigeon lofts on stairheids.  That brings me to tenements. I fully endorse what Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said. It would be useful if the law relating to tenements could be implemented so that tripartite legislation would come into force at the same time. Many people think that the bill affects the law relating to tenements, but it does not. There was fierce lobbying from owner-occupiers of sheltered accommodation—the minister has addressed that issue. Other issues that were discussed in the committee were the nature of conservation burdens; the designation and nomination of conservation burdens; an increased role for the Lands Tribunal for Scotland, which says that it does not need more money—we will see; development value burdens; clawback; and possible reform of standard securities legislation, which has been mentioned. Some witnesses sought to reopen the argument surrounding the provision that is known as the 100m rule, which provides that where a superior has a building that is used for human resort or habitation on neighbouring land and if that building is within 100m of the burdened land, the burden can be preserved by registering a notice. Some colleagues remain unhappy about that matter. The Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000 fixed the distance at 100m in contrast to the common-law position, which relied on only two cases, both of which were from Aberdeen. Professor Paisley told the committee that only one of the cases made much sense, which indicated that the burden should be checked by reference to the type of burden. He recalled that "someone in Aberdeen tried to set up a chip shop frying garlic pizzas. The people who lived within smelling distance downwind had an interest. The distance could vary from day to day" and could be much further than 100m. He continued: "For someone who was upwind it would be zero ... Implementing such a vague rule does not work."——[ Official Report , Justice 1 Committee , 3 Sep 2002; c 3926.] This is a heavy debate, but I will end on a light note. I am told, although the story may be apocryphal, that, rather like a latter-day Archimedes, Professor Kenneth Reid, erudite professor of conveyancing at the University of Edinburgh, came up with the 100m rule while he was swimming in the Commonwealth pool. He calculated each length to be 25m. On his fourth length, he thought "Eureka—that is the correct distance for the legislation." Not a lot of people know that. However, each length is 50m, so an amendment from the professor would perhaps be appropriate. We support the bill.

Thank goodness.

Given that being put on a list is a paper conviction that does not involve a hearing for the person affected, does the member support the requirement for corroboration—however narrow the margin of that corroboration—or is he saying that there should not even be corroboration?

I want to make it clear that although in relation to putting someone on a list, the Justice 1 Committee accepted that the test should be "on the balance of probabilities"—which is a lower test—the committee sought corroboration of evidence. In other words, one source of evidence would not be sufficient; there would have to be separate independent evidence.

I will restrict my remarks to the report of the Justice 1 Committee, the secondary committee on the bill. Our remit was focused narrowly on human rights issues and the procedures relating to those who are placed on the list—the methods by which they appeal against decisions or have their cases reviewed. All members of the Justice 1 Committee felt that the committee was given far too little time to scrutinise the bill. Increasingly, secondary committees are encountering problems with the time scale for consideration of bills. The conveners group intends to refer the issue to the next Parliament. Although this is a short bill, it raises important human rights issues. The Justice 1 Committee would have benefited from having at  least a couple more meetings to examine the bill. We were forced to restrict ourselves to written evidence. I accept fully that there is a difficult balance to be struck on this issue. Jackie Baillie was right to say that the state has a moral duty to protect children. However, society also has a duty to protect the rights of the individual to a fair hearing. Article 6.1 of the European convention on human rights states: "In the determination of his civil rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law." The Justice 1 Committee has some difficulty with the methodology proposed by the bill as drafted. The committee was not content that there should be referral in the first instance to the Scottish ministers. It adopted almost wholeheartedly the comments of the Law Society of Scotland, which stated: "Questions may be asked as to whether Scottish Ministers can be viewed objectively as independent when determining referrals made in some cases, especially where the organisations concerned may also be emanations of or regulated by the State. It is also of concern that the decision to include a persons name on the list will be founded on a paper based approach." The society added that it was "not convinced that these proposals offer sufficient protection to the individual to ensure that he or she can have access to a 'fair and public hearing'". The committee considered the issue of the standard of proof. The minister has said that cases will be decided on the balance of probabilities, which is not a very high standard or proof. The committee took the view that charges should not just be credible, but should be corroborated by reliable evidence. In a moment I will return to the issue of the standard of proof. Six-month provisional listing raises huge human rights issues for the party who is placed on a list. The Law Society suggests that there should be a fast-track procedure, through an emergency tribunal. The Justice 1 Committee would like cases to be referred to a tribunal chaired by someone with legal experience, assisted by someone from children's services, rather than to the Scottish ministers. It is much fairer to fast-track cases than to place people on provisional lists. Such an approach would protect the decisions that are taken. We recommend a right of appeal from the tribunal to the sheriff. Under the usual appellate procedure, there would be a right of appeal from the sheriff to the sheriff principal and from the sheriff principal to the Court of Session.  Initial decisions should be as sound, fair and robust as possible. We are concerned that the bill fails to ensure that, as it contains no reference to corroboration and provides for cases to be referred to the Scottish ministers. Those issues should be considered at stage 2. The bill would deprive people of significant rights. It would take away their right to work and, perhaps, their right to a good reputation. We are dealing with people who may never be charged, let alone convicted. Section 4, on reference by certain other persons, states: "the individual has (whether or not in the course of the individual's work and whether before or after this section comes into force) harmed a child or placed a child at risk of harm". Section 16 states: "'harm' includes harm which is not physical harm." I do not have a problem with the definitions. I am saying that in terms of the test of fairness to both parties, cases have to be examined very carefully on evidential grounds. The committee supported the process by which there is appeal to the sheriff, the sheriff principal and the Court of Session. The question of standard of proof raised problems for us with regard to someone seeking to have their name taken off the list or non-inclusion on the list. First, what is the standard? Are we talking about the balance of probability or are we talking about a case's being proved beyond reasonable doubt? Is there a presumption of innocence of the person on the list, or does the burden of proof fall on them to establish beyond reasonable doubt that they should not be on the list? Those are technical, but important, points in ensuring that the legislation works. The committee felt that there should be a new crime of false referral of an individual to be placed on the list, so that it is made clear to public authorities and individuals that malicious and mischievous reporting will be treated seriously as a criminal offence. I have touched on review. The concerns of the Sheriffs Association were valid and the committee accepted them. The sheriffs said that if a person made an application after 10 years to have their position reviewed and they failed, they would be barred for another 10 years. The Sheriffs Association stated: "it seems odd that the power of the sheriff to entertain an application early, on a change of circumstances, can be exercised only on a first and not on a subsequent application." That truly deserves examination.  I say to Jamie McGrigor, who did not take my intervention, that heaven forfend that I should defend the Executive, but it is examining whether there should be a statutory offence of grooming. Like others, if that is brought in, I want it to be extended to vulnerable adults. Finally, the comments that the Justice 1 Committee has made show the value of there being a secondary committee with expertise in certain areas. I hope that ministers will take on board the point that when they consider passing bills to secondary committee for scrutiny, they should give them the time to do it justice.

The minister will undoubtedly have had the opportunity to read the Justice 1 Committee's views on that matter. Does she perceive difficulties arising from the fact that, if an application for review is refused, the individual cannot make another application for another 10 years—or five years, if they are a child? It seems extraordinary that that is the case if reviews are to bring justice.

The minister will be aware that one of the Government's key ambitions in "A Smart, Successful Scotland" is to grow businesses. I advise him that, yesterday, Alex Neil and I attended a meeting at Scottish Enterprise with representatives of a Scottish company with a prize-winning product that is receiving inquiries and orders from all over the world. The lacklustre response that those representatives received from Scottish Enterprise, when it was asked for assistance with funding, filled me with despair—no wonder entrepreneurs leave Scottish shores.

Duncan McNeil will get a question if he stops trying to bully me.

I am more interested in the answer. When I write to the minister with the details of that case—which I am sure is replicated elsewhere in Scotland—will he give the matter the attention that the Executive's well-funded agency did not?

I would not want to offend you, Presiding Officer, so I will do my best. I associate the SNP with the remarks that have been made about the absolutely outrageous hoax calls. Last night's hoax calls follow a spate of outrageous attacks against firefighters at fire scenes. Such attacks are increasing. I note what the Lord Advocate says about prosecuting hoax callers rigorously. He has the full support of the SNP on that, because firemen—and women—risk their lives every day. The public are doubtless ashamed that a minority takes part in hoax calls. Richard Simpson rightly says that there is a plethora of issues. I will try to touch on them as they came up. As the Lord Advocate knows well, across the Parliament's parties and committees, we—the Scottish National Party is represented—have fully supported those areas of the prosecution service that require support. We have acknowledged the severe stress that procurators fiscal are under, even to the extent that, as has been remarked, one has to look for a desk. I am not surprised: the procurator fiscals have been the Cinderellas of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. Another concern is the fact that senior procurators fiscal are moved into management. The difficulties in management have perhaps led to the disastrous failures in the prosecutions in the Cawley and Chhokar cases. We realise that resources are needed. However, we also realise that the prosecution service needs reform. On secure accommodation, I have heard remarks in the chamber about 25 new places. I am content to take an intervention from Richard Simpson if he will tell us whether those 25 places have already been allocated, which is my understanding. Perhaps he will write to me later on that.  I endorse what Pauline McNeill said about the justice committees' thoughtful analysis of the criminal justice budget. We would like the resources for secure accommodation to be mainly in the justice budget line and streamed down into the children and education line. Those areas overlap; there is a clash. The ADSW requires that the resources be budgeted in that manner. We lack secure accommodation places. That partly answers George Lyon's point about offenders being back on the streets. Putting offenders into secure accommodation is not the entire answer, but it is part of it. It is frustrating for the police to see on the streets one young offender who is a crime wave in his own right. By way of explanation, I should add that, when we refer to secure accommodation, we are referring to a whole range of facilities. We do not just mean bars for keeping in baddies; we mean secure accommodation for the protection of young people who run away from home and separate secure accommodation for young women and young men and for disabled people. That area has been neglected and the Parliament and its committees have shone a light on that neglect. The SNP is committed to 100 more secure places across the range, to ensure that there is no longer a lack of accommodation for all the young people out there who need our help and, in some cases, from whom the public need protection. The SNP is committed to 1,000 more front-line police officers. The police are put into jobs that they do not require to do. I visited one police station where a police officer was spending two days putting labels on evidence about fraudulent dealing in compact discs. That was a waste of police time. We need police out, on foot, on our streets. That is not simply for detection, but as a preventive measure. As Pauline McNeill correctly said, it would make people feel secure in their communities and make our streets feel safer. The young vandals and hoodlums who come along and bang at cars, breaking their wing mirrors, will not do that if there is a policeman on patrol. The elderly person who will not leave their house because they think that they are under threat from a group of youths—even if they are not in fact under threat—will have the freedom to go out if they see police on patrol, which will make them feel secure. Putting more police on the streets is essential as a preventive measure. Far too many prisoners are on remand. I lodged written questions—S1W-29260 and S1W-29259—on bail schemes and had it confirmed that such schemes are only now being set up. The answer that I received was: "Bail supervision schemes are currently being set up by local authority criminal justice social work services".— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 4 November 2002;  p 2108.]  I asked that question as recently as September 2002, three years plus into the Parliament. We know that 10 per cent of criminal justice social worker posts are unfilled. The pressures on the criminal justice social work system are enormous. That relates to issues that Donald Gorrie and others went into, including diversions from prosecution, alternatives to custody and keeping people out of prisons. We know that being in prison is a waste of time in most cases. We know that more than 70 per cent of prisoners reoffend within two years and that 82 per cent of them are in prison for less than six months. That is a cock-eyed way in which to run the criminal justice system. We have to put money into diversions from prosecution and alternatives to custody. I recognise Donald Gorrie's long-standing campaign on alternatives to custody. My party has been campaigning on it, too, although I do not want to make a party-political point about that—of course, Keith Raffan would not know a party-political point if he tripped and fell over it. The Justice 1 Committee has had to undertake—under its own steam and in its own precious time—an investigation into alternatives to custody, because, as committee members know from the evidence that they have collected, there is no audit or directory of alternatives to custody or diversions from prosecution. Good things are going on all over the place, however, including the Cluaran project in Falkirk, where young people are being diverted away from prosecution. There is also the breaking the cycle youth crime initiative in East Lothian. However, those initiatives are patchy and nobody has added up what is being done in those areas—if that work was done, sheriffs would know what was available to them. It is interesting that the following debate is on poverty. That is a relevant issue, as so much that happens to young people depends on where they live and on their start in life. Some young people can see a life of crime from when they are toddlers. Their chances of not getting into that life are sometimes remote. Proposals for drugs courts came from the SNP, of course. We have no problems about where ideas come from, but I ask Paul Martin to recognise please where the idea for drugs courts, which he opposed, came from. Keith Raffan raised the possibility of our examining the extent to which alcohol is involved. That is a pet project of mine. We should consider how people with alcohol problems can be diverted from prison. We know that the coalition invests little in that and that the extent of alcohol problems is far and away greater than the extent of problems associated with drugs.  Furthermore, alcohol is often seen as the gateway to drugs. I know that Keith Raffan agrees with me on that matter. The situation with Sewel motions is a disgrace. We have had 38 Sewel motions so far. There was supposed to be a trickle of them, but it is turning into a flood. The fight against Sewel motions will continue in the chamber. What is the point of having a devolved Parliament if devolved issues are clawed back to Westminster?

George Lyon has raised an important point, because there are one-man and two-man crime waves all over Scotland. Is not the solution to have more secure accommodation? That is what I hear from the Borders and East Lothian. There are insufficient places. The police can point to people on the street who are committing crime waves and should be in secure accommodation, but who come back time and again. The issue is rehabilitation.

Does not Phil Gallie think that there would be extreme dangers if politicians began to determine sentences and did not keep the judiciary at arm's length? The independence of the judiciary is essential to the delivery of justice.

rose—

Does Lord James Douglas-Hamilton support the Scottish National Party's pledge to put 1,000 more police on the streets of Scotland?

Is not it the case that the Justice 1 Committee, particularly when considering the budget, was extremely supportive of the Procurator Fiscal Service, especially front-line procurators fiscal, who we know are under strength and underfunded? It would not be appropriate to say that we are attacking them. In fact, we have been very supportive of funding for the system.

The same applies to members of the SNP on the—

Part 1 of the bill is highly commendable because the debt arrangement scheme is necessary. It is unfortunate that Scotland has no jurisdiction over consumer credit, although I suspect that Lyndsay McIntosh received the offers that she mentioned as a result of her postcode.

I have only three minutes.

I hope that I will gain some extra time for that, Presiding Officer.

Part 2 of the bill deals with exceptional attachments and sales, which are really just poindings and warrant sales by another name. We had a lesson on legislation from Karen Whitefield. I want to quote from two pieces of legislation and ask her whether I mislead Parliament when I say that poindings and warrant sales still live. The first piece of legislation lists as articles exempt from poinding "implements, tools of trade, books or other equipment reasonably required for the use of the debtor or any member of his household in the practice of the debtor's or such member's profession, trade or business". The second lists "any implements, tools of trade, books or other equipment reasonably required for the use of the debtor in the practice of the debtor's profession, trade or business". The first piece of legislation is the Debtors (Scotland) Act 1987 and the second is the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill.

No. Karen Whitefield is having a lesson. The 1987 act permits "the opening of shut lockfast places, if necessary for the purpose of executing the poinding",  while under the power of entry and valuation, the bill allows that "An officer may open shut and lockfast places for the purposes of executing an attachment." That is a cut-and-paste approach to legislation, putting sections straight from the Debtors (Scotland) Act 1987 into the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill. I have no problem with making the procedure more humane, but the bill does not abolish poindings and warrant sales. It cannot do that when whole sections of it are imported straight from the Debtors (Scotland) Act 1987. The truth cannot be avoided, no matter how Executive members twist and turn in the wind. Poindings and warrant sales remain; they are simply renamed. I lodged an amendment to make the bill honest. The long title says that the bill abolishes poindings and warrant sales. Amendment 89 sought to put it honestly in seeking to insert: "rename the diligence of poindings and warrant sales as 'attachment' to provide for the auction of attached articles". Section 10 states: "There shall be a form of diligence over corporeal moveable property for recovery of money owed; it is to be known as attachment." It used to be known as a poinding. Whatever the bill does, it does not abolish poindings and warrant sales; it renames them. There are good things in the bill, but its long title is misleading. Although the Presiding Officer told me that my amendment 89 was technically defective, I do not accept that and I shall pursue the matter. It is essential that the Parliament does not mislead the Scottish public. The long title says that the bill abolishes poindings and warrant sales, but it does not.

The Tories are applauding.

I support amendment 69. In fact, the issue with which the amendment deals was first raised by my colleague Kenny Gibson at stage 1 and was supported at stage 2 by him and Linda Fabiani. As Mr Sheridan said, it is common for debtors to have their benefits reduced to pay debt. Wage arrestments also exist. Irrespective of whether one agrees with such measures, people who are on the edge of poverty can already have diligences taken against them. I received a message from the Scottish working group of the debt on our doorstep campaign, which  "remains concerned that the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill does not, in its present form, achieve its policy objective, in that it fails to ensure that those who cannot pay their debts are excluded from exceptional attachment orders." The group goes on to say: "We also believe that a clear indication of Parliament's express wish to exclude the poorest from exceptional attachment orders would be the best response to claims that warrant sales are simply being renamed. We believe that Amendment 69 ... would do this effectively, by excluding people on means-tested benefits (which are used as a yardstick of poverty in many other areas, such as eligibility for school meals)." I support Tommy Sheridan's amendment 69.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I hope that you have received notice of this point of order regarding the amendment that I lodged to amend the long title of the bill—amendment 89—which would have deleted "to abolish poindings and warrant sales" and inserted "to rename the diligence of poindings and warrant sales as 'attachment'". The Presiding Officer ruled that the amendment was not competent and he was good enough to  give me guidance why. The amendment fell under criterion 1 of paragraph 4.58 of the "Guidance on Public Bills": "Trivial amendments or amendments that are technically defective". It is my view that a long title must be faithful to the bill and that the bill does not abolish poindings and warrant sales but renames them. Under the circumstances, I am not satisfied that amendment 89 is a trivial amendment. It strikes at the heart of the role of the long title. I seek your guidance on how I can take the matter further.

Are you ruling that it is not competent to amend the long title? I seek that clarification.

Close encounters of the gull variety. In Edinburgh, just about every night, Hitchcockesque flocks darken the skies, screaming and apparently driving away flocks of the innocent little sparrows that we hardly see any more. I have no scientific  evidence for that; only the experience of what I have seen with my own eyes. In the summer, I took the boat up the Forth to Inchcolm with a friend. We got on to the island and a sign told us to beware of the gulls in the nesting season. It was August, but the birds had not read the notice. We started to walk up the path and had gone only a short distance when a great big fella—I presume that it was a male gull, given its attitude—dived down from the sky and hit my friend on the head. It is funny when it happens to someone else. Our walk was short. We spent the rest of the time watching other people and seeing how far they could penetrate the heather up the hill. They should change the notice on Inchcolm for a start. The birds have not learned to read. The gulls around Eyemouth are enormous. They strut their stuff. They know something that we seem not to. They are large, aggressive bully boys with two-inch beaks. They do not move over for people. If people have any wisdom they tend to circle round them. I searched the web for a quotation about gulls, and found this: "One of my cats had his bottom pecked by a gull recently, showing a breathtaking disregard for the conventional 'pecking order' attached to physique." There we go. I am a cat owner. If our cats are not safe, heaven knows. Gulls are not at fault. The little website told me that gull numbers are down, but the point is that more of them are moving into areas where people are and they are causing trouble. I will not address the fishing issue—it is about scavenging. We are to blame for aggressive gulls, because we are the dirtiest animals on the planet. If members walk up and down any city street they will see pizza cartons with bits of pizza in them. The gulls are waiting for that. Humans are the only animals that I know that litter their own homes. I presume that baby gull watches mummy and daddy gull getting tougher and develops an attitude towards people. Prevention is better than anything else. However, in the interim, I accept what RSPB Scotland and the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals have to say—they recognise that there is a problem—about the fact that any way of dealing with these creatures has to be humane. We must deal with them, if only to protect the odd cat.

I refer the minister to the report into the social work breakdown in Scottish Borders that resulted in failure to prevent extensive sexual  abuse of a lady with learning difficulties who is known as Miss X. Is the minister aware that some workers in Scottish Borders Council had 100 cases on their books? One worker was responsible for 120 cases. That has led Scottish Borders Council to advertise to recruit nine social workers. How confident is the minister that, given the current deficit of social workers, those places can be filled urgently?

Do not call me that.

I lived for many years in a highly afforested area in Galloway and watched the landscape darkening under Sitka spruce. However, I found that there was little benefit for the local community and much by way of disbenefit. There was no processing and little direct local employment, but the local people suffered the disturbance and destruction of their environment. That experience is entirely reflected in the Scottish Borders, which has, in the Kielder forest, the largest afforested area in the UK. I am glad to see Ian Jenkins in the chamber—late and one hour into the debate, but at least we now have a Liberal Democrat MSP from the Borders present. No doubt he was busy doing something else; I bear no grudges. Although the Scottish Borders contains the largest forest in the UK, there is no processing of timber in the area. However, there is all the inconvenience. I refer the minister to my contribution—and that of my colleague in the Scottish Borders, Ian Jenkins—to the members' business debate in Aberdeen during the summer. We referred to the environmental damage to Borders villages and hamlets caused by heavily laden lorries rumbling through narrow streets. The issue of road improvements really will not matter there, because such narrow village roads cannot be repaired without being destroyed again by those lorries in any event. The solution, although I will not dwell on it again—I hope that Mr Wilson is ready for this—is the development of the southern half of the Borders railway line, with a spur link to Kielder forest at the Riccarton junction. I was present during the statement this morning, when Margaret Curran said that she had an interesting diary. I suggest that Allan Wilson visit Riccarton junction to liven up his diary. He can travel to it on the track where the original railway line lay. The track is still there and it would be easy-peasy to put a railway line on it so that we can move the forestry trees directly on to trains. That appears to be the minister's policy and he could easily implement it.

I will not take an intervention from George Lyon, although Ian Jenkins may interrupt me if he likes. When Allan Wilson visits Kielder, perhaps he could bring the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning. If that is what he calls cross-cutting and partnership, I would like to see it in action. They could consider locating a processing plant there. It is an insult to people to surround them by trees without providing them with any of the manufacturing. A local processing plant would also, in part, remove the problems of  environmental damage. The second part of the SNP amendment deals with encouraging the use of indigenous wood materials locally. I learn from Scottish Enterprise Borders that wood fuels used for on-site heating can often compete with fossil fuels, particularly in rural areas where wood is available nearby. I am advised that equipment for converting wood into heat is relatively cheap and simple. Control systems rarely need to be sophisticated, hot water tanks provide temporary energy storage and it is easy to incorporate a standby heat source, such as coal, oil, gas or electricity—although piped gas is often not available to remote areas—for use when the wood fuel system is out of action for maintenance purposes. I ask the minister to investigate—he might already have done so—what has been done to encourage small-scale heating schemes. I heard about the example that has been mentioned, but I would like to know where else small-scale heating schemes could be viable, not just for schools and local hospitals, but for prisons, country hotels, farms, industrial estates and cold stores. There is a whole range of uses for such heating schemes, on which Scotland unfortunately falls down in comparison with its Scandinavian neighbours. I refer the minister to Borders Biofuels, which has identified housing estates in the north of England and in Scotland that are close enough to sources of forestry residues to be supplied with district heating from centrally placed boiler houses. The company is offering home owners free central heating system installation in return for a contractual agreement to buy heat from a central boiler for a set period. According to the company, the cost of heat will be lower than if the home owner bought and used fossil fuel. I ask the minister to look into that. John Home Robertson mentioned the new Scottish Parliament buildings. The timber school in the Borders uses mature fallen trees—

Yes. It uses those trees to make high-quality, custom-built furnishings. I hope that the procurement group will consider the materials that Woodschool uses. There are lots of good things going on. Finally, I want to mention social inclusion. A team based at Glentress is working to help long-term unemployed people to improve their quality of life by using the availability of the forest. I wish such projects to be pursued. Like my colleagues, I am concerned that the Executive has lodged an administrative motion rather than a substantive one. I ask the minister to reflect on the fact that, during the debate, I have  not felt that either he or some of his back benchers—particularly those from urban areas—were taking the matter seriously.

Is the minister aware that a business in Coldstream that has the same rateable value as one in Berwick has a water bill that is at least £200  more? Notwithstanding what the minister has just said, what interventions will the minister make to redress such competitive disadvantages, especially given that Borders businesses continue to struggle in the aftermath of the foot-and-mouth outbreak?

On a point of order.

rose—

I must make it plain that, with cross-party agreement—which includes a Conservative member—the Justice 1 Committee report states: "Given these concerns, the Committee does not believe that HMP Kilmarnock should be used as a point of comparison for proceeding with further private prisons in Scotland." That is unequivocal.

I hope that the member appreciates that my speech was remarkably politically restrained and that I kept to the committee's report. My problem is simply that the committee recommended that a long-term sex offenders unit should stay at Peterhead, but we do not have a crystal-clear commitment that such a unit will stay for good. That is not the message that is being given and ministers can clear that up today. Alec Spencer told us that we can see only 10 years up the road and that no commitment has been given after that. That is my problem.

In the light of the committee's serious concerns with regard to the chief executive of the SPS, is the minister confident that, under the current leadership, those reviews and changes will take place with the negotiated consent of the staff?

The Justice 1 Committee's view certainly was not that the SPS should take a direct hand in design; it was simply that the service should commission a private firm to undertake that work, just as the construction of house blocks is commissioned. That was the committee's view; it was not just my personal view.

Before addressing the substance of the report, I make reference to a 12-page document that I received by e-mail yesterday evening. I first had the opportunity to read the document at 9 pm last night, on my way home from meetings. It was the Scottish Executive's response to our report and it came with a covering letter from the Minister for Justice's private secretary, explaining that he hoped that the Justice 1 Committee would find it useful. Somewhat disingenuously, the letter was dated "October 2002". Why do I suspect that it was sent out on the eve of the debate simply to enable ministers to claim that they have responded to our report? The minister has applauded the committee procedure in the Parliament. However, in the discourteous and hasty dispatch of that response, he and his department have shown scant regard for committee members, many of whom have not had the opportunity to read it before the debate. We published our report more than three months ago, yet the minister has responded—allegedly—only on the eve of the debate. That will not do and I will ask the committee members whether they want to pursue the matter. I hope that some members will have the opportunity—albeit during the debate—to comment on the content of the response. On behalf of the committee, I belatedly take this opportunity to thank our seemingly indefatigable clerking team, who worked at break-neck speed from the first evidence-taking session on 16 April until the production of the final report on the cusp of the summer recess. The Parliament is also indebted to the many witnesses, including those who submitted written evidence. They were a wide range of the usual suspects: the Scottish Prison Service management, the minister, prisoners, governors past and present, the Association of  Visiting Committees for Scottish Penal Establishments, the Prison Service Union, a range of accountancy firms and Professor Marshall in Canada, who gave evidence via video link. All that evidence was collected within seven weeks, showing that we on the Justice 1 Committee are a determined lot. I extend my personal gratitude to my colleagues on the committee, who applied themselves to the task in hand with determination and commitment, despite thrice-weekly meetings in May and twice-weekly meetings in June, to meet a timetable that was truncated by the Easter recess, which followed almost immediately the publication of the "Scottish Prison Service Estates Review". The review was promised to the original Justice and Home Affairs Committee for spring 2000, but it was delayed because the private build, public operate model was not even mentioned in the original specification. The review was further delayed because the figures did not add up—I shall say more about that later. Nonetheless, the committee was resolved and ended up with a unanimously agreed report. Every paragraph was signed off by every member, which demonstrated the valuable committee system at its best. Things have moved on and a member of our press corps has questioned the need for a debate now—as if everything was done and dusted, which is plainly not the case. No doubt, in the course of members' speeches, the many issues that were thrown up during our inquiry will be developed. I shall therefore try to speak to the broader issues, focusing on four of them: private finance initiatives and public-private partnerships; HM Prison Peterhead; slopping out; and alternatives to custody. I shall link those issues to recent developments, in particular the minister's statement of 5 September, which gave a marginal opportunity to explore the issues. The limited time that we had then is, in part, why the committee is using its precious allocated time to have a two-hour debate today. If time allows, I shall also make cursory reference to the Executive's response, which, as I said, I received last night. I shall address the four issues that I have identified in reverse order, as the last one should have been the starting point for the prison estates review, not the requirement to end slopping out, with which we agree. Paragraph 52 of the executive summary of the committee's report states: "The Committee believes that slopping out should be eradicated as soon as possible and recommends that this be addressed by either refurbishing existing accommodation or by building new houseblocks on existing sites." That issue is not a problem. However, it is not with that issue alone in mind that one should proceed  either ostensibly or principally to redesignate and redesign not only the prison estate, but the service and the functioning of prisons themselves. The committee challenged the notion that we can build our prison service for the decades ahead without addressing penal reform and simply by basing changes on projected and continuing increases in prison numbers. That idea should be exposed as too simplistic a premise in any event and it should be subject to even more critical examination—we know that a prison is a waste of resources, as so many offenders return after a few months. A substantial majority of prisoners serve a sentence of six months or less and there is no time for them to attend a relevant programme to deal with literacy or numeracy, let alone drug dependency. I refer the minister to paragraph 21 of the committee's report: "The Committee is concerned that crucial decisions about the long-term future of the prison estate are being based on a single set of assumptions which must be subject to policy considerations. The Committee ... considers that the Executive should have carried out a complete review of alternatives to custody, how they could be used more effectively and their potential impact on projected prisoner numbers in advance of the Estates Review." It continues: "It is not prudent to consider the Estates Review without examining penal policy." On the effectiveness of throughcare, the committee said: "The Committee is dismayed by the lack of reliable evidence on participation in rehabilitation and throughcare in the public sector. If we do not know the percentage of the prisoner population taking part in programmes, we cannot assess their effectiveness. It is essential that reliable data is produced on participation in these programmes and the outcomes." During this week's questioning of Alec Spencer at the Justice 1 Committee, it was disclosed without even a cursory blush that the director of rehabilitation for the Scottish Prison Service could not produce data on the effectiveness of rehabilitation programmes. That is the level at which the SPS is operating. On slopping out, the committee agreed—who would not?—that the practice should end, for the sake of the staff as well as the inmates. I move quickly to the issue of PPP and PFI. The prison estates review considered three options: private build, private operate; private build, public operate; and public build, public operate. The committee expressed "serious concern" that the private build, public operate model—although commonplace in many sectors—did not figure in the review except as a late afterthought. In paragraph 43 of our report, we agreed with Stephen Nathan that there had been a "paucity of  research" and we recommended that "the Executive should carry out further comparative work". No doubt, in responding to the debate, the minister will advise us what steps he has taken in that regard. I do not think that that is addressed in his written response. The private build, private operate model is called the Kilmarnock option for short. Our findings on such a model were unequivocal—as were our other conclusions—and brought into question the quality of the operational leadership of the SPS, if such differentials as were placed before us, between private build, private operate and private build, public operate models, are to be believed. Paragraph 48 of our report states: "This calls into question the quality of operational leadership and management of public sector prisons". The Executive believes that the SPS would not be able to commission a building project, which seems extraordinary. We asked the minister, in connection with our other concerns about the leadership of the SPS, to "explore the reasons why the SPS does not believe that it has sufficient in-house expertise". The minister should not ask the SPS simply to come up with an alternative, but—much more fundamental—he should ask it why it did not and, more important, why it cannot. I will not mince my words, because the committee did not. In reference to Tony Cameron, the chief executive of the SPS, we say in paragraph 60 of the report: "The Committee found the evidence of the Chief Executive of the SPS extraordinary and unconvincing on the issue of buildings, staffing and the space required and found his comments about the inefficiency of his organisation astonishing." That paragraph, like all the others, was signed off and agreed word for word by all members of the cross-party committee. I have no doubt that the minister will advise us what cognisance he has taken of that comment. Our concern extended to the use of Kilmarnock—the only private build, private operate prison in Scotland—as a model: "The Committee is concerned that the specification for HMP Kilmarnock is being used as a point of comparison, despite evidence that there is inadequate space for staff in that building. The Committee believes the building specification is inextricably linked to staffing levels". It is unfortunate—to say the least—that, despite that, the minister has embarked on instructing at least one PPP prison. Although it has been stated that that prison is to incarcerate remand prisoners, we have yet to be told how long the period between decision and occupation will be, despite my parliamentary questions. Perhaps the minister will give an answer in this debate.  On Peterhead—an issue that other members will address more fully—the committee is clear: "The Committee therefore recommends that a long-term male ... offenders' facility should remain at Peterhead with the following recommendations: the state of the building should be addressed either by refurbishment or new build and the difficulties associated with throughcare should be tackled." I have checked the minister's measured response on Peterhead on 5 September: "As our priority is to develop wider sex offender programmes, now is not the time to move the long-term programmes from Peterhead. Peterhead will therefore remain open and will continue to be the main centre for long-term sex offenders."— [ Official Report , 5 September 2002; c 13375.]  I think that, when pressed, the minister said that he could not see that changing for the foreseeable future. I compare that with Alec Spencer's response to the Justice 1 Committee this week, from which it is clear that Peterhead is reprieved pro tem, but that is all. In his evidence, Mr Spencer made it clear that the reprieve might be for eight or 10 years only and that no final decision has been made, although one might be made in the summer of next year. Unlike the journalists, who have moved on to another instant headline, the committee—and whichever committee follows on—is committed to the long game and to keeping a watch on what happens in the months ahead. I note that the Scottish Parliament information centre briefing paper on the prison estates review states that there are three key documents: the SPS report, the PricewaterhouseCoopers report and the Executive's consultation document. That is not so: there are four key documents and the Justice 1 Committee's report is certainly not the least of them. I move, That the Parliament notes the 6 th Report, 2002 of the Justice 1 Committee, Report on the Prison Estates Review (SP Paper 612).

I congratulate Michael Matheson on  securing the debate, and I congratulate the prison officers, their families and colleagues who are here. Some of us met the officers recently when they were launching their petition. It seems incredible to be talking about having to save a club that is so obviously successful, not just from the point of view of prison officers, but from that of the whole community. How many assets like the social club at Polmont do communities generally have? It does not seem so incredible that we are having to discuss the matter, however, when we learn that the social club is owned by the Scottish Prison Service, which I hold in even less regard than does Donald Gorrie. The Justice 1 Committee has had nothing from the management of the SPS but arrogance and inability to consult at all levels. As for its recent statement that it intends to change its corporate personality and be more consultative, I am waiting for pigs to fly. On the subject of wildlife, I did not know that one of the organisations that uses the Polmont prison officers' social club is the Laurieston and District Racing Pigeon Society, whose president stated in a letter of support for the club—and I apologise for this dreadful pun—that his "members were shocked to hear that they would not have the privilege of holding our yearly 'Doo' in the Polmont Staff Social Club." The subject is not funny, but I thought that I would throw that in. I also note that the social club is used by the local fly-fishing club and by the San Quentin Country and Western Club. I hope that all those organisations do not use the club at the same time. Anyway, that demonstrates the range of activities that take place in what is a community club. Members have heard about the money that was spent. That money was spent for a reason—it was spent because the prison officers thought that they were going to be able to buy the property. The meat of the debate lies in the text of the motion. The SPS should "honour its commitment to allow the club to purchase the property". That is the starting point and the end point of the debate. The offer was made when the club needed building up. That has been done—investment has taken place and the club is profitable. It has much more money in its bank account than I have; it can start running my finances for me. I believe that the club has £12,000 in savings and has invested about £40,000. The club was built up to the point of its being ready to be purchased and to make its way within the community. At the last minute, the plug was pulled without a whisper of consultation—the club was simply told, "Your lease is not being  renewed." That is typical of the management of the Scottish Prison Service. I will be interested to hear how the Deputy Minister for Justice can defend the management of the SPS. I suggest, with respect, that Tony Cameron has the opportunity to show that he has changed his colours and that he is a listening chief executive. For years, he has trashed and demoralised prison officers through failure to reorganise the prisons. The prison officers run a successful club. Mr Cameron can show that he is listening to the people in the Prison Service, so let him make his first such gesture by allowing the prison officers to keep their building.

Is the minister aware that, in evidence to the justice committees yesterday, Jim Wallace declared that, according to the advisory committee report on secure accommodation, there was no evidence to suggest that there was a shortage of such accommodation, even across her portfolio? Given that, according to the minister's leaked documents, it is now clear that the 25 additional places have been filled, will she confirm that no vulnerable children are waiting for secure accommodation?

To ask the First Minister what concerns the Scottish Executive has regarding child poverty. (S1F-2121)

Given that one in three children in resources-rich Scotland lives in poverty and that we have the third-highest child poverty rate of 25 countries after five years of Labour rule, is the First Minister not ashamed?

In reference to the same petition and having listened carefully to the minister, I take it that he utterly refutes the petition's claim that, by calling fingerprinting "a matter of opinion"—or an art form—ministers are wrongfully covering up errors made by experts. Is that the case?

It will not surprise members that I will talk about the Borders rail link. Years ago now, this Parliament voted unanimously to reinstate the line from Edinburgh to Carlisle. Since then, very little funding has gone towards the project. A total of £1.9 million has gone towards preparing a bill, and a pauchle—£250,000—has gone directly to the project. The project clearly is not a priority for the coalition, but it ought to be. It is a disgrace that a part of Scotland that has a family income that is £50 a week less than the Scottish average, and that has a growing elderly population, is not having its railway line reinstated as a priority to regenerate its economy. Margo MacDonald said that we have an overheated city, from which there could be a dispersal of jobs and people to an environment that is pleasant to work in. That is not happening for want of £70 million to start the rail line to Galashiels. Euan Robson recently welcomed the £250,000 and said: "Once again, the actions of the Executive speak louder than words". Well, with £50 million a mile being spent for a motorway, the Executive's actions do indeed speak louder than words. The vision of my colleagues on the coalition benches is so limited that at a recent meeting in Stow—where people have been campaigning for a railway station that would reopen their village and connect it to other communities—a letter that Ian Jenkins had written was read out. It said that people should not go on about the Stow station or they might not get the line at all. My goodness, with fechters such as that, no wonder the people of Stow have a failing economy and no railway station.

Just a minute. Mr Jenkins's party has been in coalition for three years, but there has not been a penny of commitment at any stage for that railway line.

Mr Jenkins has had his say. The other point made at the Stow meeting was about the train taking longer. Mr Jenkins should ask himself why there are three stops in Midlothian and nobody quibbling about it taking time there. I shall tell him why: there are Labour votes in Midlothian. The Executive does not care about the two Liberal Democrats in the Borders. They have no clout, so no money is coming to the Borders railway line. While I am about it, I shall have a go at Mr Jenkins's colleague, Euan Robson, who is not here now. If Mr Robson is welcoming £250,000 for the Borders railway line, how little will he settle for to have a stop at Reston, in his constituency? A lot less, I would suggest. This Parliament unanimously committed itself to that railway line. What right has the Executive not to put any commitment in funding towards it? Why should it ask that railway line, above all others, somehow to pay its way? Nobody is asking whether the links to Glasgow or Edinburgh airports will pay their way. It is time now for the Liberal Democrats to get some money out of their Labour colleagues before it is too late.

Will the member give way?

Let me quote from the speech that the Minister for Finance and Public Services made to the Parliament: "For our rural communities, we will deliver additional support for our forestry strategy and our fishing industry. Our investment in infrastructure and public services will  bring direct benefits for rural communities." But what was the next sentence? It was: "Our cities are central to the quality of life and well-being of Scotland."— [ Official Report , 12 September 2002; c 13669.]  That is where the rub lies. We hear a lot of gesture politics and gesture words about rural communities, but there is no financing.

I have only just started. The member should let me get on. As far as infrastructure is concerned, the Borders has received nothing for roads or for the rail link. Although a rail link has been proposed to Edinburgh and Glasgow airports—

No—the member should sit down. We have received only £2.4 million for the Borders rail link. That is a hill of beans.

I am not giving way at the moment. We have not even received any funding for broadband. What has the Scottish Executive delivered for the Borders economy? I will tell the chamber. It has delivered a call centre. In 1999, Donald Dewar announced the creation of a call centre that would boost the Borders economy and bring 250 jobs to the area. In a Scottish Liberal Democrat press release from 14 February 2001—it is always handy to keep such releases—Ian Jenkins described it as a "major boost for the Borders economy, an economy that has had more than its fair share of job losses in recent years." He continued: "I am especially pleased that this will help diversify the economy and will also provide opportunities for young people to both live and work in the Borders." Well, well. What happened to that call centre, which received about £1 million of Government funding? Until this June, its employee total was in double figures. In June, it managed to increase that figure to something like 160 and, for a brief moment, on 29 August, it employed 313 people, 60 of whom were commuting from Edinburgh. Within three weeks, 100 of those jobs had gone and I have learned today that 30 more people are on short-term contracts. That is the reality of investment in the Borders economy. Let me quote from young people—

Oh, deary me. The Liberals have been in the Borders for 40 years. They were a waste of space then, and they still are. I have some comments from young people who took up employment at the call centre. "One upset worker" said to The Southern Reporter : "I only started three weeks ago, and had a week on a training course. This came totally out of the blue—everyone was looking forward to the careers they were promised." A mother said: "My son gave up his job to go there and has had to pass a lot of tests, only to be told he no longer had a job. They shouldn't be allowed to get away with destroying people's lives." For the people in the Borders, there were simply a lot of soundbites, noise and big promises. If people are working at the centre, they are lucky to get £10,000; most of them are on short-term contracts. The way in which the organisation hires and fires its staff is outrageous. How anyone can stand up in the chamber and say that the Borders has done well out of this Lib-Lab coalition is a great mystery to me and to the people who will vote next year.

Will the minister give way?

rose—

Before the minister runs out of time, he should acknowledge that he has completely missed the point—it is not about not protecting the poor. The bill narrates that it abolishes warrant sales. I want the minister to answer a direct question. Section 16 of the Debtors (Scotland) Act 1987 narrates circumstances of exempt articles and the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill narrates, in schedule 2, non-essential assets that are exempt from attachment orders. Those sections are identical. Are not they the same thing?

Hooray!

Will the member take an intervention?

I was a bit impassioned at the time. What Murdo Fraser says is nonsense. I, too, have represented many creditors. At issue is the fact that the principle of the abolition of warrant sales, which the Parliament voted for, is not included in the bill—as I demonstrated by quoting sections from comparable legislation.

Phil Gallie will recall that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee unanimously recommended in its stage 1 report on the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill "that efforts should be concentrated on finding a workable but humane alternative." Having heard me quote earlier from the Debtors (Scotland) Act 1987 and from the sections of the bill covering attachment orders and officers being able to "open shut and lockfast places", is Phil Gallie saying that such methods are alternatives? Are they not just replacements?

I too am a member of the Law Society of Scotland and a non-practising solicitor who had a great deal to do with clients who were in debt, so I recognise much of what Fergus Ewing had to say. I want to focus on the principles. The Justice and Home Affairs Committee's stage 1 report on the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill said: "The first step is ... to acknowledge that poindings and warrant sales must go, and that efforts should be concentrated on finding a workable but humane alternative." It is a pity that Mr McLetchie has left the chamber, because I have an example of what is an alternative and what a replacement. When the bus breaks down, one has the alternative of sitting by the road and perhaps hitching a lift, or one could wait for a replacement bus. That is the difference between an alternative and a replacement. What the Executive is doing—and it is kidding itself on—is replacing warrant sales by the exceptional attachment order, as I shall demonstrate.

No. I want to give an example. Murdo Fraser can come in later. I shall quote from two different pieces of legislation. The first lists as articles exempt from poinding, "implements, tools of trade, books or other equipment reasonably required for the use of the debtor or any member of his household in the practice of the debtor's or such member's profession, trade or business, not exceeding in aggregate value £500".  The second lists, "any implements, tools of trade, books or other equipment reasonably required for the use of the debtor in the practice of the debtor's profession, trade or business and not exceeding in aggregate value £1,000 or such amount as may be prescribed in regulations". The first piece of legislation permits "the opening of shut lockfast places, if necessary for the purpose of executing the poinding". The second provides a "Power of entry and valuation", under which, "An officer may open shut and lockfast places for the purposes of executing an attachment." There is no difference. I tell Trish Godman that a warrant sale is a procedure of diligence. It is irrelevant whether the person cannot pay because of their economic circumstances or whether they are wilfully not paying. It is a procedure, and that procedure remains in those two pieces of legislation. There is no difference between the Debtors (Scotland) Act 1987 and part 2 of the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill.

I am talking principles. The preamble to the bill says, inter alia, that it is a bill "to abolish poindings and warrant sales". It quite obviously is not abolishing warrant sales. That procedure remains. It is nothing to do with ability or inability to pay. It is the procedure. There are problems with the bill, but there is a logical argument here. We either abolish warrant sales or we do not. The Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill is not abolishing warrant sales. However, in the debate on 6 December 2000—

Please let me finish.

I have not misled people.

I shall give way.

It is not commercial.

With due respect, I ask the minister to check afterwards, but it is not commercial.

I would also like to add that, on 6 December 2000, in a debate in this chamber, Euan Robson said that he had suggested introducing a bill to abolish poindings and warrant sales only to be told: "'Actually, I think somebody's beaten you to it.' I therefore congratulate Tommy Sheridan".— [ Official Report , 6 December 2000; Vol 9, c 667.]  He went on to say: "I heard Tommy Sheridan say earlier that it is impossible to make an attachment to property without entry to property. That is simply not the case."— [ Official Report , 6 December 2000; Vol 9, c 668.]  It is. It is here in the section of the bill that deals with entry into lockfast places. When the Justice and Home Affairs Committee scrutinised the bill, Phil Gallie said that it was clear that the Tories would not stand against the principle of getting rid of poindings and warrant sales. Poindings and warrant sales are still here in a bill, renamed. David McLetchie was quite right; we must not kid ourselves. It is the same thing. All right, there are barriers and protections, but the Executive is still keeping warrant sales. Let us not kid ourselves.

In the same debate, Gordon Jackson said: "The right thing, and the really good thing, that we have done today is to abolish poindings and warrant sales and to say, 'Focus your minds. On that date it will disappear.'"— [ Official Report , 6 December 2000; Vol 9, c 670.]  Warrant sales may be more restricted, but they live on.

Will the member give way?

I remind David McLetchie that, during the debate of 6 December 2000, Phil Gallie said that the Conservative party "would not stand against the principle of getting rid of poindings and warrant sales."— [Official Report, 6 December 2000; Vol 9, c 668.]  When challenged in that debate, Mr McLetchie admitted that in putting a diligence against moveable property and an attachment "there is no point in kidding ourselves" and agreed with me that "That would be poinding and warrant sale by another name."— [Official Report, 6 December 2000; Vol 9, c 646.]  That is why Mr Sheridan and I left the working group—the attachment is a replacement not an alternative.

I think not.

Another illusion gone.

Will the member take an intervention?

It is courteous of the member to give way. Lord James has referred to minor offences. We are all agreed that only very minor offences would have to be referred. I take it that the member was persuaded by the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and by the comment by the chief constable for central Scotland that I quoted in my speech, as he was persuaded by them on the smacking issue.

Will the member give way?

Did she smack you?

I will confine my remarks to section 44 and the committee's recommendation 165, which states that it does not fully support the proposal for a youth crime pilot as it stands, but is attracted by the recommendation of the Association of Chief Police Officers of Scotland.  I fully understand the perception that youth crime is not dealt with effectively. Many young offenders seem to flout the law, the police and the public. However, from my experience of visiting prisons and taking evidence, I know that—as sure as little eggs—entering the criminal justice system leads someone into a life of crime. The earlier that intervention can be made at an appropriate level, to stop young people from entering adult courts, the better. In the Justice 2 Committee's evidence, the usual suspects—Save the Children, Barnardo's and so on—supported the youth pilot projects. However, ACPOS submitted interesting evidence to the committee. It is worth reading what the chief constable of central Scotland said. I bear in mind what David McLetchie said about major offences—that there are difficulties of definition—but the chief constable's submission was interesting. He said: "On many occasions, the youngsters that might come to the fore in that category are those who might be first-time offenders who have committed acts of disorder, breaches of the peace, common assault or vandalism. Our view is that a pilot study would be worth while to see whether there would be any success in providing different options for those individuals, instead of having them enter the adult criminal justice system. Day in and day out, we see youngsters graduate from involvement in those types of quality-of-life offences to more serious acts, which can lead to a proliferation in car thefts or to more serious assaults. ACPOS would support any pilot scheme to try to divert youngsters from criminality."—[ Official Report , Justice 2 Committee , 15 May 2002, c 1331.] That was an important comment by front-line officers who deal with the matter. The Scottish Children's Reporter Administration had an interesting thing to say about Scotland. According to that organisation, we are the only country in western Europe in which 16-year-olds are routinely dealt with in the adult criminal justice system. Given the cycle that that can lead to, it is interesting to quote from the eloquent evidence from Douglas Bulloch of the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration, who said: "Two weeks ago, I heard a children's commissioner from Norway describe, metaphorically, how his municipality was trying to pull children from the river and put them back on their feet on dry land. He said that eventually the people there thought they had better start to look upstream and find out why their children were falling in the river in the first place." —[ Official Report, Justice 2 Committee , 5 June 2002; c 1454.] He went on to say other things and ended by saying that the cycle must be broken. The Scottish Parliament must not go for cheapskate headline-grabbing, youth-bashing answers to youth crime, which is a complex and serious issue. The Justice 2 Committee rightly recognised that the youth crime pilot project had huge faults, but it should not just be swept aside. It  is worthy of consideration, because we must try to do something to prevent young people from simply graduating from all the things that we see daily in the street—about which I get as angry as the next man or woman—into a professional life of crime.

I have finished.

Do we have figures for the number of cases that sheriffs remit from the sheriff court to the High Court for sentencing? It would be interesting to know those figures.

It is strange that I speak in this members' business debate as convener of the Justice 1 Committee, which is currently dealing with petitions on dangerous driving and the law. I applaud the petitioners, Mr and Mrs Dekker and Mrs Donegan, for pursuing the matter in tragic circumstances. The Justice 1 Committee is concerned about the time that the matter is taking. The then Justice and Home Affairs Committee first considered petitions PE29 and PE55 in May 2000. We knew that the report that has been referred to—"Dangerous Driving and the Law", which was produced by the then Department of Transport, Local Government and the Regions—was in the offing, so we waited until it came out. I note that the report was published in January 2002. We are way down the road and we still have no decisions from the minister. In the meantime, the Justice 1 Committee has been pursuing the issues that were raised. We wrote to the Minister for Justice and to the Lord Advocate about those issues. I will refer to the Justice 1 Committee's letter of 15 May 2002 to Colin Boyd. We said: "The Committee supports the suggestion that all causing death by dangerous driving cases should be tried in the High Court." Colin Boyd's response is that the prosecution service can exercise discretion. We understand that, but the committee's position is that there is no appropriate signal to put out in such cases.  There is a hint that sometimes cases that are brought to the sheriff court stay at the sheriff court when they should not have been there in the first place. The committee was also greatly concerned about the lack of statistical information that is kept on the outcome of cases involving fatalities and serious injuries, where those fatalities and serious injuries do not form part of the charge. In such cases, that information would not normally be entered in the records. The issue was raised again in the Justice 1 Committee's meeting of 3 September. In his response to our concerns, the Minister for Justice noted that the committee "supports the recommendation to undertake a consultation exercise to assess ... the introduction of an intermediate offence, to sit between the current offences of dangerous driving and careless driving" and that it supports research into the extension of the current offence of causing death by dangerous driving to include serious and severe injuries. Sometimes it is only the abilities of paramedics that make the difference between kinds of offence. The minister also noted that the committee was "persuaded by the recommendation that there should be a requirement for convictions for bad driving offences to be kept by the DVLA to assist in monitoring re-offending." Reoffending happens, particularly where speed is involved. At our meeting on 3 September, the committee decided—I will paraphrase to save time—to write to the minister to ensure that we obtain a proper timetable for the steering group and that we will see, in the form of answers, an end to the research. The letter will be in the post. We have been considering the issue for two years. Firm answers and responses are required very soon.

The minister will be aware that I have lodged a series of questions about the operation of the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001, which was originally a practical and worthy committee bill. The act protects cohabitees by extending the power of arrest so that it can be attached to common law interdicts. There will be a review later in the year to discover how many people have applied for such interdicts. When will the review be published and what publicity has there been to advise people of the act? It is my experience that people are not aware of the protection that the act could give them.

I ask the First Minister to consider whether a bail hearing on an indictable offence and a bail application in an appeal against conviction on an indictable offence should be heard in public and not in chambers. In the first instance, which occurs pre-trial, the accused's rights are protected by section 4 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981. At present, those proceedings take place in private. It would assist the public if they were in the public domain.

I welcome the statement on Peterhead in so far as it goes. However, there is no commitment to new build there. The minister said that there is a saving of £12.5 million from current expenditure. Is it not the case that, over the past three years, £40 million to £50 million has been clawed back out of the SPS budget? If that money, together with the £12.5 million, had been applied three years ago to building new house blocks, the minister would not be in this position now. Does he agree that, if that money had not been clawed back, we could have had the new house blocks and that a considered position, reflecting the Justice 1 Committee's views, could have been taken about new build prisons in Scotland?

A solicitor made that comment.

I simply say that I have from the sheriff clerk's office the court time figures from 1999-2000 through to 2001-02. I do not know whether we are talking about the same figures. It looks to me as if the amount of court time used has been pretty static over that period, apart from criminal summary complaints, which went up from 12 in 1999-2000 to 20 in 2001-02. The amount of court time used has not fallen. According to the figures that I have from the sheriff clerk, it has been static or has risen.

I am mystified as to why everybody is clearing the chamber. The debate will be startling and stunning. I have heard this called the graveyard slot, but I do not adhere to that view. Seriously, I thank the Deputy Minister for Justice for his letter of yesterday, which clarifies why no formal response was made to the sheriff principal's report on the previous review of the courts system in the Borders and East Lothian. In a debate two years ago, the former Deputy Minister for Justice, Angus MacKay, said that a formal response would be made. In his letter, the current deputy minister says that no formal response was made because "Ministers accepted the recommendations of the Sheriff Principal in their entirety and there were no further matters to report to the Parliament at that time. It is unfortunate that we have to re-visit the future of Peebles Sheriff Court once again but, as I will explain in the Debate, the situation with which we are now faced is very different from that which applied in January 2000." I feel that I should sit down and hear what the minister has to say, so that I can respond, but I will press on to say why I think that we are in the same situation as applied in January 2000. I speak not only because I represent the South of Scotland, but because I have an interest in justice matters from my days in practice and as convener of the Justice 1 Committee. The press release on the debate to which I referred reported that Angus MacKay said: "I am able to advise the Parliament today that Sheriff Principal Nicholson's Report was received by officials in the Scottish Executive last week ... Ministers will need a little longer to consider the Executive's response to the Sheriff  Principal's Report. But I have listened to what members have said in this debate and I have a good deal of sympathy for the principle arguments which underlie the motion. The Minister for Justice and myself will reflect on what has been said today. But I think I can assure Members now that there is no prospect of this administration bringing forward proposals for closure of Duns and Peebles Sheriff Courts. I end with an undertaking that our formal response"— I referred to that— "to the Sheriff Principal's Report will be made known to the Parliament in due course." Of course, I focused on the words "no prospect". If there is no prospect, there is no prospect. I ask Richard Simpson, who is, unfortunately, present, whether that has the same ambiguity of meaning as the phrase "absolute disaster" does. Will we see something different? In his letter of 15 May to me, on the survey of Peebles sheriff court, the Minister for Justice said: "I hope to reach a conclusion on this matter before the summer." It appears from press releases from other members that a consultation is to be held of the Borders people. Unfortunately, the Minister for Justice did not share that information with me, for some reason. Perhaps I have different lines of communication—let us put it like that—from those that my Liberal Democrat colleagues have. If a consultation is to be held, it will mark a change from conclusion to consultation. It would be nice to have been told that by another source than the press. That said, I welcome a proper consultation—I hope that it will be that. However, to suggest, as the press releases to which I referred do, that the public should come up with alternative venues is ridiculous. That route has already been explored and rejected. A letter of 18 January from the Scottish Court Service to Andy Crawley says: "As you narrate, alternative local venues for the hearing of Peebles court business were considered and all regarded as unsuitable. Alternative accommodation must be suitable for the hearing of criminal and civil court business and as you will be aware this extends to more than a decent sized courtroom. With your experience as a practising Solicitor I am sure you will agree that ancillary accommodation is required for the Sheriff, Clerk of Court, Procurator Fiscal, Solicitors and Witnesses. Secure accommodation for prisoners in custody is paramount." I do not know where we will look in Peebles for that alternative accommodation, because a courthouse is a specialised venue—more so these days. Even at the moment, the position in Peebles is very unsatisfactory. Prisoners are being escorted in handcuffs from the police station across the main road and into the courthouse—innocent until proven guilty—in full view of the public. We are not  back at the turn of the century. That must end. In the legal fraternity, the opposition to the closure of court facilities in Peebles is unanimous, as detailed in part in the motion. Those opposed to closure include the sheriff principal, the sitting sheriffs, the Sheriffs Association, the Faculty of Solicitors in Roxburghshire, the Society of Solicitors in the Shires of Selkirk and Peebles and the Peebles citizens advice bureau. To enable a different slant to be given to the matter, I will quote from a letter from the CAB, dated 27 May, which gives its support for the keeping of the sheriff court. The letter states: "The judicial process is stressful enough for lay people with little or no experience of court appearances, without the added strain of difficult and expensive journeys to unfamiliar surroundings. We have always seen it as one of the additional advantages of a local court that we can advise clients to prepare for a hearing (of whatever kind and whether they are defender, pursuer or witness) by attending the court beforehand to see how it operates." When I was in practice, I did that with people in civil cases, who were perhaps in a reparation action and found themselves at the Court of Session. It was invaluable to take the client to look at the courthouse, to show them where they would be standing and tell them about the procedures. People are often put into those situations completely unprepared. They think that it will be like something that they have seen on the television, either from the States or in a drama. They do not know what is going to happen and, if they have seen the courthouse, it makes a huge difference to their confidence in appearing. The letter from the CAB makes another serious point about small claims actions. It states: "Although the CAB represents in Small Claims actions, our resources are also very restricted. As you know, Small Claims often require several appearances at court and we have reluctantly had to refuse representation to clients recently because of the time (and expense) required on the 20 mile round trip to Selkirk. However helpful the sheriff is in explaining court procedures to litigants, as the CAB rep, I know from personal experience that having a representative or adviser can make all the difference". Those are very serious matters. I have a letter from a solicitor, which cites the case of three defence witnesses who all live in the Broughton area. On average, they would have to travel 40 miles to and from the court to Selkirk. Public transport is impractical in the Borders. It might be half-reasonable for someone to get to Selkirk if they live in Peebles, but not if they live on the outskirts and have to get to Peebles in the first place. The solicitor goes so far as saying that "the fabric of the Court building in Peebles was deliberately neglected in a period of years running up to the review." I must be quick. Do I have two minutes?

I challenge the figure of £1 million for the refurbishment. My understanding—no doubt the minister will address the matter—is that a substantial part of the money is to do with bringing the facilities into compliance with requirements of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995, so that money would have had to have been spent no matter what. There are other costs to people; there is not just the stress of travelling. People on benefits would require additional funding to get to a court elsewhere. Costs in legal aid, both civil and criminal, would have to go up. There are also costs in additional police time. The minister completely misunderstands the position with public transport in the Borders. The strategy statement in the guidance leaflet from the Scottish Court Service says: "Our purpose is to help secure ready access to justice for the people of Scotland, delivering a high quality service to all who use the courts." It is not ready access if there is no court in Peebles. I ask the minister three questions. Will the minister stand by the balance outlined in the Minister for Justice's parliamentary answer to me? He stated: "In addition to the cost of repair and upgrading, consideration will be given to the level of business transacted at the court and the impact on court users will be taken into account in determining the most effective means to provide court services".— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 3 April 2002; p 352.]  I focus on "impact on court users". Will the minister confirm that, whatever the case with the current building, a court facility will remain in Peebles? Finally, will he advise whether he has ruled out new build in Peebles?

To ask the Scottish Executive what consideration it is giving to amending police bail conditions. (S1O-5413)

I thank the Minister for Justice for correcting me on that. A court bail order can have a curfew condition attached, prohibiting someone who has been charged with an alcohol-related offence from being out between the hours of 7 pm and 7 am, thus denying them the opportunity to reoffend. Will the minister consider attaching a similar curfew condition to police bail, which the police have indicated to me would be a simple but effective measure?

As some people know, my engagement with finance is on the fruit level—apples and apples, apples and pears. However, I understand more since Professor Brian Main appeared before a joint meeting of the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee to give us serious and much-needed advice on the shadowy business of considering the budget report. The report from the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee is covered in paragraphs 10 to 20 of the budget report. It was sometimes difficult to understand where money was being applied. We want budget headings to be revised to be more consistent with programme-based activities so we can find out what happens to the money. We want to better understand what is meant by "Miscellaneous Categories". We were allocated a miscellaneous category in 2001-02 with approximately £13.5 million of spending. In 2003-04 the category was split in two: "Miscellaneous Projects" and "Support Programmes". What does that mean? I am no clearer about the matter. We require subject committees to state how much money has been spent and on what the money was spent. I understand that there will be changes in the way information will be presented. When spending crosses several parliamentary briefs—for example, in the care and treatment of offenders—the collective sum of money could be co-ordinated to inform us how much was spent where by various departments. Members will be glad to know that my  contribution will be brief. I do not need 10 minutes. The substance of the budget concerns us, given that crime is one of the Executive's five key priorities. The amount of money spent on justice is decreasing. Managed expenditure is increasing by 3.1 per cent in 2002-03 and 2003-04. However, in the justice department, spending is set to fall by 1.7 per cent in real terms. In order to stay at the same level, we would need an extra £18.5 million for justice. In order to keep in line with the rise in managed expenditure, justice would need an extra £36 million. I do not see how cutting the justice budget balances with the fact that justice, and reducing youth crime in particular, is a key priority. I say to David Davidson that the Justice 1 Committee made and costed specific recommendations. I will give examples of three of them. We asked for an increase in the diversion from prosecution budget from £1.5 million to £4 million. We asked for an increase in the budget for time-out centres, such as the centre in Glasgow for women offenders, from £0.6 million to £1.2 million. Those are examples of how we could keep people out of prisons, save money, stop people reoffending and get people back into structured lives. It is money well spent at the front end to stop spending excess money at the other end. Finally, we asked for the budget for voluntary through-care provision to be almost doubled, from £3.5 million to £6 million, because that hits recidivism on the head, as we know. Something like 70 to 80 per cent of offenders are back in prison within two years. Money spent on that in the budget would cut the amount of money that is spent elsewhere. We think that, overall, the justice budget—I should not be doing this; Jim Wallace should do it for himself and I am sure that he does—should be increased. Within that, priorities should have more money spent on them to save money at the end of the sequence of events that happen in people's lives. I draw those priorities to the minister's attention and I hope that he will respond.

That is a lone voice.

Jamie Stone felt the vibes.

They are all leaving.

The minister is aware that, with the commencement of these provisions under the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000, the presumption that children with special needs will attend their local school will fall in their favour, except in special circumstances. Given that local authorities are already finding education budgets strained, will she reconsider allocating central funding to children with special needs to ensure that that money is rucksacked? In that way, the money will follow the child to whichever local authority is responsible for the school they attend, thus ensuring service delivery. Just now, children are facing particular obstacles because of financing. The minister will remember that I have asked this question before.

I did not think that I would be called. Excellent.

If I had not wanted to speak, I would not have endeavoured to intervene during Euan Robson's speech. I know that he is campaigning, as I am, for the reopening of Reston railway station. I hope that the minister will provide limited funding for a feasibility study into the operation and viability of a station at Reston. That is all that is required for that part of the railway line—it is not as though a lot of funding is required. My second point concerns the Borders railway line. I refer to the leaflet "Have Your Say: Edinburgh's New Transport Initiative". Apart from the fact that I do not know whether people in the Borders have received that leaflet, I have other concerns about it. In its middle pages, it refers to rail schemes and mentions the "Borders rail line from Edinburgh to Galashiels". However, under the heading "'Up-front' transport improvements", it says: "Many publicly funded transport improvements will be put in place before 2006, and before any congestion charging scheme is introduced. These up-front improvements will include—" The list in the leaflet does not include the Borders railway line. We know of the troubles with FirstBus in the Borders, so the omission of the Borders railway line from that list means that people who try to get into Edinburgh to work by private transport could be charged up to £2 a day. In the Borders area, wages are some £50 to £60 a week less than they are in the rest of Scotland. People are driven—"driven" being the operative word—to commute to Edinburgh. I would like an assurance from the minister that efforts will be made to put money into the Borders railway line and to reinstate it before congestion charges get off the ground. There is no reason why the line cannot be operational before 2006. If the minister can spend £450 million on five miles of motorway, he can spend £100 million on reinstating a railway line in order to give people in the Borders access to jobs in Edinburgh and people in Edinburgh access to jobs in the Borders.

Will the member give way?

Does Nora Radcliffe support English Welsh & Scottish Railway, which wants to see the reinstatement of the Borders railway line as a central freight line through Scotland? That would be very useful, given the current problems on the west coast line.

I congratulate Gordon Jackson on securing  this debate about an illness that is, as has been said, a cinderella condition. It is reckoned that about 3,000 people in the south of Scotland suffer from epilepsy. As has been said, there are no specialist nurses and no epilepsy neurologists in that area. Those 3,000 people are not getting the specialist treatment they require. That can lead to the high number of misdiagnoses, which the motion refers to, that can cause huge problems. I do not know why we do not have specialist nurses, given that we know the impact that they have in relation to heart disease, multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease. Specialist nurses not only treat people but educate the primary and secondary care professionals. They are a terribly important ingredient. Supporting counselling has been mentioned. Somebody quite close to me was diagnosed with epilepsy and did not tell me for quite a while. They simply had to deal with the condition even though it did not just prevent them from driving but caused them to give up university. They were put on medication that was pretty hit and miss and made them sleep most of the day. Medication is a huge problem for people with epilepsy and the amount of trial and error that is involved can be incredibly disruptive to someone's life. I was therefore interested to hear about the importance of the review of medication. It is dismaying to hear that some people are on courses of medication for years without review. The training of teaching staff is another important area that must be addressed, but I do not know whether it has been addressed at all. Recently, the Scottish Executive published the "Scottish Diabetes Framework". It is an excellent document that if implemented constructively and with adequate resources—again we hit the wall of resources—would introduce a sea change in the way people with diabetes are cared for in the NHS. As the motion says, we need to develop a national framework for dealing with epilepsy so that we can get away from patchwork provision, postcode prescribing, hit-and-miss medication testing and the isolation that many people with epilepsy suffer when they have to deal with the problem on their own. I am glad that we have had this debate, if only because the subject affects someone I know.

Is the minister aware of the apparent success of CCTV, as used by Lothian and Borders police, in identifying ring-leaders when there has been vandalism, for example, so that they can be dealt with differently from hangers-on? Notwithstanding what the minister said, I have information from Lothian and Borders police that there is insufficient money to continue with such projects, which seem to work. Will the minister ensure that such projects continue?

We should refer to the debate as one on youth issues—which is how the police asked me to refer to it—because most youngsters are not involved in crime, even though at times they appear threatening, as my colleagues have said. As we get older, we forget what it was like to assemble in large numbers and make a lot of noise, although I am afraid that some members, such as Bill Aitken, did not do that. The police are taking practical measures such as providing  skateboard parks, dry dock facilities for youngsters and youth shelters in certain areas. Although such measures should be commended, I do not see why the funding for them should come out of the police budget. I want to talk about secure accommodation, because there is some confusion about this issue. I understand that there are two categories of placements in secure accommodation. A small number of placements are funded through the justice budget and are for young people who have been convicted of serious crimes. However, the vast bulk of placements in secure accommodation are funded by local authorities through the social work budget. As evidence given on the budget at the joint meeting of the Justice 1 Committee and Justice 2 Committee made clear, that is not a happy way to organise funding. Extreme pressure was placed on local authorities that did not have any secure accommodation. It is my information that six or seven secure places are needed in the Borders, and the area does not have them. Sometimes such accommodation is for a youngster who is simply not getting on at home and runs away. For example, a youngster from Penicuik ran away to Edinburgh and was not seen for four days. The police in Edinburgh managed to pick them up and, although it was a social work referral, five hours of police time was spent trying to find secure accommodation. None could be found, not even in England, and in the end the police had to persuade the runaway to go back to the home that they had left in the first place. The youngster then moved back into that particular cycle.

I am coming to that point. We seem to talk about secure accommodation as though it is one particular thing. Instead, we should have a range of secure accommodation with different facilities. The Association of Directors of Social Work told the justice committees: "We do not just need the kind of secure accommodation that we have already; we need secure accommodation that incorporates health and social care as well as containing the youngsters. We need a different kind of secure accommodation."—[ Official Report, Justice 1 Committee and Justice 2 Committee (Joint Meeting) , 1 May 2002; c 171.] As the witness pointed out, we should not have a one-size-fits-all accommodation. As for the youngster who had run away to Edinburgh for four days, the police wondered how  they had managed to survive in that time. They might have committed petty crimes simply to keep going. Such problems can be exacerbated: the child who is deprived or has trouble at home might become a criminal. We know that there is a link in that respect. In the very short time that I have left, I want to highlight another serious point that the ADSW raised about the range of secure accommodation. The association said: "The needs of young women in secure accommodation are not well met at the moment and we often have vulnerable young women in with young men who have very aggressive and sometimes abusive behaviour."—[ Official Report, Justice 1 Committee and Justice 2 Committee (Joint Meeting) , 1 May 2002; c 172.] If that is the case, why has such a situation been allowed to continue throughout the three years of this Parliament? That issue has never been raised with me before, and I want the minister to address it. It is disgraceful.

No, I am on my last few seconds. The budget report by the justice committees recommends that the budget for secure accommodation come through the justice budget and that it then be designated to other departments to ensure that we have a clear funding stream. I hope that the minister will take up the point. Local authorities that deal with the bulk of what people loosely term as secure accommodation do not have the funding. If we had one clear funding stream, we would know how the money was operating and would perhaps be able to prevent children who have been put in secure accommodation for their own good because they are runaways from going into the other kinds of secure accommodation because they have committed serious criminal offences.

The Justice 1 and Justice 2 Committees received evidence that the budget for diversion from prosecution services is just under £1.5 million for each of the three years from 2001-02 to 2003-04. However, in evidence, representatives of  South Lanarkshire Council said that it would cost them £250,000 simply to deal with substance misuse. How can £1.5 million deal with Scotland's problems when South Lanarkshire Council alone requires £250,000?

Members did not think that I would come here and not talk about the railway, especially as Kielder forest is the largest afforested area in the UK. The harvest is being taken from that great forest and great big lorries are trundling through small villages that were never meant to take such freight. Not only roads, but buildings, are damaged and the lorries make the lives of people who live in those villages and small towns unpleasant. Introducing weight restrictions and repairing roads would be a temporary solution in the south of Scotland, but that is nonsense when Riccarton junction still exists—people can visit it—and has all the prospects for laying track. The forest is round about it. The timber could be taken on track roads and loaded on to a train to be taken over the border, which is its destination. That would make sense. The problem for members such as Ian Jenkins and for others who campaign for the Borders railway line is that freight seems to be slipping off the agenda. The Scottish Parliament information centre research note that was published before the Parliament's debate on the Borders rail link two years ago contained a quotation from Donald Dewar, who said: "A rail link may also be a useful freight route, and could make commuting journeys to Edinburgh quicker and safer." Such language is not used now. The language that is used now appears later in that research note: "The track would be more suitable for local or regional type diesel multiple units than for high speed Inter City type trains or freight." That is wrong. The problems must be solved over generations. The line should be heavy gauge. The illusion has been created that English Welsh and Scottish Railway Ltd is not interested in a freight line through the centre of Scotland. It is.

I am going back to trees. EWS would be prepared to operate on a freight line, which would carry timber through the Scottish Borders—I have mentioned trees again. It would also take trees—I have said the word again—into England. A lie has been told about EWS, on which Ian Jenkins may pick up. EWS has made it plain that there is every reason to have a freight line through the centre, to clear freight from the east and west coast lines. On that freight line, EWS would carry many, many trees.

The minister should be aware that at a recent presentation by GPs to MSPs it was brought to our attention that a substantial number of GPs are aged 50 and over. The same is true of practice nurses. What is the minister doing to address the fact that there might be problems with shortfalls not far down the line?

The Executive took two and a half years to come up with the estates review but there were only 12 weeks for consultation. Will the minister consider extending the consultation period, within which the Justice 1 Committee is finding it difficult to work?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

On the question of resources, my  colleague Maureen Macmillan alluded to the Justice 1 Committee's meeting with Grampian police yesterday. Its representatives told us that they are using up their resources chasing people who breach bail. Maureen Macmillan gave the example of a lady who had breached bail on five occasions to feed her drug habit. Will the minister consider looking in an holistic—if I may use that awful word—way at the resources that the police use when people breach bail to feed their drug habits?

I want to touch on two issues. The first is  inclusivity for young people with autism; the second is adults with ASD. We start from the premise that the Standards in Scotland's Schools Etc Act 2000 will introduce in August next year a presumption that children will be educated in mainstream education. To remind chief executives of local authorities that that will happen, the Executive issued a circular, dated 5 April 2002. On planning, the circular states, on page 3, paragraph 13: "Education authorities should also from the date of this circular begin to consider the placements of children already attending special schools or special units when they undertake their annual reviews of children's progress during the 2001-02 year." In other words, the attitude is that local authorities should address the policy now. That is not happening. There are a couple of reasons. The main one, as usual, is resources. There simply is not enough money to fund placements for children with special needs or autism in which they get support from educational psychologists, speech therapists and so on. The second issue that requires to be addressed is the attitude of some professionals. Unfortunately, out in the educational world there are head teachers who are not happy about taking children with autism or special needs into their schools. Some educational psychologists are also resisting the policy. I know from members' business debates and others that the spirit in the Parliament is to place such children, as far as possible, within their local schools, but that is not happening. I know of a child who has been at a local nursery two years, whose mother is having a terrible time trying to get her into a local primary in September. That is the reality. An issue that is often not addressed—but not by members—is the problem of adults with autism. Autism is for life. I know of a case involving a beautiful 22-year-old girl. It is difficult for people to understand that she has a problem. They just presume that she is not autistic. She was placed in accommodation with someone else who has autism. Lloyd Quinan rightly said that everybody is different. That placement was a disastrous match. The girl was bullied, harangued and had two beatings from the other person. She had to be quickly placed somewhere else. Her parental home was not an option. She has no friends and is well aware of her difficulties, so she took it out on her parents by behaving aggressively. To the outside world, however, the girl appears to have no problems. She contains it. She was placed in so-called emergency supported accommodation. The carers came in on rotation. They changed each day and she had no idea who  they were. Anybody in the chamber who knows anything about ASD knows that it is important that the daily life of a person with ASD is structured, predictable and stable. The girl, however, was in an unstable situation. For two months her parents slept over in the flat with her at night because there was nobody to come in. They are exhausted. It is a wonder that their marriage has survived the stress. I would like the minister to advise us of the strategies that are or will be in place for dealing with adults with ASD and what data we have. I do not expect those answers today. I have lodged a parliamentary question on funding in this area. Could the funding come from the centre? That would make rucksacking—where the funding follows the child—a lot easier because local authorities would not suddenly find that they do not have the resources because of accidents that happen in their community.

Do I have five minutes or four minutes, Presiding Officer?

I see. There are rules for some and rules for others. First, I associate myself with Robert Brown's remarks on the role of citizens advice bureaux. When I was a practising lawyer, I spent much of my time recommending that clients go to the local citizens advice bureau, in particular for benefits information. Citizens advice bureaux need financial support. Secondly, on rurality, I note the recommendations of the Social Justice Committee. I draw the Deputy Minister for Social Justice's attention to the first recommendation on page 17 of the report: "The Scottish Executive should clarify how the problem of rurality is dealt with in funding arrangements for the Voluntary Sector." I would like to know when an answer is received on that. I hope that it will deal with some of the issues that Mr Rumbles raised about defining deprived and impoverished areas. I will focus on something that mystifies me, but for which there may be a simple answer, and that is how funding is allocated. I will provide an example with regard to the recently announced £5 million package for special educational needs. I note that grants will be given "to a range of national and local organisations across Scotland, including Enquire, the national SEN advice and information service." That is worthy, but I do not understand how a voluntary organisation such as ISEA Scotland—ISEA stands for Independent Special Education Advice—which is a Scotland-wide organisation, does not get any money. I make the distinction for this reason: ISEA Scotland does the hands-on  work. Phone calls go to Enquire, but ISEA Scotland does the work. In fact, Enquire sends out a leaflet with information on ISEA Scotland on the back of it. The organisation has 1,056 live cases. The two women who run ISEA have children with special educational needs—

That point is similar to the one that I was making, which was not meant to be contentious. I do not understand why an organisation that represents people at educational appeal tribunals and committee hearings does not get funding. ISEA is to receive temporary funding only until the end of the year and it states in its leaflet that, because of funding, its advocacy service is "restricted to providing support to parents who are about to embark on or are in the process of going through an appeal or taking legal action. However exceptions will be made depending on individual circumstances". It is all very well to create an advice line, but if the people who are delivering the advice are not getting funded—

ISEA is not a Borders-based service—its advice line covers the whole of Scotland. I made the point to give an example and members have heard another example from my colleague Adam Ingram. I may be wrong, but I think that ISEA is the only voluntary organisation in Scotland that is doing that work. I am asking the Social Justice Committee to consider that discrepancy. I also ask the committee to be good enough to proceed to undertake an audit of the organisations that are receiving funding through the Scottish Executive or other bodies. That would allow us to  see who is getting the money and what they do for that money. It may be that there are examples other that ISEA in Scotland, but I ask the committee to consider the position of ISEA. It is all very well to have advice lines, but not if the front-line voluntary organisations that provide them do not get support to deliver the services.

I am not sure how the budget change will impact on the money that local authorities are able to provide, as the national insurance increase will obviously affect their budgets. Perhaps the Executive should take into account the fact that less funding will be available to local authorities because of the new national insurance burden.

I want to tackle a real issue—the problem of the constriction of the Scotland Act 1998 on our justice system. It should be borne in mind that the justice system is one of the few areas of jurisdiction that remained intact, despite the shabby union of the Parliaments. Of course, certain areas in an independent nation will remain a matter of consensus and sometimes binding agreement between fellow independent nations if there is mutually beneficial concern—for example, environment laws and employment laws. To demonstrate the anomalies of the Scotland Act 1998, I want to speak about the reserved matter of the benefits system. Incidentally, in recent evidence to the Justice 1 Committee, the Prison Service Union disclosed that 60 per cent of prison officers at Kilmarnock prison are on state benefits, so taxpayers subsidise the commercial profits of Premier Prisons Ltd. There is the recent and appalling example of  new Labour's threat to remove child benefit from those whose offspring commit offences. The announcement was extraordinary. If Margaret Thatcher had made it, the press and those on the Labour benches would have yelled. Where are the Liberal Democrats on the issue? Who knows? Who cares? The suggestion was outrageous and demonstrated how far new Labour has moved to the right—even beyond Mrs Thatcher. When young people offend, a multitude of social and deprivational problems are often in the background. When I was a teacher, I recall an eight-year-old child in the playground who was not only born to fail, but born to offend. Everyone knew that his family gave him no chance. The last thing that his family needed, with seven children, was the removal of its benefits. The Parliament has no power over that.

No. I do not want to hear the member. People in poverty or on the edge of poverty should not have such a threat hanging over their heads. The income of such people is a million miles away from ministerial salaries. However, if the proposal were to become law, the Parliament could do nothing about it, although I suspect that the Parliament and Scotland would not want any truck with it. The threat to remove housing benefit from persistently disruptive neighbours is another example. The idea sounds neat and good, so why not? I represented somebody who had a terrible neighbour. In the pleadings, we found out that the neighbour had a mental disorder, but was not so badly mentally disabled as to be sectioned. I, and the lawyer who acted for her, had to manage the situation carefully. Under the proposals, who would make a distinction for her? Her housing benefits might be removed, although she would have no control over what she was doing. The proposals are outrageous, but the Parliament could do nothing about them if they become law down south. Those are two small but potent examples of why we need control of the benefits system in Scotland. The Parliament should be able to reflect a just and socially caring Scotland, which is more than 300 miles away from the Blair London body politic and its drive to foist right-wing politics on a left-of-centre Scotland.

Is it a reserved matter?

Our ages are all coming out of the cabinet. I am 57 and have found that I am now an older person—it is as if I have somehow lost my  individuality. That is complete nonsense. I remember that in 1997 a young man at a political selection meeting said to me, "Christine, do you think that you're up to it? You're no spring chicken." This ex-spring chicken is in the Parliament and that young man is not; that says something. There is a serious problem with perceptions of aging, because perceptions lead to attitudes. For example, there is what I call the "my dear" syndrome. People know that they are there when somebody in the medical profession says, "How are we, my dear?" Notice the use of the plural. The situation becomes worse when they say, "How is she?" as if the person is no longer there. That has a serious impact on the way in which some younger members of the medical profession treat older people who are in bed. They are treated as if, because they have become older, they are somehow not individuals. When my mother was very ill, we put up on the wall beside her pictures of her in her youth, with her family and at her golden wedding, to bring home to some of the younger staff that she was a person with a past, a present, a family and individuality. The attitudes of staff changed on the spot. I do not want to be grim, because I have a future, although Donald Gorrie may only have a past. I am here to talk about my perceptions of aging. I think that there is fun at 50—I know because I have been there and I am doing it. I believe that there is sex at 60 and I am looking forward to it—no doubt someone can advise. I think that there is sin at 70 and I am looking forward to that, but what is there at 80 and 90? I will tell the chamber. I had two old chairs in the conservatory that needed a facelift, as some of us do. I phoned up the upholsterer I know from many years ago, whom I had not seen for 10 years, and said, "Tommy. Are you still doing upholstery?" He replied "Yes, but I dinnae do a quick job." I said, "That's not a problem. You do a good job." Tommy came along. He was a fit-looking man and I guessed that he was in his 60s. He looked at the chairs and costed the job. He said that he would take them away and would be a few months. They were heavy, old Windsmoor-type chairs—Parker Knolls. He picked one chair up and took it down my long hall and out to his white Volvo estate. He loaded it in and came back and took the other one. Months passed before he came back with the chairs. I had a look at them in the back of his white Volvo estate and said, "You've done a blooming good job." He said, "Could you help me carry them in?" That was when I found out how heavy they were. We lugged them back into the house. I saw  how nice they looked and thought, "Right, the next project will be the old suite in the living room that the cats have shredded." I took him through to the living room, showed him the old suite and asked him to give me a cost for doing that, because he is not cheap. He had a look at them and said, "I don't know if it's worth it, Christine. I might be pushing up the daisies." I said, "You mustn't talk like that. That's not the way to look at life. How old are you?" He replied, "I'm 92." So, I am here to tell the chamber that at 80 and 90 there is upholstery.

Young people tell me that they want action, not words. I have taken on board the fact that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee has had frequent contact with young people, whereas the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee have still to do that. Given that the committees are addressing diversionary programmes for youth offending such as drug taking, perhaps it is time for those committees to take advice from young people. I want to be practical. I will demonstrate how difficult it is for young people to get anything going. I want to talk about Scottish Borders youth council, which I know about. I say to Ian Jenkins that I was not in Eyemouth. I do not know where I was, but I was doing something important. Scottish Borders youth council was established in November 2000, but after spending so much time building up its constitution, policies and ideas, it has just lost its community education officer, who supported the council throughout, but who was sacked on the spot yesterday. That has happened just when the council is embarking on some real targeted projects. The reality is that the situation is very hard: there has been some tokenism and patronising behaviour, which has not helped the youth council at all. Of course, the Scottish Borders youth council has a link with the Scottish youth parliament, as it sends two members from each of the Borders constituencies to represent it. The youth council wants to be taken seriously. I paraphrase article 12 of the UN convention on the rights of the child when I say that I think that the organisation should be heard and that its views should be taken into account in decisions that affect it. I mentioned one such decision in an intervention on Ian Jenkins. Although the youth council's representatives already sit on Hawick community council and Galashiels community council, they have no voting  rights. Young people should have such rights, because they are engaged at that level in the community. From such successes, they can develop to national level and engage with national issues. In fact, they can do that in parallel with their engagement with the community. Those aspects do not have to be separated. On Thursday, the youth council will meet to discuss skateboarding facilities in the Borders. I have learned more about skateboards in the past few months than I ever knew before. The only skateboard park in the Borders is in Hawick and it is over-subscribed. It was, interestingly enough, funded by the police; the youth council has found that the police are really engaging with the park to find means of diverting children away from what I might loosely call mischief—which can of course grow into criminal activity. I can give all members including Duncan Hamilton a guarantee: I consider skateboarding parks to be a youth issue; I broke my foot going down some steps, so there is no way I would ever get on a skateboard.

Mike Russell has just given us an undertaking that he will have a go on a skateboard. The youth council also helped Scottish Borders Council to draft its transport policy, which shows that issues between the generations are not exclusive. Furthermore, young people know the real facts about drugs. For example, today I found out the price in the Borders of drugs such as ecstasy and cocaine. I am sure that even the authorities do not have that information. We have to find ways of discovering what is happening to young people on the ground. We also have to find out how to divert young people away from a potential life of crime. The youth council representatives told me that we have to catch such people at the age of 12. When the youth council's members went round schools in an attempt to get people to join it, it was 12-year-olds who came forward, not the teenagers who were already into the drink-and-drugs lifestyle. The youth council members simply wanted to engage those children in something more worth while in the community. Unlike Mr Raffan, I will keep within my time and end on this point. The Scottish Borders youth council requires not just proper funding, but consistency of approach and people who take the issues seriously—I know that MSPs from all parties do so. However, we are sometimes seen as old and out of date and we must catch on to issues such as the importance of skateboarding. I assure the chamber that I speak for myself on that point.  I commend Mike Russell's amendment to the chamber. We have a long way to go before we can ensure that the youth of Scotland make a real input to this very young and developing Parliament.

I am not sure whether Ian Jenkins is aware that Scottish Borders youth council is looking for voting rights on community councils, and that the convener of Scottish Borders Council—a Liberal Democrat—has not responded on the matter. Would Ian Jenkins support the call for youth councils to have voting rights on community councils?

Naughty, naughty!

I am not sure—I may have been sitting here too long—but I think that I followed what Donald Gorrie said. I thank the minister for congratulating the Justice 1 Committee. I also thank my colleagues on the committee, as we often had to forgo shortbread and tea just to be sure that we got through all the amendments—on far too tight a timetable as usual. The Parliament must keep its eye on the consequences of the legislation. The codes of practice will be important. We have seen drafts, but we have not yet seen the final codes. Financing will also be important. The committee was concerned that there should be sufficient resources not only for the commissioner but for the public authorities so that the proper goals of the bill can be pursued. The calibre of the commissioner herself or himself will be important, because that person will set the tone for implementing the bill, for the positive pursuit of freedom of information in Scotland and for the promotion of a culture of openness—something that has been lacking. I cannot resist saying this: I am opting for the big bang that the minister has offered, rather than that we do things in stages. I prefer the former simply because the public will know where they are. The public do not follow the minutiae of legislation but, if things are done quickly, people will be able to say that the doors to information in Scotland are open.

I speak in favour of amendment 79 and I will refer to Kilmarnock Prison Services. I am one of the many members who has fallen victim to the Executive's non-answers or evasive and incomplete answers, as I have tried to find out such a simple thing as who insures Kilmarnock prison and what it is insured for. I have lodged a series of questions on the matter but have not received straightforward answers. I ended up writing to the director of Kilmarnock Prison Services. I stated in a written question: "the Auditor General for Scotland's report in the Scottish Prison Service Annual Report and Accounts for 2000-01 states that the prison does not appear in the Scottish Prison Service's accounts as a 'property asset'", nor does it appear in the accounts of Premier Prison Services. The Auditor General stated: "neither party is recognising HMP Kilmarnock as a  property asset with both parties claiming to have transferred substantially all risk and rewards associated with ownership of the property asset to each other".— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 3 April 2002; p 354.]  In other words, SPS thinks that Premier Prison Services carries the risk of insuring Kilmarnock prison, while Premier Prison Services thinks that the SPS does. That is not an illustration of the spirit of openness. It is vital that such a prison company or any other private sector organisation that is wholly funded by public money is accountable to the Parliament, and that MSPs get answers to questions instead of having to go round and round in circles and getting into a paper chase. That is why amendment 79 is important.

I remind the Minister for Justice that the Justice 1 Committee's stage 1 report recommended that the public authorities—which have listened to the debate for long enough—should "already be getting themselves into a state of readiness for the freedom of information regime and that implementation should be possible within a maximum of two years of royal assent." The problem with backstops is that people use them. We are all guilty of that. Speaking personally, if I have until a certain date to complete a tax return, I usually do it on that day or the day before. The problem with amendment 37 is that it will create a longer implementation period. It is important that the regime is introduced as soon as possible because the Parliament promised a new culture of openness and accountability—which I wait to see. We should move the agenda along. For that reason, I will not support amendment 37, but I will support amendments 9 and 77.

I will make a brief contribution to the debate on this group of amendments. There was a strenuous debate in the Justice 1 Committee about the ministerial veto and I note that the minister has moved on the matter, albeit not far enough for some of us. For the minister to refer to the veto as an override—as he also did in the Justice 1 Committee—was a bit of sleight of language. After all, it is a veto. I note what the minister said about the Cabinet's  collective decision on such matters. However, the problem for the chamber is that everyone in the Cabinet owes their position to the First Minister. We wonder how strong collective decision making can be in those circumstances. At the end of the day, if the First Minister's veto is used, it will be up to Parliament to call the Executive to account. That is a matter for the justice committees. I hope that the Parliament will refer such matters to one of the justice committees, with a view to having a full debate in the chamber thereafter. The Parliament should exercise its powers over the Executive in such matters.

The opportunity to speak has come quickly—I expected other members to come in. I speak in support of amendment 63 and remind the minister of a recommendation in the Justice 1 Committee's stage 1 report. The recommendation, on which the committee was unanimous, relates to the provisions of amendment 63. I quote from paragraph 10: "The Committee is concerned that many public services are provided through private/public partnerships and private finance initiatives, as well as by voluntary and community organisations, and that these organisations will only be covered by the provisions of the Bill if designated by Ministers. Whilst the Committee acknowledges that it would not be practical to list all such organisations in the Bill, it recommends that the Executive should look at whether an appropriate form of words could be inserted into the Bill to ensure that such bodies are automatically covered by the legislation, without the requirement for Ministers to designate these organisations as public authorities." I accept that the minister has moved to a position in which he will consult the commissioner before he designates organisations. However, there is still the problem that the power remains with the minister to designate or remove. I remind the minister that the Justice 1 Committee was  unanimously unhappy with that power.

I support amendment 1. As the minister knows, there was an extensive debate among members of all parties at stage 2. Gordon Jackson's contribution was, as usual, invaluable. He said: "The minister says that he would designate bodies under section 5 and I have no doubt that he would, but there is no power to make the Executive make a designation under section 5. If an Executive wanted a loophole, it has got it. It could cut its holdings in a body down to 95 per cent and then not designate it. Such bodies would no longer automatically be subject to the provisions of the bill, because they would not be wholly owned and the Executive could decide not to designate them."—[ Official Report, Justice 1 Committee , 5 February 2002; c 3179.] That would be true of any Executive, because this is a bill for all time. During the same meeting, when Michael Matheson raised the matter, Jim Wallace said: "I will do my best to find a way to address the potential abuse that members have highlighted without that having unintentional damaging effects." I asked, in my role as convener, whether that was an undertaking and the minister replied: "Yes. I will address the potential for abuse that has been highlighted."—[ Official Report, Justice 1 Committee , 5 February 2002; c 3180.] The minister was courteous enough to send me a letter on 18 April, which addressed other matters that were raised at stage 2, but that issue was not addressed. I look forward to the minister's answer. As I understand it, if the public owns only 99 per cent of a company and 1 per cent is privately owned, and if the Executive—an Executive of any colour—takes the view that it will not designate that company, it will not be designated.

Thank you. In the light of the minister's explanation, I seek leave to withdraw amendment 54.  Amendment 54, by agreement, withdrawn.

Amendment 54 is a paving amendment for amendment 55. I lodged the amendments after  being made aware of concerns about the impact of the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill on the Parliament's powers under section 23 of the Scotland Act 1998. I am interested in those concerns as convener of the Justice 1 Committee, which scrutinised the bill at stage 2. Amendment 55 does two things. It seeks to make it clear that the bill has no effect on the Parliament's statutory powers under section 23 of the Scotland Act 1998, which requires persons to provide information and documents to the Parliament. The amendment also seeks to make it clear that the FOI regime has no effect on requests that the Parliament makes to persons to provide information and documents voluntarily. As members are aware, the Parliament has wide powers under section 23 of the Scotland Act 1998 to require persons to provide information and documents. It is an offence for a person to refuse to comply with such a requirement. The Parliament's power is subject only to the limitations of section 23. In practice, the Parliament and its committees have operated by inviting and requesting information rather than by resorting to section 23 powers. The Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill gives individuals a new and distinct right to obtain information from Scottish public authorities. However, that right is subject to the various exemptions and limitations in the bill, which are wider than the restrictions in section 23 of the Scotland Act 1998. Section 23 is fundamental to the operation and workings of the Parliament. On the first part of amendment 55, I want it to be clear that the bill has no impact on the Parliament's section 23 powers. I assume that it does not, as that would mean that the bill were outside the legislative competence of the Parliament. I would, however, be grateful for the minister's assurances on that point. On the second part of amendment 55, I would be grateful for the minister's assurance that requests that the Parliament makes to Scottish public authorities will not be subject to the exemptions and limitations in the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill. I appreciate that that means that Scottish public authorities, including the Executive, will be under no legal obligation to comply with the Parliament's requests—but that merely reflects the position at the moment. In practice, given the existence of section 23 of the Scotland Act 1998, we do not need Scottish public authorities to be subject to a separate legal obligation to respond to our requests. I believe that it would cause confusion if our section 23 powers were exempt from the FOI regime, but the Parliament's requests were covered by it. That could suggest to Scottish  public authorities that they are not required to provide information to the Parliament if one of the exemptions in the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill applies. It could also lead to Scottish public authorities trying to charge the Parliament fees under section 9, as a condition of complying with the request. I would be grateful for clarification from the minister on both aspects of the amendments. I move amendment 54.

rose—

Will the member give way?

When I visited Kilmarnock, I saw that the welding shed has blind spots that even the CCTV cameras cannot possibly cover. Does Bill Aitken accept that?

Thank you, John. It is the Justice 1 Committee's intention to report. The committee clerks are writing to the minister today to ask whether the Executive intends to have further debate on the matter. If it does not, the committee might initiate further debate.

I asked to contribute to the debate as the convener of the Justice 1 Committee. As the committee is launching its response to the estates review, I did not think that it was appropriate for me to speak from a party-political point of view. I will therefore take this opportunity to tell members about the witnesses whom the committee will call. If, as Paul Martin said, this is to be an open consultation, members who do not sit on one of the justice committees should come to hear the evidence that is given by those parties. That will be more valuable than reading the report. We will hear from governors of various prisons.  We will hear from governors of private prisons, including prisons outside Scotland. We will hear from PricewaterhouseCoopers and the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy; from Professor Cooper, with the alternative response; from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities; from the Association of Visiting Committees for Scottish Penal Establishments; from trade unions; and from Safeguarding Communities and Reducing Offending in Scotland. The committee will be given a presentation on the STOP programme, and will hear from academics, Her Majesty's chief inspector of prisons, the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service and the Minister for Justice. I do not know whether that is the complete list.

I am content to discuss the committee's hearing from any other parties who are recommended by members or by people outside the Parliament. The committee wishes to examine the report thoroughly and with an open mind. It is unfortunate that the time scale for the committee is very short—the estates review was published before we went into two weeks of recess—but we shall do our best. I am setting aside the arguments that have been aired about whether it is morally or ethically wrong to privatise prisons. I ask members simply to read the documents that are available. I shall provide references that members can pick up on. The terms of reference of the SPS estates review are on page 1 of the review. Members should examine the terms of reference on page 31 of the PricewaterhouseCoopers report. Page 3 of the Executive's consultation document says: "The Executive's proposals focus on three main challenges." Members should read those challenges. They will find that rehabilitation appears not to be given the balance and proportionality within the investigation that we would wish it to have in the interests of Scotland. What is a prison for? That is quite a simple question to which there are simple answers. Members will agree that prisons are basically for punishment, deprivation of liberty, protecting the public and property and providing security. Rehabilitation should happen in the interests of society and costs. Not least, there should be decent pay and working conditions for the staff  who work in Scotland's prisons.

I have a very short time and I am making a point about what the Justice 1 Committee will consider. All members will agree that all that the committee does should be accountable to the Parliament and done in the spirit of openness in Scotland. We have received evidence from the two main players that are set against each other to some extent—the models of Kilmarnock and Peterhead. The committee will consider the issues in that evidence. I ask members to give advance notice of their coming to the committee to hear evidence. If I have time and if members of the committee allow it, I will let other members put questions to the parties who will give evidence. I do not want people to rely on soundbites or press releases. Members should hear evidence first hand, because this is a serious issue about the way in which Scotland looks after those who offend and the rest of society for the coming 10 years.

My question concerns state responsibility. I hear what the minister says, but when assets and their running go into the private sector it is almost impossible for members to get answers to questions. We simply get replies that say, "That is a matter for Kilmarnock Prison Services." How does that square with the Executive's responsibility for those prisons?

I congratulate Gil Paterson on securing the debate. A debate on protecting the interests of vulnerable witnesses, particularly children, and the rights of the accused to a trial in which the onus is on the prosecution to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt is difficult to resolve. There are huge difficulties with the adversarial system, but nevertheless, one must test the evidence. I do not know the answer to that difficulty. I hope that we will come to a view on it in the discussions with the Executive that will follow. The worst thing that can happen is that a trial collapses because somewhere further down the chain there is not a proper way of addressing the evidence of the child. That is particularly true if the evidence of the child is the only evidence, corroborated by the evidence of other children or if there is minimal corroboration by other circumstantial evidence. I welcome the report and the holistic—I hate that word, but I will use it, because no one else has done so yet—approach of all the agencies involved that it proposes right from the beginning of the chain when a crime is investigated. Evidence has to be taken in a sustained and sensitive matter, making it secure. That has to be maintained when the evidence goes to the Procurator Fiscal Service—or Crown Office for more serious crime. We have to consider the assessment of the evidence and how the child will  stand up in whatever system we operate so that no child or accused is put in the position in which everything is unsatisfactory. The trial itself should be conducted in a forum in which the best evidence is taken from a child. We must also always bear in mind the interests of the accused. We should consider simple things such as separate witness rooms, which Maureen Macmillan mentioned before she ran for her train.

I quite agree. That is where we must develop skills and a multi-agency approach. We must take into account the delays in bringing cases to court. How many adults here can remember what they had for dinner this time last week? That might not be a dramatic period of time, but it is hard to think back and a week is a lifetime for a child. There are other complexities to consider surrounding the evidence of children. A child might be the victim and prime witness or they might be witness to something else. They might be witness to something involving a member of their family, a trusted friend, priest or teacher. That can make it much more difficult for a child to give evidence when facing the alleged accused in court. There is also the matter of what happens post trial. What happens post trial if the accused, who is a member of the child's family, is convicted. What happens if the accused is acquitted? What happens if the case is not proven? So much support has to be given to children in such circumstances. When a child is a witness, we do not want there to be a collapsed trial. It is not in the interests of justice for the child, accused and system to be blighted. The question of protecting child witnesses is not an easy one to crack. I am interested to hear what the minister has to say. We must ensure that we have sensitively taken, but robust evidence from children, and just solutions. We must ensure that accused people who have genuinely done the deed are convicted and that the innocent are freed. That is what we have to consider.

Is the minister aware that, in a written answer to me, his colleague the Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services rejected allocating any of the £200 million underspend to Scottish Borders Council, and that, as a consequence, voluntary organisations such as the Gala Youth Project, which I have mentioned before and which supports hundreds of young people in difficulties, and Penumbra, which provides supported accommodation for vulnerable young people, will lose out and could close down? Does he think that his Cabinet colleague is supporting voluntary organisations in the Borders?

I will keep to my three minutes, Presiding Officer. Wendy Alexander referred to quick fixes and Marilyn Livingstone applauded the enterprise system, but the experience in the Scottish Borders has given no cause for that satisfaction. It was announced proudly in 1999 that the call centre at Claridge Mills in Selkirk would provide 250 jobs, at least 60 of which would be in place by October 1999. The last figure that I have shows that there were 28 jobs in January, eight of which were in management. I tried to confirm the exact figures this morning, but the company is not answering my phone calls—I wonder why. The cost so far to the public purse of that little enterprise has been £680,000 and regional selective assistance is in the pipeline. However, when ordinary people in the Borders try to access enterprise funds they find it extremely difficult. I refer to Thompson and Son Bakers in Hawick. The owner used his own money to renovate an old building and turn it into a bakery, which cost him £56,500. He asked for help from Scottish Enterprise Borders and got £1,500. He has six jobs and another six in the pipeline. John Mackay of Eyemouth took over the old Co-op, which overlooks Eyemouth harbour, and redeveloped it into a splendid restaurant, which opened three weeks ago. The business employs 20 people and he is looking to develop it. He got nothing from Scottish Enterprise Borders. Another lady in Peebles, who wants only £2,000 to start up a business, got an offer of £500 from Scottish Enterprise Borders for information technology. However, Manpower can get £670,000 for providing 28 jobs to date. That is the problem with the system on the ground. The other problem with the system is the infrastructure in rural areas, to which Alex Fergusson referred. The Ettrick riverside business centre has just opened in Selkirk. Its aim is to provide a complete business facility for Borders  people. The problem with that centre is that it does not have broadband. Another problem is the road network to the Borders. The A1 is not complete; the A68 has just a couple of crawler lanes; and the A7 and A702 are definitely scenic routes. I will not even mention the railways. With infrastructure like that, who will locate in the Borders? How on earth can the Borders get on? How can enterprise develop in that community with that kind of system in place? Lots of guff gets spoken in here. Ordinary people cannot set up businesses in the Borders, because they cannot access the funds that the large companies can access.

Is the minister aware that, in evidence given to the Justice 1 Committee on Peterhead prison—which we are visiting again on Monday—it was plain to all that the success of the sex offenders programme was to do with the culture in the prison and with the dedication and experience of the 240 staff, who are now extremely worried people? It was made plain to us by a senior academic that that programme would not transfer elsewhere. The minister referred to the governor of Barlinnie. In evidence to us, he said that to run a sex offenders unit in Barlinnie would be like running a prison within a prison and would be extremely difficult. Why does the delivery of what is an excellent programme seem to count as nothing against bricks and mortar? If a new prison for 700 is to be built, does that mean that the 250 sex offenders will be mixed with other prisoners, or does the minister propose to do what the governor of Barlinnie describes as almost impossible?

Rural post offices are essential to sustaining small communities economically and socially and must not wither on a commercial vine. When I lived in a village in Galloway, I used to pile my two then small sons into a big pram, tie the Irish setter's lead to the handle and set off on a weekly pilgrimage to pick up the child benefit. At the post office, I would chat to friends with their small children and exchange village small talk with everyone in the queue. We were brought up to date on who had left whom for somebody else, who was and was not pregnant and who was on their last legs. I once fainted in the post office queue. By the time I reached home, everybody was telling me that I was pregnant again. I was not—ah, happy days! There are 70 rural post offices in the Borders. I give a starring role to Eccles post office and its good postmistress Mrs Nora McDougall. She has been postmistress for 25 years to a village  population of about 100 and to outlying farming areas. Eccles is five or six miles from Kelso and a similar distance from Coldstream. The post office is a hearty green shed in Mrs McDougall's garden and is the only shop in the village—I point out to George Reid that there is no café tabac or boulangerie there. The post office dispenses bits and bobs and most important—as well as post office services—the daily newspapers. It is open from 8 am to 5.30 pm most days, except Thursday and Saturday, when it has half days, and Sunday. The postmistress could not praise more highly the introduction of Horizon, which allows her customers to pay their bills on the spot, such as bills from Scottish Power, which introduced that facility in December 2000. At least 25 elderly residents use that and other facilities at the renowned green shed. If that facility was lost, it is clear that those people could not travel five or six miles to an alternative post office. I would welcome the early introduction—without piloting—of "Your Guide", which would extend the electronic resources of rural post offices. I know that Mrs Nora McDougall would also welcome that. What could be better for the people of Eccles and other parts of the Borders than to walk into their local post offices and access the Christine Grahame website and send me an e-mail? Perhaps that is not the system's best selling point.

What consideration has been given to the special difficulties for ME sufferers in accessing benefits?

I am glad that somebody found that interesting.

Eligibility.

It is late in the day.

Let me make it clear that the committee's letter sets out the four most important issues that should be considered straight away. We will then address the other issues. We are dealing with the matter that the minister mentioned.

The minister's position is reasonable if the limit for small claims stays at £750. However, would he take a different view if the limit went up to £1,500, which could mean that there might be reparations actions on small claims? People might then need legal representation and the assistance of legal aid.

Somehow, I do not think that the debate will be oversubscribed, Presiding Officer. Before I address the detail of the Justice 1 Committee's report, I should say that I appreciate that a paper on legal aid—whether civil or criminal—is not the sexiest or most riveting topic. Michael Matheson challenged me on that point, but I do not wish to take up his challenge. However, it is a riveting topic for people who, for whatever reason, fall on hard times. I advise members that I will come to the problem of the pensioner, the pavement and her purse later in my speech. I hope that members will stay until the end. As for hard times, they include marriage breakdown—more than 30 per cent of Scottish marriages fall into that category—domestic violence, dismissal from work, criminal charges or a dispute with a builder over the extension to a house. One finds oneself at the citizens advice bureau or scouring the "Yellow Pages" for a solicitor. It is at that point that legal aid leaps to the top of the agenda. It will reach the top of many people's agendas at some point in their lives, given that litigiousness is on the increase. Once one has got over the hurdle of the "Yellow Pages" and has found a solicitor who will deliver legal aid, one is confronted with form after form. The purpose of the forms is to determine whether one has a case to argue; whether, in civil cases, one has a reasonable chance of proving that case; whether one is financially entitled to legal aid or advice and assistance; and whether it is in the public interest to use public funds for the action. In the context of that introduction, I quote from the report's terms of reference, which were to make "an assessment of the impact of recent changes in the legal aid system ... and the likely impact of possible and prospective changes, on the contribution made by that system to securing access to justice." Our report was set against the background of both  those aims. The motion makes it clear that the committee's work on legal aid does not end with the report. Before the committee can produce a final report, it must consider in much greater detail the issues that have been raised at this stage, including the responses that have already been received and those that are in the pipeline. The responses that the committee has received but has yet to consider include the report of the working group—made up of Citizens Advice Scotland, the Scottish Consumer Council and others—on the establishment of a community legal service for Scotland. We have also yet to consider the research undertaken by the Scottish Legal Aid Board into the reduction in the number of civil legal aid applications between 1992 and 2001. The committee was concerned about that reduction because we were told that the service is, supposedly, demand led. We have also received responses to our report from the Executive and the Law Society of Scotland. The committee has not had an opportunity collectively to consider any of those responses. We still await the Executive's response to the report on the establishment of a community legal service—I hope that members are still with me on all these reports—and the Executive's comments on the financial impact of our recommendations, to which paragraph 21 of the executive summary of our report refers. We also await the mapping of available legal services, which SLAB is considering, a report on the monitoring of the recent extension from 10 to 20 months of the repayment period for contributions—that report is due to be published in 2003—and responses from anyone else who wishes to respond. It is abundantly apparent that we are in no position to produce anything like a final report. I promise that, one day, the responses to the responses will cease and that we will produce that final report. Legal aid and its availability are serious issues for our citizens. Legal aid needs more than first aid; it needs radical surgery. It received first aid with the introduction of an extended repayment period for contributions, to which I referred—contrary to popular myth, legal aid is free only for those who are in receipt of income support. I understand that that simple change has helped those in receipt of income support and those collecting contributions. The collection rate has reached 94 per cent, which must be in the interests of the public purse and of the contributor. Some areas require urgent and near-urgent response. We have written to the minister to enumerate them. Our letter is in the post; the minister will find it in his large postbag. Those areas include examining the eligibility criteria. The lower capital limit for legal aid has not been  changed since 1983 and there should not be a sudden cut-off when one has to pay a contribution, as that can be unfair. We suggest a tapering of the contribution until it reaches 100 per cent. There is the anomaly between financial eligibility for legal aid and financial eligibility for advice and assistance, which includes the sometimes mysterious interaction between the legal aid system and the benefits system. Not many people have sympathy for the legal profession, which is seen to lick from the dripping roast of legal aid. I do not flinch from the truth, which is often different from the perception. The fixed fee criminal legal aid rate gives rise to concern for the supply, quality and distribution of legal aid services, particularly in rural courts. The fee rates for solicitors have remained pretty well frozen since 1992—I wish that my plumber's rates had done the same. The committee stressed that increases should be linked to quality assurance appraisals. Failure to pay the rate for the job might result in the job not being done well or not being done at all. Another area that should be addressed is the extension of the availability of legal aid. I confirm that the committee's reference in paragraph 25 of the report to "excepted proceedings" does not correspond to the technical definition in the existing legal aid legislation; it amounts to a much broader definition that is not confined simply to defamation and election appeals, for example. That broader definition covers the wide spectrum of fora that the public might require to access in disputes. I will give an example from a constituency case that involved an education appeal committee. At the appeal, the parents were confronted about placing their daughter, who has cerebral palsy, at the local school—where she had been refused a place—beside her older sister. The parents faced a panel consisting of two councillors, a layperson and the legal representative of the council. They were not entitled to legal aid. However, if that appeal had failed, they would have been eligible for legal aid at the next stage, which is the appeal to the sheriff. That seems unjust and, in the end, more expensive to the public purse. The minister should also address the problem of people not knowing where to go for what. An example that came up in evidence is advice on the welfare system. We were told that it is difficult to know where one would get a solicitor who specialised in the welfare system. I would like to meet such a solicitor, because I have never understood the welfare system. What about the pensioner, the pavement and the purse? A pensioner who has come from her local post office and is zipping up her purse trips in the hole that has been left by two utility firms. She  breaks her leg and hangs on to her purse. Shortly afterwards, she suffers a stroke. As well as entering the world of hospitals and out-patients, she is entering the world of insurers, possible litigation, legal advice and assistance and legal aid. The pensioner goes into the office of the nearest local firm, which might or might not deal with reparation and legal aid—she is not to know that. Her claim displays some complexities, as the minister will appreciate. Which utility firm is liable? Were the subcontractors who did the work responsible? Are both utility firms liable? What is the proportion? Someone claims that protective barriers were removed. Were they? Who removed them? Did she suffer the stroke as a consequence of the fall? What about her contributory negligence? She was looking in her purse instead of looking out for the hole in the ground.

Is Mr Gallie going to tell us the end of the story?

The problem is the same, but I said that the woman in my example had to find a firm that had two specialities—reparation and legal aid. The category has to be narrowed down in that way. Let me continue. Did the pensioner suffer the stroke as a consequence of her fall? Was there contributory negligence? I am trying to show that what looks like a simple fall is complex. In her purse, she carries her bank-book for her life savings of £9,000. Legal aid is therefore not available to her at the outset. To pursue a difficult and possibly protracted case, she will have to part with her savings. That example shows why the committee's report matters. I am sorry, but that is the end of my speech. I cannot make it any more interesting. I move, That the Parliament notes the 8th Report 2001 of the Justice 1 Committee, Report on Legal Aid Inquiry (SP Paper 437) and further notes that the Committee intends to publish a final report on legal aid in due course.

Four education advisers and musical  instrument instructors are to lose their jobs because of the £5.5 million cuts by Scottish Borders Council. Does the minister agree that such people are essential to deliver a rounded education programme? If so, what action is she taking to save those jobs?

To ask the First Minister what steps will be taken in order to ensure that the end-year flexibility of £200 million for 2001-02, identified in the letter from the Minister for Finance and Public Services  to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities' finance spokesman on 25 February 2002, is disbursed timeously. (S1F-1717)

The point is that the letter says that the true end-year flexibility figure is £200 million, although £600 million has been mentioned. I take that to be £200 million spare cash in the coalition coffers. I have a question for the Deputy First Minister that probably would have suited the First Minister.

If the Borders population equals 2 per cent of the Scottish population, and 2 per cent of £200 million equals £4 million, and Scottish Borders Council is short of £4 million, has the Deputy First Minister any advice for his Liberal Democrat colleague, the new leader of that council?

Given that Scottish Borders Council has increased council tax bills substantially to prevent cuts over and above the £5.9 million that is already on the books, will the minister reciprocate and encourage Councillor Tulley, who is the leader of the council, to apply for special borrowing?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last contacted Scottish Borders Council and what issues were discussed. (S1O-4671)

That was an enlightening answer. Does the minister agree that the £6 million of further cuts that the Liberal-Independent coalition in Scottish Borders Council is imposing are unacceptable, as they will harm the most vulnerable? Will he meet Borderers in Edinburgh on 28 February to discuss special borrowing for the council's administration in the light of the £300 million offered to Glasgow Housing Association at 0 per cent interest and the write-off of £20 million of health trust debts?

This is difficult for me, because I was originally a signatory to the bill before it was in draft form. Although I supported it in principle at  stage 1, I am not supporting it now. I said that I was open to the debate and I have listened to the debate. It is not a matter of ballot boxes—I will mention that before other members do. The response to the bill that I received was split 50:50. I view the bill as legislation that does not do what it was intended to do. I am concerned that we will criminalise gamekeepers and that there is no compensation—not for the rich, to whom I did not speak, but for very ordinary people, many of whom are self-employed and whose jobs will be imperilled if the bill goes through. As a piece of legislation, the bill is so convoluted that it is in chaos and is unworkable. Indeed, it is bad law. Therefore, I will not support it.

How much will Karen Gillon's proposal cost?

Gordon Jackson will.

I refer the minister to the latest round of funding cuts, which now run to £6 million, by Scottish Borders Council. I draw the minister's attention to the Dry Dock in Eyemouth, a project that is aimed at reducing the problems that arise from alcohol misuse; for example, the project provides an alcohol-free bar for young people to socialise in. What will the minister do to prevent the closure of that project?

Is the minister aware that in the latest swingeing cuts by Scottish Borders Council, the core funding of the Gala Youth Project in Galashiels—£60,000—will go as at 31 March? That will end at a stroke a 50-year-old project for young people in difficulty that has 150 young people on its books and is highly regarded by police and educationists. Will the minister release a pauchle of those millions underspent on the education budget, on whatever terms, to Scottish Borders Council, so that at least those 150 young people are not punished for the mistakes of others?

Try currying favour with your party.

I say "Well done" to Alex Fergusson and John McAllion for their work on the cross-party group on ME. I cannot get to the group's meetings often enough because of other commitments. I came to the group because I have a friend with ME. If one sees him in the good times, it is hard to believe that he was once in a wheelchair. I know that he must be going through a bad time now because his e-mails have stopped. He is very politically active. I get hordes of e-mails and then there is silence for months. I have discovered that, at the moment, he hardly has the energy to switch on a television or follow anything. The swings and roundabouts of this dreadful illness are what brought me to the cross-party group. I asked him what I should talk about in this debate, and he mentioned the issue that was raised at the cross-party group meetings, which was benefits. People with ME find that benefits are a problem; for example, the disability living allowance form asks questions such as the number of steps that applicants can climb. The point is that although those people might have been able to do it yesterday, they cannot do it today and they do not know whether they will be able to do it tomorrow. My friend has had the illness for decades and explained that he copes with it by managing it. However, if something goes wrong—for example, if he does something in a hurry—it might then take him two or three hours even to put his hand to his face in order to shave. Although the World Health Organisation has recognised this peculiar but real illness, I must stress that ME sufferers' huge difficulties with benefits have been severely neglected. People have to go through many appeals before any benefits might be granted. Robin Harper mentioned young children, who face great difficulties with having their illness recognised. I must point out that there are problems with professionals in this respect. Before I finish, I want to mention the written parliamentary questions on this subject that I asked when Susan Deacon was minister. In one question, I asked whether the Scottish Executive would "undertake a national audit of the services which are available to those who have myalgic encephalomyelitis." — [ Official Report , Written Answers , 22 May 2001; p 249.]  I was advised that I should wait for the report. Now that the report has been published, will the minister undertake an audit of the available services? Furthermore, will he answer the other questions that I lodged about involving professionals in understanding the illness to get rid of any prejudices and the idea that it is simply  psychosomatic?

Very risky.

I associate myself with the remarks of Pauline McNeill, convener of the other justice committee, about consulting with conveners. Given that raising the age of criminal responsibility is somewhat controversial, or even contentious, will the First Minister tell us when the issue will come before this Parliament's justice committees? I hope that he will confirm that he thinks the matter should come to the justice committees and not the Education, Culture and Sport Committee.

I knew that was coming—it took less than two minutes.

Will the member accept an intervention?

I will not be sharing my fantasies with you, Presiding Officer—you might be a little shocked. I will try to leave my party-political hat to one side and address the issue as convener of the Justice 1 Committee—it is a bit of a test for me. With one exception, the committee welcomed the bill. I welcome the substantial prejudice test as a higher test. Gordon Jackson explained eloquently—as always—that that is not a minor change of language. There is a great deal of emphasis in the bill on the role of the Scottish information commissioner, to which I shall return. At the end of his speech, Gordon Jackson raised the important issue of our concerns about proper funding for the independent commissioner and for public authorities so that the bill can operate. I listened to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's speech with great interest. He has been a positive contributor to the Justice 1 Committee in many  ways, but he is wrong about the bill not being necessary. It is good to have regulatory legislation that does not dictate but which guides on rights and obligations—the right to information and the obligations on public authorities. In due course, with the codes of practice, we will see whether the bill is flawed—as Lord James thinks it is—or otherwise, but the principle behind the bill and the fact that we need a bill are clear. People do not know what their rights are or the obligations and duties of public bodies. The committee welcomes the intimation by the Minister for Justice of an amendment in response to the recommendation in paragraph 40 of our report that the time scale within which an applicant must apply for a review be extended from 20 days to 40 days. Class exemptions will be of interest when we get to stage 2. Some Justice 1 Committee members have substantial reservations about class exemptions and wonder whether they simply take a swipe at the bill and undermine it fundamentally. Others will develop the issue of commercial confidentiality, but I can think of attempts to get information on private prisons that were stymied because the information was said to be commercially confidential, yet it is public money that is used for private prisons. I say to Gordon Jackson that we will have a little stushie about certificates issued by the First Minister. I do not think that they are as unlikely to be used as he makes out. His argument was interesting and no doubt we will hear it developed, but there are problems. Even the Law Society of Scotland said that if they are not necessary, why have them? It is a belt-and-braces approach. I think that Gordon Jackson asked for an example of when such a certificate would be used. I do not recall hearing an answer to that.

I take that point. We will have an interesting debate when we deal with amendments on the issue. The role of the commissioner is at the heart of the bill. He or she will be crucial to the development of the legislation and to its operation and policing and will make a great deal of difference to how the legislation develops, not just because of the commissioner's status, but because they will be the first commissioner to be appointed. There is concern that there are no sanctions against public bodies that fail to comply with an  order to produce information. Section 55 puts a bar on raising an action against a public body. We draw the minister's attention to that. There seems to be an imbalance. The committee was unanimous in saying that two years was a reasonable time over which to bring the bill into operation. I will finish quickly. Do I have four minutes?

I have six minutes. I can slow down. I want to address the culture of openness, which is at the heart of the bill. Those of us who are in Parliament have found it hard to detect the fresh breeze of openness blowing through the Parliament's corridors. Parliamentary questions are something of an art form. When one gets to one's fourth supplementary one might begin to smell blood, but it takes a great deal of cunning to get there, because one knows that the civil servants on the other side are working out how to—I love this word—obfuscate with their answers. One gets the wonderful answer, "This information is not held centrally." Where is it held? One has to dig around for it oneself. A culture of openness is essential. The codes of practice are of great concern. There are many references in the Justice 1 Committee's report to the codes of practice: paragraph 28 states that disabled rights, which Roseanna Cunningham raised in relation to blind or partially sighted persons, should be mentioned in the codes of practice; paragraph 31 mentions the codes of practice in relation to the grounds for refusal to provide information by a public body; paragraph 57 refers to charging; and paragraph 52 relates to vexatious litigants. I listened carefully to what the Minister for Justice said. I think he said—he will correct me, please, if I am wrong—that we would receive the codes of practice during stage 2. That is not good enough. We require draft codes of practice before the last date for lodging amendments. That is important, because amendments will be lodged if the codes do not address certain issues. It is important that those amendments are tested at stage 2. I would like the Deputy Minister for Justice to give us an exact time for when the codes will be provided, because we are supposed to be launching into stage 2 some time in the coming weeks. On behalf of the committee, I say that we will not be happy to examine a draft code of practice once amendments have been lodged at stage 2 and there is no time to lodge more. I have nothing further to add.

Dream on.

I remind the minister that, on 1 June 2000, the Parliament unanimously supported the reinstatement of the Borders line from Edinburgh to Carlisle and urged the Scottish Executive to make representations to the Strategic Rail Authority. It was therefore disappointing not to hear the minister or the Strategic Rail Authority mention the Borders railway line on the radio. When the minister was pressed, she did refer to the line and she introduced a concept of which I had never heard before: a light rail link. I do not know where that came from. No matter what Ian Jenkins says, no financial commitment has been made to that Borders railway line. Compared with the £450 million that can be spent on five miles' extension of a motorway, £1.9 million is small beer. At the same time, no one asks whether the motorway pays its way. Every time that the Borders railway line is mentioned, we talk about whether the fares that are collected will be sufficient. That is not the point of a Borders railway line. The point is to open the area to economic recovery. In 1999, Lord Gus Macdonald said that the Borders railway line was crucial to the economic recovery of the Borders. We can continue to say that, but until money is put into the project or a commitment is given to put money into the project, we will have only tea and sympathy, which will be taken on a bus. At the moment, if that bus is on the A68, its passengers will have to sit in Dalkeith for 20 minutes, where they will have time to alight and get their scones. Political words are useless if people do not see the Parliament delivering. The Borders needs that recovery. In the past five years, the area has lost 5,000 jobs. I can reel them off. Job losses have  occurred at Pringle of Scotland, Viasystems, Laidlaw & Fairgrieve Ltd, Ettrick & Yarrow Spinners Ltd and Lyle & Scot. We can name them all. They are not returning. The area needs investment. The economic investment that the Borders needs is a railway line. The project itself would create 900 jobs. That does not include the knock-on effect from commercial interests that would move into the Borders from an overheated Scottish economy in the central belt. Edinburgh needs the Borders railway line. I received an e-mail today from someone who had considered establishing a UK operation in the Scottish Borders. Tom Andrews from Australia went to the Borders and told me: "Please keep campaigning for high quality infrastructure to serve the Borders - the rail link and improved roads will not only help business but will help boost tourism." He will not come to the Borders with his business because it does not have that infrastructure now and needs that soon.

I share Ian Jenkins's hopes for the Borders railway line, but I remember after the debate on the issue that he issued a press release calling on the Executive to invest in the Borders rail link. How is he getting on with the money side of it, given that he is part of the coalition?

Will the minister give way?

The minister will be aware that 200 residents of the Ladywood area of Penicuik recently met to protest about the abysmal bus service in that area. Does he agree that at the heart of traffic congestion is the failed policy of bus deregulation and the consequential bus war between Lothian Buses and FirstBus, which my colleague Kenny MacAskill highlighted yesterday? If he does not agree, will he speak to some of those 200 Ladywood residents, who will tell him that competition has left them with virtually no service on weekday evenings and none on Sundays?

I am an unlikely interloper in a fisheries debate. When I said that I was going to speak in the debate, I was asked what fishing had to do with the Scottish Borders. When I said that I wanted to speak about the plight of the fishermen in Eyemouth—in particular the prawn boats—my questioner was utterly surprised that there was still fishing there. There is, but it is not thriving. The fishing community there dates back to the 13 th century, growing, as all fishing communities have done, around its harbour and its fleet. It suffered the worst fishing disaster known in Scotland, on 18 October 1881, when more than 189 fishermen—129 of them from Eyemouth—lost their lives when they put out to sea to meet their tithes to the church. In recent times fishermen are again taking to the sea in more and more dangerous conditions in order simply to make a living. Fishing is still core to the town's tourism, with a seafood festival in June and a herring queen festival in July. There are currently 61 members of the Eyemouth Port Association, 40 of them fishing prawns. The threat of a further 25 per cent reduction—in the face of scientific evidence that others have referred to—will, when added to last year's 10 per cent cut, push a vulnerable local industry and community close to the edge.

Yes, I do. I am using Eyemouth as an example of a vulnerable community. I am talking about fishing communities of that size throughout Scotland. I have simply had more meetings with the Eyemouth fishermen than with any others. I speak after having spoken to them today on this matter. The Eyemouth fishermen have negotiated and accepted the use of larger mesh nets to prevent smaller fish and prawns being caught. David Shiels, of the Eyemouth Port Association, told me that he thought that that and other measures, along with proof that cod was not taken by prawners, would lead to the removal of the 10 per cent cut. I understand that that proof was given but that the cut remained. The wider issue of discards must be addressed. As a laywoman, it appears to me that, despite all the mesh measures, the fact that good fish are being tossed dead back into the sea is simply irrational. Where is the conservation in that? If the further cuts go ahead, they will have serious effects on the economy of Eyemouth and surrounding areas, some of which I have described. There would be a knock-on effect on local suppliers. According to David Shiels of the Eyemouth Port Association: "vessels are already operating too close to the red line". He predicts that quite a few further firms and vessels will go to the wall. Members should set that against a crash in the prices for fish on the quayside: £12 to £15 for haddock, £6 to £10 for a box of whiting and £10 for a box of monkfish. The situation is desperate and has given rise to a desperate plea from just one of the many fishing communities in the south of Scotland. I stress the word community because, when the fishing declines, so will the entire economy. However, Eyemouth is a fighting community. I recommend the article in the Fishing News of 30 November this year, which refers to the dreadful disaster in 1881. It is called: "EYEMOUTH—THE FISHING TOWN THAT REFUSED TO DIE". Eyemouth still refuses to die

I am winding up. Eyemouth needs advocates who will genuinely plead the case against a cut in quotas. I trust that Ross Finnie will be able to deliver.

I thought that you quite liked me, Presiding Officer, but you have immediately cut my time to three minutes. It is unjust of Maureen Macmillan to criticise the attitude of members of my party towards the Prison Service. Our criticism of the minister has been robust, but that is our purpose. Rather than waste my time with that, I want to turn my attention to Cornton Vale, which was addressed by my colleague. Cornton Vale is in a serious position. Since 1998, there has been a great dropping-off from the promises that were made to deal with women offenders. We have had several years of quiet. I commend the role that has been played by Kate Donegan and her medical officer. One is inclined to make a link between the transfer of those two ladies elsewhere and the recent suicides of Frances Carvell and Michelle McElvar. I regret that I must say that, but I believe that the link has to be made. Between April and November this year, Cornton Vale was 10 per cent overcrowded. The peak occurred in August, when it was 29 per cent overcrowded. Overcrowding has a bad impact for all kinds of reasons. It means that there is too  much pressure on the staff and there is an increase in lock-ups, which causes pressure on inmates in a prison population that is already highly vulnerable. Whoever one speaks to—be they the chief inspector of prisons, the National Association of Prison Visitors or the former governor—all say that most of the women in Cornton Vale are sad not bad. I want to quote something that Kate Donegan told the Justice and Home Affairs Committee when it met in Stirling last year. Ms Donegan had been in the Prison Service for a long time, but this is what she said about when she became governor of Cornton Vale: "I must say that I was completely unprepared for the physical, mental and emotional condition of the majority of the women in the prison. I found appalling damage, mostly as a consequence of chronic poly-drug abuse, and a variety of mental health problems related to those addictions. I found a population that was characterised by social exclusion, ill health, poor educational attainment, lack of employment skills ... Many of the women were persistent petty offenders and, along with those on remand, were finding the combination of drug withdrawal, uncertainty about the future and separation from friends and family an almost intolerable burden."—[ Official Report, Justice and Home Affairs Committee, 6 March 2000; c 881.] Those are the people whom we are locking up for petty crimes—for failure to pay fines for prostitution, or for other small matters. We are disrupting families; we are not dealing with the problems of women offenders. They are sad not bad. I will quote again from the same committee meeting. Every time I hear these words, it brings to mind just how dreadful it is to imprison 70 to 80 per cent of those women. When asked by Lyndsay McIntosh whether prison was a proper place for two babies who were there, Ms Donegan answered: "I think that, paradoxically, babies in Cornton Vale get a fabulous start in life. They have more mothers than you can shake a stick at."—[ Official Report, Justice and Home Affairs Committee, 6 March 2000; c 892.] Those are the people whom we are imprisoning in Cornton Vale. The Justice 1 Committee has commissioned research into sentencing and into attitudes to sentencing and custody. I say this on behalf of members of all parties: perhaps, minister, with a great deal of pushing from the justice committees, we will stop raiding the justice budgets—which has been happening—and turn to real solutions for vulnerable women who should never have been imprisoned in the first place and who should be helped to lead positive and fulfilling lives with their children.

rose—

Will the member give way?

I will endeavour not to be tapped, Presiding Officer. I remind the chamber of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee's report on children with special educational needs, with its emphasis on integration, and the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000, which has been referred to. It establishes a presumption of integration for children with special educational needs. I am delighted to hear of Alloa's success story, but that is not the story throughout Scotland. I have been involved with the Borders Autism Support Group. As a result of the education cuts there, which members are well aware of, the group has been vulnerable to attacks on its budgets. Children with autism have lost auxiliaries and have been affected by social work, transport and respite cuts. A special unit that was to be developed was cut from the budget so that the money could be spent on computers. If it is a case of children with autism versus computers, I come down on the side of children with autism. Computers are not the be-all and end-all. At least 40 families in the Scottish Borders have been identified as having children with some degree of autism on the spectrum. The support group mails at least 50 people—it mails to professionals. There is some support for primary age children, although it is being undermined, but there is no support for children of secondary age. I understand that there are regions in Scotland where there is such support. What has happened to that special unit? It was a modest step. Parents are the driving force behind the autism movement and parents campaigned for it. What was it to be? Only two classrooms—an art therapy room, which is important, as has been mentioned, and a staff-parent interview room. There was also to be a specialist play area outside and a kitchen area. They are not getting the unit, although they have worked for years to get so far. The Borders Council says that the unit has been deferred. We all know that that means the matter is out of the park. Added to that is the failure to provide speech and language therapy, and a general failure to train professionals in the main stream in recognising the talents of children with autism in its varying degrees rather than seeing them as a problem and not "ordinary". Like East Renfrewshire Autism Support Group, the Borders Autism Support Group not only supports but drives the agenda. Sometimes the group achieves two steps forward and two and a half steps back. I have another invitation for the deputy minister—I do not care if it is taken up after  or before George Reid's invitation to Alloa. I ask the deputy minister to meet the Borders Autism Support Group, which is suffering from the cuts, to hear its concerns and to consider what he can do to assist it.

The minister is aware that additional resources funding to schools is precisely that. Directors of education and finance must clearly certify that such funds for school building repairs, for example, are additional to planned expenditure. Will the minister therefore investigate the actions of Scottish Borders Council, which received a £416,000 award in December 2000 and cut £350,000 from its education budget within a month? Any arithmetician will know that that left only £66,000 additional funding for schools. Will the minister scrutinise that creative accounting? I see Mr McConnell leaning forward to Cathy Jamieson.

Bad luck, Jack: I am in. I remind the First Minister that, when asked whether he was new Labour or old Labour, he said that he was Scottish Labour. I suggest that he enhance his Scottish credentials by announcing tomorrow that the saltire, the flag of St Andrew, will fly at all times from all Scottish public buildings, beginning with Edinburgh Castle.

To ask the First Minister what confidence the Scottish Executive has in the prosecution of crime in Scotland in light of the outcome of the Andrew Aspinall case. (S1F-1402)

I thank the acting First Minister for his answer. Following the collapse of the case against an alleged paedophile, it appears that the police tried to shift the blame on to that bogeyman, the European convention on human rights. In fact, the case was sabotaged by the police's blunder over the execution of a warrant. Does the acting First Minister have confidence that the police inquiry into this disastrous and expensive mess will be objective and open? Does he agree that the public would have more confidence if he were to direct—if he remains Minister for Justice—that there should be independent inquiry, the report of which should be placed before the justice committees?

The SNP welcomes the general intent of the bill, which is, as the minister said, to remove from complainers the fear factor of appearing in court and being faced with cross-examination by the accused. The small percentage of rape cases that are proved from the number of reports that are lodged every year is shameful, and that does not take into account the many people who do not report rapes. The evidence from the Scottish Rape Crisis Network showed that the prospect of cross-examination deters people from reporting rapes. I also note what Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said about the reluctance of juries to convict, which was referred to by Graham Bell in his weighty evidence to the Justice 2 Committee. I want to make some comments on the bill, not to undermine its principles, but to strengthen them. I draw the minister's attention to concerns that were expressed in the evidence and in the Justice 2 Committee's report. It is unfortunate that only five evidence-taking sessions were held. The bill is extremely important and it makes important changes to Scots law, but evidence was again crammed into a short time span. Section 1 of the bill is wide. Members have focused, quite rightly, on the serious sexual offence of rape, but that is not the only offence to which section 1 refers. For example, section 1(2)(e) refers to "indecent assault" and section 1(2)(f) to "indecent behaviour", an example of which was given by Roseanna Cunningham—the  common or garden flasher. Indecent assault can range from an action such as brushing across a woman's breasts to—at the other end of the scale—a serious assault on a woman with some kind of device or implement. The range of offences is huge and I want that issue to be addressed when the bill is considered further. I am concerned about the test for prohibition, which is fear, distress and intimidation; as Roseanna Cunningham rightly said, that amounts to power. For example, if an elderly lady is seriously assaulted and put in fear of her life, there might be no sexual element, but under section 1(4) the accused could conduct his defence. That is another issue to be considered. The problem with the operation of pre-trial disclosure is that it takes place pre-trial. Graham Bell said in his evidence that pre-trial disclosure could cause problems, not for the prosecution but for the prosecution of a case. He said that the concern would be that "the bill would require notice in writing to be given so that the issue could be determined before the trial began and before the jury was empanelled." He went on to say: "My fear is that if we make a provision such as that which is proposed in the bill, every defence counsel will frame an application—dotting the i's and crossing the t's—just in case the situation arises."—[ Official Report, Justice 2 Committee , 3 October 2001; c 494-95.] That does not help the legislation and it must be considered. The committee said, in paragraph 68 of its report: "We consider that this aspect of the bill needs further close scrutiny". I think that that view is correct. I also note Roseanna Cunningham's comments on sandbagging. We must achieve balance by giving fair notice to the complainer of what might be coming their way. In relation to behaviour when victims of sexual assaults are being cross-examined, I endorse what Pauline McNeill said. However, I can think of an example in which one might want to lead evidence having not made written application: the complainer denies in evidence a previous sexual relationship with the accused, but evidence from a third party to the effect that the complainer has had a previous sexual relationship with the accused credibly refutes the complainer's statement. In such a situation, it should be open to the accused's legal representative to lead evidence about what the complainer has just said, because it has been refuted. How would one go about doing that when one has not made written application? I realise that an existing provision refers to "on cause shown", but it still seems to me that we must examine the matter of written  applications. I say that in the interest of making good law. I got a bit muddled about previous convictions, so I look forward to hearing an explanation. As we all know, there is the presumption of innocence and there is the test of guilt being proved beyond reasonable doubt. Which kind of convictions would be led? If someone had a previous conviction for flashing and they were on trial for flashing again, could that be led? I seek clarification on that. As for the ban on self-representation, I can envisage problems when a solicitor or advocate is imposed. For example, how does the appointed solicitor or advocate proceed if the accused refuses to instruct? The bill states that they must "act in the best interests of the accused." How on earth could that be determined? What if the solicitor proceeded and the accused claimed afterwards that the solicitor did not act in his best interests? Could a civil claim be brought against the advocate or solicitor? Before we reach stage 2, I would like to know more about the provision of an amicus curiae, because I did not know about that before. There could be problems in operating the provision whereby a solicitor or advocate who is appointed cannot be dismissed. Solicitors or advocates acting in those circumstances could have difficulties. The Justice 2 Committee had difficulties about whether the notice of defence of consent was necessary in the bill. I cannot see how it can be necessary to include that in the bill, when it must be in the terms of the charge that there has not been consent. The accused has a right not to defend himself; there is a right to silence. There might be confusion in this case, because the accused is being asked to put something forward. Is it the same as a plea of self-defence or alibi? I do not know. That is another question that I would like to be answered. I put those reservations on the record so that we can address them at stage 2, make good law and secure the fair but necessary balance between removing deliberate intimidation of a complainer by the accused in court, while adhering to the principles of being innocent until proven guilty, and putting the onus on the crown to prove guilt beyond reasonable doubt. I raise those points in order that the legislation will be secure.

Sit down now.

I refer the minister to table 3.3 in the document "Strategic Priorities for Scotland's Passenger Railway", which is headed: "Most favoured major development projects". Beneath that table, the document states: "The Waverley Route through the Borders was the specifically named project most favoured by" individuals. It also states: "This stood out from all other proposals." My information is that civil servants in the minister's office—

The question is coming. My information is that civil servants in the minister's office are lukewarm, to say the least, about that project. Will the minister confirm or deny the attitude of her civil servants? Is that one of the key projects that she will refer to Railtrack?

Presiding Officer, thank you for allowing me to remain seated. I congratulate Johann Lamont on securing tonight's debate. I declare an interest: I am a patron of Scottish HART, the Borders-based charity to which Ian Jenkins referred, which is also known as the Cameron Gunn memorial fund. As Ian Jenkins indicated, the organisation was set up by Wilma and Kenny Gunn after their son died from hypertrophic cardiomyopathy some 10 years ago. Since then, Mr and Mrs Gunn have worked tirelessly to promote awareness of cardiomyopathy and to encourage the testing of young athletes. The Gunns have done that by endeavouring to raise the £0.25 million that is required to provide a mobile echocardiogram that could be used at sports clubs and schools to test young people. The disease is usually more recognisable under the headlines that we unfortunately sometimes read, such as "Sudden Death on Sports Field", "Heart Condition Kills Youth" and "Teenager in Mystery Death". Cameron Gunn was playing five-a-side football with workmates, practising for a charity game, when he suddenly dropped down dead. He was 19. As has been said, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the largest single cause of death among the under-30s. It is thought to affect at least 125,000 people in the UK, which means about 12,000 in Scotland. Without a heart scan, the condition is difficult to diagnose. Often there is no sign that anything is wrong until the sudden fatality of  someone who had appeared to be young and fit. However, with screening, the disease is easily treatable. I refer Mr Chisholm to a series of questions that I have lodged on this disease. I do not expect answers now, but I hope to get them later. Last year, I asked question S1W-8790 in response to an Executive claim that only 1,000 people in Scotland were affected by cardiomyopathy. Does the minister accept that the figure should be 10 times that amount? The higher figure has been indicated by Professor W J McKenna, who is the professor of cardiac medicine at St George's hospital medical school, London. In her response to my question S1W-6079, the Minister for Health and Community Care indicated that, under advice from the UK national screening committee and on the basis of current knowledge, Scotland should not offer population-wide screening for the condition. Have we made any progress on that? I also refer the minister to an Executive news release of 10 April last year, which again stressed that the minister would not consider a national screening programme. The news release contained comments from Professor Stewart Hillis, who said: "I agree that on the basis of present evidence there is no justification for the introduction of a national screening programme though this should not stop those who feel they are at risk from having access to local screening facilities if they so wish. We are currently piloting work with Sport Scotland where we are examining the value of offering a test or screening to young people taking up competitive sports." What progress has been made with sportscotland? Will the minister at least consider selective screening for young athletes, sportsmen and sportswomen? Last year, in the answer to question S1W-4653 on research and funding, I was advised that there were 129 UK-wide research projects at that time. Will the minister provide an update on the current state of research, the collation of that research, and the funding of that research? Would the minister, or ministerial representatives, be prepared to meet the trustees of Scottish HART, as they have repeatedly requested, in order that they can put forward their views?

On 25 August last year, in answer to my question on discussions with the Strategic Rail Authority about financing the Borders railway line, the minister responded that that was discussed on  26 June last year. On what occasions since has funding been discussed with the SRA? What advice and guidance has the minister given to the SRA about funding the line?

Murray Tosh will be missed. He made a wonderful speech, which I enjoyed thoroughly. However, he should travel on some of the trains on which I travel. They are not serving their customers in the way in which he suggested. They are sometimes quite disgraceful. I want to talk about the idea of a rail service, rather than a rail business. The key word is service. That does not exclude managerial accountability. If we put the failure to develop a rail service together with the infamous Beeching cuts, we will see where we went wrong. Business was seen as the cure-all, but in fact it was a disease that led to the collapse of investment in the rail  infrastructure—with tragic consequences, as we know. The demise of Railtrack gives us an opportunity to be radical: to put in place a means of ownership of the infrastructure that takes the profit element out of the service. A rail service that includes a profit element is, in any event, a contradiction in terms. The establishment of a Scottish public railway investment trust—SPRINT—or of local investment trusts for community ownership would allow us to remove that profit element. A national trust would place control in the hands of this Parliament, bringing rail into line with Scotland's roads—no more, no less. Crucially, it would open the door to an integrated transport system for the nation. It would give us access to the billions of pounds of SRA funding that are Scotland's by right, but which we will not get. There is no doubt that the bulk of SRA funding will stay south of the border, where congestion and population pressure will dominate the divvying-out of resources. There will be an emphasis on quick returns, not on the social and economic requirements to which Murray Tosh referred—for example, those of the Borders. The benefits of projects in such areas are longer term and sometimes more subtle. As members would expect, that brings me to the Waverley line. A petition calling for the reinstatement of the line from Edinburgh to Carlisle received 17,000 signatures, and in a debate just over a year ago the Parliament gave unanimous support to it. However, we have not received a commitment in principle to the funding of the line. The M74 extension that was mentioned—5 miles of three-lane carriageway—has cost more than £200 million. That is equivalent to the cost of 90 miles of track serving 180,000 people, for whom the loss of the Waverley line had dire economic consequences. In the last minute of my speech, I want to refer members to what was said in 1968: "It is no secret that the Secretary of State for Scotland himself argued in favour of keeping a service and had to suffer being over-ruled by his cabinet colleagues." Westminster does not have the vision to restore the Borders railway line. I dream of that and I think that Sarah Boyack dreams of it too. She can make that dream come true. Giving £1.7 million to Hawick for bus shelters and a wee bus service is not the realisation of a Borders dream.

Will the minister give way?

Ireland has been referred to in the debate as it has had similar legislation for five years. It is interesting that, in the three years between 1998 and now, the Irish Criminal Assets Bureau confiscated £6.5 million of goods. The bureau also seized a bar called the Paradise Bar—perhaps it was aptly named—that had been used to launder hundreds of thousands of pounds of drug money. Through civil proceedings, the bar was put into receivership and sold, as a result of which the bureau received £215,000. The bill has merits. The Scottish National Party supports in principle the thrust of the bill. It is obviously just and satisfactory that those who appear to benefit from crime should cease to do so through proceedings in either the criminal or the civil courts. The Scottish National Party also welcomes restraint orders. The minister is quite right—one must be able to act quickly, especially in these days of selling goods by electronic means. In this instance, it is our view that there should have been a Scottish bill—there could have been Scottish consolidating legislation. The current legislation is the Proceeds of Crime (Scotland) Act 1995 and the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995, which is to do with money laundering. In our view, those acts could have been dealt with under consolidating legislation in Scotland, which could have been in parallel with any existing legislation down south. After all, the purpose is not to erode the demarcation lines around Scots law, but to strengthen and buttress them against an invasion from the south.

Now that there is the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill—which, as the minister knows, I was resistant to—I can be a bit choosy about what comes in my direction next. I want to raise matters of civil recovery. Interestingly, the minister said that civil recovery was not a soft option. I thought that there were already difficulties and I will give examples. As members will realise, the evidential test in civil actions is the balance of probability, which is a substantially lower standard of proof than that required in criminal proceedings—beyond  reasonable doubt. I want to raise an issue on the European convention on human rights, a copy of which I have with me—how we have come to love that document. I will refer to article 6.2, which states: "Everyone charged with a criminal offence shall be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law." I thought that perhaps we were heading for difficulties. A rather uninteresting example—it is the best that I could come up with at this time of day—would be if Joe Bloggs was suspected of unlawful conduct and was using the proceeds of crime to purchase, let us say, a string of fish and chip shops—I told members the example was not interesting. The Crown Office might be suspicious, but might not have enough evidence to charge him, let alone secure a conviction. It could serve a disclosure order and would be able to obtain enough information to bring not a criminal prosecution, but a civil action for recovery at the Court of Session. During civil proceedings of proof, evidence might come out that established that there was sufficient evidence for criminal prosecution, which there was not at the beginning. If a decision at the end of that was made in favour of the Lord Advocate, who is the pursuer in the action, as I understand it—I would like an explanation of this—there would be great difficulty in bringing a criminal prosecution against the defender, as they would no longer have the right to the presumption of innocence. It is the opposite of the Duffy case, when a criminal prosecution produced a not proven verdict and civil proceedings were then brought. We support the bill, especially the fact that the funds recovered will be used for drugs strategies and so on. I would also like the funds to be used to reduce recidivism.

One month after £416,000 was allocated to Scottish Borders Council, the council cut £350,000 from its budget, so the net amount was the difference. An official has admitted that in a letter to me. The figures are all very dazzling, but they conceal the truth.

To the best of my knowledge, the wording is admissible. Before it was drafted, I confirmed the wording on behalf of the petitioners with the Public Petitions Committee clerk and I have his assurance that it is in an admissible form.

I welcome all those who have managed to travel from the Scottish Borders today for this debate. [ Applause. ] For those who could not manage to come to the Parliament—and there are many, especially parents and carers of children with special educational needs—the hope is that they can follow the debate at home on the webcast. The debate is but another step in a continuing campaign to reverse the cuts approved by the Liberal Democrat-Independent coalition of Scottish Borders Council at its meeting on 1 August. It is therefore interesting to see that Euan Robson will reply to the debate. Today, Borderers have presented a petition with 10,000 signatures to the Parliament's Public Petitions Committee, asking the Education, Culture and Sport Committee to undertake an inquiry into the cuts and their causes. In particular, I praise Augusta Greenlees who was co-ordinator of the petition, which contains signatures from communities all over the Borders. For example,  there are 423 signatures from Coldstream; 591 from Duns; 1,975 from Galashiels; and 290 from Walkerburn. All the signatories are united in their determination to reverse the cuts. I know the Public Petitions Committee and believe that this petition will be given a sympathetic hearing en route to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. The petitioners hope that their 10,000 signatures will speak loud and clear to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee so that when it visits the Borders, parents and others can have their say to committee members in person. Last Saturday, thousands of Borderers, local politicians—including me—trade unionists, teachers, parents, children, cleaners, auxiliaries and others marched in stair-rod rain through Galashiels to protest against the cuts. We marched behind the banner of the Educational Institute of Scotland and the tall figure of Jock Houston, who is the secretary of the institute and the head of Hawick High School. As for the Association of School Boards, all 17 school boards in the Borders had a unanimous vote of no confidence in the director of education, the director of finance—who is currently acting chief executive of Scottish Borders Council—and the entire Liberal Democrat-Independent administration. Furthermore, the Borders Headteachers Association condemns the budget cuts. Why such people power? The impact to date of the as yet unexplained overspend of £3.9 million and the subsequent £2.5 million in cuts has resulted in job losses among cleaners and dinner ladies and cuts in auxiliary and speech therapist hours. Children at Broomlands Primary School in Kelso have even been fighting to prevent the partial sale of their playground. I want to focus on some telling individual examples of how the cuts are impacting children with special educational needs. Jared Johnstone is eight years old; he is blind and does not speak. He has been attending the Royal Blind School in Edinburgh since he was four, travelling by taxi all the way from Kelso with an escort. He used to be picked up at 7.45 am and was at his school, on time, by 9 o'clock. He was a happy child. In August, all that changed as a result of the cuts to the education transport budget. We should note that the cuts were made to the transport budget, because Scottish Borders Council keeps claiming that it has not made cuts to the SEN budget—which might technically be true. Jared Johnstone now leaves home at 7.25 am and travels by taxi to St Boswells, where he transfers to a minibus. The bus picks up other children en route to Edinburgh, which means that Jared reaches school at 9.30 am. In effect, he is  late for school every day. The change has had a noticeable effect on him. His father, who is in the gallery today, says that, from being a child full of life and energy, Jared comes home tired and moody. He is suffering because of the incompetence of others and, as any parent or non-parent would understand, his family are desperately concerned and anxious. Victoria Nichol is six and has cerebral palsy—I asked a question about her at question time this afternoon. Her parents want her to attend her local primary school at Halyrude in Peebles, where she could mix with her friends and older sister, as she does at the local girl guides. She is currently travelling four days a week with her mother or grandmother to the Craighalbert Centre in Cumbernauld with a half day at her Peebles school, where she wants to be permanently. Her parents are quite prepared for her attendance at the local school to be phased in. What has the local authority done? It has kicked the parents' application into touch by sending it to the Scottish ministers and into a process that will take almost a year to resolve. Like many other parents, Victoria's father is in the gallery tonight. There are other examples. Donna Allen's son, who is five and a half, currently attends a school that is part of the early intervention programme. That programme also is losing out, because of the virement of £525,000 from the excellence fund. Early intervention is one of the categories in the excellence fund. Donna Allen is seriously concerned that her son, who is being assessed for Asperger's syndrome, will not receive support. The once proposed autism unit is now—in local authority-speak—postponed, yet the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs has agreed the virement because the council has assured him that it will not impact on children with special educational needs. Scottish Borders Council may live to regret that assurance, as there are autistic children who are losing out now because of cuts from the excellence fund. The list goes on. The audit report will be published soon. I hope that it will be robust and tell us the why, the who and the where of how the money was spent, but that is only part of what is required. The purpose of this debate is to call on the minister and his Cabinet colleagues—I have previously written to both the Minister for Finance and Local Government and the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs—particularly in light of the £718 million underspend in the Scottish budget, to redress the impact of the cuts by providing a financial rescue package, on appropriate terms and ring-fenced, so that these and other children do not pay for the failures of others.  I refer the minister to the third report in 2001 of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, on special educational needs. Recommendation 1 of that report is: "Maximising the participation of all children in mainstream schools". Section 15 of the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000, which will come into force in due course, contains a "requirement that children be educated in mainstream schools". The act states that, where there are exceptions to that, "it shall be presumed that those circumstances arise only exceptionally." I trust that the mismanagement of a local authority does not constitute an exception. There is a presumption for mainstreaming. The minister has a responsibility for these children over and above the council's responsibility. In the spirit of that legislation and in conformity with the report of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, Jack McConnell—and I regret that he is not here to hear this—should ensure that the word "mainstreaming" is given its worth, by proper funding so that Jared and Victoria and all the other Jareds and Victorias, and all those concerned parents and carers, can know that it is not the cost of their children that counts, but their value.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will investigate the circumstances surrounding the appeals procedure used by Scottish Borders Council under the Education (Scotland) Act 1980 to refer the case of Victoria Nichol from Peebles,  who suffers from cerebral palsy, to HM Inspectorate of Education. (S1O-3880)

I hope that the minister has received the full letter and file of papers that I gave. I dispute the competence and legality of the referral and I ask the minister to consider the matter urgently. Many children in the Borders are suffering because of the cuts. I hope that he will be able to give me an undertaking that, in line with the Parliament's policy on mainstreaming, Victoria Nichol and others like her will be included in their local schools, which they attend with their friends and which, in Victoria Nichol's case, she attended with her sister.

It gives me great pleasure, both personally and as convener of the Justice 1 Committee, to speak to the motion that the bill be passed. As has been said on earlier occasions, this is the first bill to be introduced by a committee in the Scottish Parliament. That alone makes the bill important, even without the increased protection that it will give to many in society who are at risk from violence and abuse. In a constitutional sense, the bill demonstrates the ability of the Parliament's committees to initiate legislation. That is one of the most important ways in which our system is distinctive from that at Westminster. Having been a member of the Justice 1 Committee when it first had the idea of investigating the subject, I am well aware of the amount of time and consideration that was given to the original suggestion. I was there, as were others, when a flash of light illuminated the committee during evidence from representatives of the Sheriffs Association. Who would have thought that the Sheriffs Association would be our Damascus? The witnesses suggested that a way forward would be to have a common law interdict to which a power of arrest could be attached. That proposal developed into the bill that we are considering today. The committee undertook a thorough investigation before reporting to the Parliament and I am glad to say that the proceedings within Parliament have been conducted quickly, but without sacrificing any of the scrutiny that the Parliament requires to undertake. The current law does not protect all victims of abuse equally. The main civil protection available is the Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981, but that act does not offer protection to all abused persons. A matrimonial interdict ends on divorce and is not available to a divorced spouse. The 1981 act affords limited protection to cohabitees, who may apply for an interdict or exclusion order for an initial six-month period only, and thereafter for a six-month extension. Another limitation of the legislation is that a solely entitled cohabitant cannot obtain a matrimonial interdict against her or his partner  unless the latter first seeks occupancy rights. The Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Bill addresses those points. The effect of the bill will be to entitle any individual who has obtained, or is applying for, an interdict against another individual, for the purpose of providing protection from abuse, to apply to the court to have a power of arrest attached to the interdict, regardless of whether the interdict is a matrimonial interdict. It will no longer be necessary to demonstrate any particular personal relationship to the alleged abuser. Instead, the court will simply have to be satisfied that granting the power of arrest would be necessary to protect the applicant from the risk of abuse. If the court is so satisfied, it will grant the order. The effect of attaching a power of arrest to an interdict is that, in the event of the interdicted person being suspected of breaching the interdict, a constable would be entitled to arrest that person and take him or her away from the scene. The constable would also have to be satisfied that if he or she did not arrest the interdicted person, there would be a risk of that person continuing to cause abuse in breach of the interdict. Once the person has been arrested, if the fiscal decides that there are to be no criminal proceedings, the person must be brought before a court on the first available day following the arrest. The fiscal must present a petition to the court that sets out the facts and circumstances of the case. The sheriff then has discretion to order a further two days of detention. The further period of detention will be ordered only if it appears to the sheriff that the information discloses a prima facie breach of the interdict and the sheriff is satisfied that there would be substantial risk of abuse to the victim if the person was not detained. The bill is not all one-sided and safeguards have been built in to protect the rights of alleged abusers. I read an editorial in Green's Family Law Bulletin , July 2001, which suggested that the loss of the discretion that is given to the police to release an arrested person back at the police station could lead to injustice. With respect to the editor of that journal, I cannot agree. Two safeguards are built into the bill to avoid such injustice. First, the test before an alleged abuser is arrested has been set at a higher level than was the case under the 1981 act. Not only must the constable have reasonable cause for suspecting that the person is in breach of the interdict, but he or she must consider that if the person were not arrested, there would be a risk of abuse or further abuse by that person in breach of the interdict. That alone should answer the suggestion that a one-off momentary loss of self-control would lead to a man or woman spending the weekend in the cells.  In addition, one must consider the background to the granting of a power of arrest that is attached by the courts to an interdict. To obtain an interdict, it is likely that the wife in the situation described by the editor of Green's Family Law Bulletin will have suffered abuse previously at the hands of the man, and the terms of that abuse will have been set out in an application to the court. Under the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Bill, the man will also require to be given an opportunity to contest the application to the court. Thus, rather than dealing with a momentary loss of self-control that will not be repeated, we are dealing with at least two incidents of abuse and, in many cases, more. The bill also provides the arrested person with rights that are equivalent to their rights under the criminal law. Those include the right to have a solicitor informed of their detention, the right to a hearing with a solicitor to obtain advice prior to any court appearance, and the right to be heard before a sheriff before any further period of detention is ordered. During stage 2, there was discussion of the requirement on the police to intimate an arrest to the procurator fiscal "as soon as is practicable." Pauline McNeill and others were satisfied that those words were appropriate, given that an attempt at immediate intimation would, at certain times, find the procurator fiscal's office closed until the next morning. The bill provides safeguards against excessive detention by requiring the alleged abuser to appear at court on the first court day following arrest. That could be the same day, and the provision will ensure the earliest possible appearance, at which the procurator fiscal will be required to present a petition to the court. The requirement on the procurator fiscal may also assist in ensuring intimation as soon as practicable, because the fiscal will wish to ensure the earliest possible intimation in order to prepare the petition. At the end of the day, however, it is necessary to consider the purpose of the arrest and detention. The arrest and detention will be imposed because there has been a prima facie breach of a lawful order made by a court. Also, the detention is part of a train of events that is directed at ensuring that the abuser will fulfil his legal obligation not to abuse the victim. It is worth emphasising that there is no element of punishment. The purpose of the detention is not to punish the person concerned for the breach. In considering whether to order a further short period of detention, the sheriff will weigh up the risk of future substantial abuse in the immediate aftermath of a breach of the interdict, and the need  for a cooling-off period. The Justice 2 Committee considered that to be an entirely proportionate response to increase the protection of the person who is at risk of abuse. In many circumstances, the power of arrest will enable the police to take prompt action to remove an abuser from the scene, which in some cases could prevent matters from escalating into criminal conduct. This has been a trail-blazing bill in many ways, not least in its passage through Parliament. This is the first time that the procedure for a committee bill has been used and it has been seen to work well—from initial consideration by the Finance Committee, when my predecessor as convener, Alasdair Morgan, was called to give evidence on the financial memorandum, right through to the stage 2 process, when the Justice 2 Committee considered 44 amendments. I thank the Law Society of Scotland in particular for introducing a number of amendments that enabled the Justice 2 Committee to scrutinise all aspects of the bill. The process has shown the Scottish Parliament at its best. The Executive has been extremely supportive during the passage of the bill, and a number of the amendments that I lodged at stage 2 had their origins in suggestions by the Executive. I thank all members of the Justice 1 Committee and those of its predecessor, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. In particular, I thank my two predecessors as convener, Roseanna Cunningham and Alasdair Morgan. I have mentioned the Finance Committee, which scrutinised the bill at stage 1. In addition, the Subordinate Legislation Committee gave the rule-making provisions a clean bill of health. Mention requires to be made of the clerks to the Justice 1 Committee and its predecessor. Andrew Mylne, in particular, provided a lot of assistance and encouragement during the inquiry stage. I personally thank David Cullum and Alison Coull of that shadowy group known as NEBU—the non-Executive bills unit—who worked hard and put in long hours in assisting the Justice 1 Committee and me with the bill. I have already quoted from the Family Law Bulletin , but I quote from it again in relation to the drafting of the bill. After commenting on the work of the Justice 1 Committee, the editors stated: "Another noteworthy feature of the Bill is that it shows the utility of the innovative Scottish Parliamentary Drafting Unit which prepares members' and other non-Executive bills. In Westminster private members' bills are often badly drafted ... and have to be kicked into shape by the official Government drafters during their passage. The Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Bill, drafted by a member of the Scottish Parliamentary Drafting Unit, is by contrast admirably clear and precise from the outset." That should make for good law. I, and all members of the Justice 1 Committee, echo those sentiments  and express our thanks to the unit and its draftsmen. It gives me great pleasure to move the motion to pass the first committee bill in this Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Bill be passed.

As Bill Aitken said, amendment 5 was debated at stage 2 and subsequently withdrawn. Bill Aitken's amendment would require the police to inform the procurator fiscal of an arrest "immediately" following the moment of arrest, which might not be practical. As with amendment 14, there are good reasons for allowing the police some flexibility. At present, section 4(6) states that when the alleged abuser is arrested, the police should inform the procurator fiscal of the facts and circumstances of the arrest "as soon as is practicable."  In practice, intimation to the procurator fiscal will be given as soon as the fiscal's office is open. There is nothing to be gained by requiring an immediate intimation when the office is known to be closed; we are not dealing with situations in which the immediate attention of the fiscal would have any effect on the alleged abuser. The concern that was expressed during the Justice 2 Committee debate on the ECHR is misplaced. The bill is fully compliant. Section 4(6) requires the police to take action as soon as they can. The purpose of that is to ensure that the alleged abuser is brought before the court on the first possible date after the arrest. Therefore, the alleged abuser is able to challenge the deprivation of their liberty at the earliest possible opportunity. Section 5 makes it clear that appearance on the next court day is required. An additional protection can be found in the actions of the procurator fiscal, who must present a petition to the court on that day. The procurator fiscal can therefore be expected to be anxious to be informed promptly of the facts and circumstances so that the petition can be prepared. Because the liberty of the individual is at stake, the courts will be very strict in their assessment of how much leeway is permitted to the police on this matter. I have no doubt that the courts will interpret the phrase in section 4(6) as requiring the police to intimate to the fiscal almost immediately after the arrest and just as soon as it is feasible to get in touch with the fiscal. The sensible discretion that is given to the police does not in any way affect the protection that is available to the alleged abuser, nor does it delay their appearance at court. I therefore invite Bill Aitken to withdraw amendment 5.

Amendment 6 seeks to ensure that an arrested person who is brought before the court can have their solicitor or counsel speak on their behalf. That is entirely appropriate and is already allowed for in the bill.  Section 5(4) requires the sheriff who is hearing the facts surrounding the arrest and alleged breach of interdict to afford the detained person the opportunity to make representations. It does not say that those representations can come only from the arrested person. As drafted, subject perhaps to the normal civil court rules on representation, anybody could make representations on behalf of the arrested person. The bill places no restriction on that. That is a natural follow-on from the provision in section 4(3)(e), which allows an arrested person, on request, the opportunity for a private interview with a solicitor before any appearance in court. In addition, I understand that legal aid regulations are being examined to ensure that a duty civil lawyer is available for the arrested person should they wish such a service. There is also a potential consequence that could flow from the amendment being accepted. The rules on representation at court are less strict in civil proceedings and, on occasion, family members or advice workers appear in order to speak for parties. Although the bill does not encourage that, it would not prevent it from happening where such representation is appropriate. By specifying solicitors and counsel, the amendment could cause the courts to interpret such assistance as being the only alternative open to the arrested person. I hope that it is clear that the amendment is unnecessary and potentially harmful and that solicitors and counsel can appear if required. I hope that the amendment will be withdrawn.

Amendment 4 has the laudable aim of protecting children in police custody by requiring the police to intimate to the person with parental responsibilities that the child is being detained. I agree with the thinking behind the amendment, but the bill already states that the police "must" intimate. In an attempt to save police time, the bill gives the police an element of discretion by providing that the police "must where practicable" intimate. The police must intimate unless it is not practicable to do so. It seems sensible that, without in any way diluting the protection given to a child, we prevent the police from undertaking fruitless attempts to intimate when it is known that the attempt is bound to fail. Let me give an example. A child of 15 is arrested for being in breach of an interdict. At the police station, he tells the duty officer that his parent or parents are on holiday abroad. Under the amendment, despite the fact that the child has given the police that information, the police would still be required to send intimation to the parent or parents. That seems pointless and would be a waste of precious resources. As I have said, we are keen to ensure that children are protected. We have made specific provision in the bill to give children extra protection. Very few children will be affected by the bill. It is extremely unusual and possibly almost unique for a child to be interdicted. Even so, protection has been provided.

Let me conclude. Bill Aitken still has a right to reply. However, that protection has been tempered with a touch of realism about the duties of the police. The bill states that the police must intimate; only if it is not practicable to do so is the obligation removed. I ask Bill Aitken to withdraw his amendment.

Amendment 14 follows on from considering the rights given to the accused, which we have just discussed in the debate on amendments 10, 11 and 13. While examining the rights available to an arrested person under section 4(3), we felt that there were some additional matters that should be recorded by the police. As drafted, the bill requires the police to record the time and nature of any request made by the detained person under section 4(3) and the time and nature of any action taken by the police under that subsection. In addition, the police are required to record the time and nature of any action that they have taken under subsection (4) in relation to a person who appears to be under the age of 16. Amendment 14 repeats the existing recording requirements, but requires the police to record five additional matters. First, the time of arrest, the police station to which the arrested person is taken and the time of arrival at the police station must be recorded. Those facts could be significant in ascertaining whether the arrested person was taken to a police station as soon as was reasonably practicable, which is a requirement imposed on the police by subsection (2), and whether the procurator fiscal was informed of the arrest as soon as was practicable, as required under subsection (6). The recording of any other place to which the arrested person is taken is included and reflects equivalent requirements under the criminal law. For completeness, the police are required to record the time the arrested person was informed of their rights under subsection (3). That could be significant in ascertaining whether the police informed them of their rights as soon as they arrived at the police station. The requirements to record the time and nature of a request to the police and the time and nature of any action taken are in the bill as drafted and are repeated in amendment 14. Amendment 14 brings the information that the bill requires the police to record into line with what is required under criminal procedure. I move amendment 14.

Amendments 1 and 3 seek to replicate in the bill a discretion that is given to the police under criminal law. The amendments would allow the police to take an arrested person to premises other than a police station. For a number of reasons, such discretion at the point of arrest is inappropriate. At stage 2, there was much debate about importing criminal provisions into the bill. The Justice 1 Committee accepted that this bill, which is a civil measure, should stand alone, and expressed its approval for the fact that the bill is self-contained. The bill is not a criminal measure, and it is necessary to examine closely the purpose and effect of importing provisions that resemble criminal provisions into a bill where the purpose of detention is quite different from that of detention under the criminal law. At section 4(2) the bill requires the arrested person to "be taken to a police station as quickly as is reasonably practicable".  It does not require the person to be detained thereafter at the police station; it requires only that they be detained. That is in line with the equivalent provisions in the 1981 act. Under the criminal law, an arrested person could be taken elsewhere for other purposes, such as attendance at an identity parade or the search of premises. Both those situations would be in connection with the on-going investigation of a crime. Neither can apply under the bill, as there is no further investigation to be undertaken. The arrested person may also need to be taken to another police area where the crime is being investigated. Again, that situation does not apply under the bill. The person requires to be brought before the sheriff for the district where they were arrested. Although under the bill there are no release provisions by the police, we see no operational reason why an arrested person should not initially be taken to a police station, be advised there of their rights, have those rights recorded and have any requests acted on. Should the police for operational reasons wish to detain the arrested person elsewhere thereafter, the bill allows for that. We also consider that it is desirable that a child be taken initially to a police station in order to ensure that the active step of intimation to the parent is properly carried out and supervised. We note the additional safeguards provided to children under section 43 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995. That section requires the involvement of senior officers or the officer in charge of a police station when a child is not released immediately. It suggests that the provision in section 15(4) of the 1995 act refers only to a police station and that children under criminal law must be taken directly to a police station. We consider that the serious circumstances of the arrest of a child merit their being taken directly to a police station. For the sake of completeness, I should point out that there is a problem with amendment 3. At present, the officer in charge of the police station must intimate the detention to the child's parents. The amendment would require the officer in charge of the other premises to intimate the detention to the child's parents. However, there may be no officer in charge of the other premises. It remains our view that there are sound reasons for requiring the alleged abuser to be brought to a police station immediately after arrest and that the provisions of the bill should be consistent with the equivalent provisions of the Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981. I invite Bill Aitken to withdraw amendment 1 and not to move amendment 3.

I have nothing to add.

At stage 2, Bill Aitken raised the question of detention under criminal proceedings following upon an arrest under the provisions of the bill. As I indicated then, that was helpful and the matter has been given careful consideration since that debate. I am grateful to Bill Aitken for pointing out that area and for allowing us time to look into the position. The bill sets out the procedure that is to be followed on and after arrest when no criminal proceedings are to be taken in respect of the incident that gave rise to the arrest. That will be the normal position, as the purpose of the bill is to provide powers to the police to arrest and remove alleged abusers in situations in which the criminal law does not apply. When the conduct is sufficient to be a breach of the criminal law, it is to be expected that the arrest will be under criminal law provisions. Having considered the position further, I accept that there is a need for an amendment to make it clear that the detention that the bill permits will cease at the point where criminal proceedings are initiated. In other words, when is the alleged abuser subject to the normal provisions of criminal law? Amendment 12 amends section 4(2) to make it clear that the detention under the power of arrest in the bill stops when the alleged abuser is accused of a criminal offence on petition or is charged on a summary complaint. From that time onwards, any detention of the person will be under the provisions of the criminal law and they will be in a similar position to other persons charged on complaint or accused on petition. The position that I have described seems fair. It is fair to the alleged abuser, who will be returned to the criminal law sphere with the rights that apply to others who have been accused or charged. It is clear for the police, who will have a definite point in time when the civil warrant ceases to be applicable, and it is fair on the victim, who will have had the additional benefit conveyed by the power of arrest until the criminal law takes over. In practice, in most cases the service of a petition or complaint will occur after the alleged abuser has been taken to court to await their appearance before the sheriff. Service will occur in the cells at court and the then accused will be required to appear before the criminal court later that day. We expect that, in most cases, detention will continue until their appearance in court, but that is a criminal law matter and not a matter for the bill. Amendment 2 is in the name of Bill Aitken. The wording is the same as that of an amendment that he moved and subsequently withdrew at stage 2. As he indicated at stage 2, the amendment is directed at providing the police with the power to continue detention after an arrest under the bill but  in the circumstances in which the fiscal has initiated criminal proceedings. We do not consider that it is appropriate to put such a power in a civil law measure. Any detention prior to the alleged abuser's appearance before the criminal courts is a matter for the criminal law. The procedure in the bill is no longer relevant to such a situation. We also consider that amendment 2 remains defective, as its reference to section 135(3) of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 is incorrect. That section deals with taking an accused person to court on the first court day after arrest on a summary criminal charge. However, the accused will be appearing at court under section 144 of the 1995 act, following the service of the complaint by the fiscal. Furthermore, amendment 2 does not deal with appearance at court following the initiation of solemn proceedings. I hope that Bill Aitken will not press amendment 2 and will feel able to support amendment 12. I move amendment 12.

You are quite correct to say, Presiding Officer, that I am the member in charge of the bill. However, as it is a committee bill, the amendments appearing in my name are in fact committee amendments. Amendments 7, 8 and 9 intend to make it clear who is entitled to apply for a power of arrest and to make subsequent, related court applications under the bill. It might be helpful if I set out a little background, explaining how the relevant sections of the bill operate. Under section 1(2), a court must attach a power of arrest to an interdict if it is satisfied that, among other things, the power of arrest is necessary to protect the applicant or any other person from a  risk of abuse. A similar provision is included under section 2(3) in relation to the granting of an extension of a power of arrest. Again, the court must grant an extension if it is satisfied that that is necessary to protect the applicant or any other person from a risk of abuse. Under section 2(7), a power of arrest must be recalled if the court is satisfied that it is no longer necessary to protect the applicant or any other person from a risk of abuse. The reference in each of those provisions to "any other person" was inserted to follow the provision in the Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981 that gives a parent the right to obtain a matrimonial interdict on behalf of a child of the family, regardless of that child's age. That provision applies even if the child has full capacity to act on its own behalf. Capacity to act is a vital component in making an application to the courts. In general, all adults have capacity unless they suffer from a mental disorder, and in such cases the courts will appoint a person, often but not always a solicitor, to be named in their place on the court action. The fact that that person is acting in such a capacity would always be shown. Children, by which I mean persons under the age of 16 years, have legal capacity to instruct a solicitor in connection with a civil matter where they have a general understanding of what it means to do so. When they are aged over 12, the law presumes that a young person has a general understanding of what it means to instruct a lawyer in any civil proceedings, and that young people over that age have the same capacity as adults. They can, however, consent to an adult acting as their representative, and that would be shown on the court papers. If they do not have capacity, they are usually represented by their parent or parents as their legal representatives, and such a fact is also shown on the court papers. Following further reflection, we do not consider it necessary to make express provision in the bill to try to cover the provision in the Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981 relating to a child of any age. In accordance with normal civil laws, it seems more appropriate that a child with capacity should either apply for a power of arrest themselves or consent to their parent acting on their behalf. If they do not have capacity, they may apply through a representative. That brings me back to the amendments that seek to delete the words "or any other person". We think that the policy that I have covered is already achieved without the need for those words. Removal of the words does not remove any protection that is currently provided by the bill. It will remain the position that a person can apply for a power of arrest to be attached to an interdict  if they consider that that is necessary to protect them from abuse. Either they will apply in person or their representative will apply on their behalf. In each case, "the applicant" and "the person who obtained ... a power of arrest" will be regarded for the purposes of the bill as the person whom the power of arrest is intended to protect. There is an additional reason for making these amendments. At stage 2, the minister identified a possible difficulty in relation to what happens when the person in whose favour the application was made gains capacity. Arguably, there is then nobody who "obtained" the power of arrest and to whom section 2 of the bill can apply. The references to "any other person" could, in that connection, be misleading. They could be interpreted as trying to deal with children and adults who do not have the necessary capacity. They could lead to a construction of the phrases "the applicant" or "the person who obtained" the court order, which are used elsewhere in the bill, as references to the person who made the application, rather than to the person in whose favour the application and subsequent order were made. The proposed changes avoid that interpretation and the potential difficulty that the minister helpfully highlighted. Under the bill, it remains the position that a person can apply for a power of arrest to be attached to an interdict, and the court will attach the power of arrest if it is satisfied that the power of arrest is necessary to protect the applicant. By removing the words "or any other person", it will be clearer that the real applicant is the child or person with mental incapacity, despite the fact that, under the general law, the child or adult is being represented. Similarly, where the bill confers power on the person who obtained the power of arrest and that power was obtained by the representative of a child or adult without capacity, it will be regarded as having been obtained by that child or adult. The child or adult will therefore be entitled to apply for an extension of a power of arrest if they subsequently have capacity. I move amendment 7.

I will respond briefly to the point made by Bill Aitken. In the circumstances that he outlined, the applicant would be the person with incapacity. That would not be appropriate.  Amendment 7 agreed to.

I can be brief in relation to these amendments. Section 4(4) of the bill sets out on the face of the bill the rights available to an arrested person. Those rights are specified in full and are essentially the same as the normal rights of a person arrested on a criminal matter. At stage 2 I gave a commitment to consider further the rights conferred on an abuser when the police arrest them. As I indicated at stage 2, there was concern that the alleged abuser should be informed of the reason for their arrest at the time of arrest. These amendments follow on from that consideration. Amendment 10 addresses the specific concern that I have mentioned and requires the police immediately to tell the person why they are being arrested. Amendments 11 and 13 are consequential to amendment 10 and I propose to say no more about them. I move amendment 10.

I have nothing to add.  Amendment 10 agreed to.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is planning more private prisons in the next three years. (S1O-3825)

That is a year and a half late. Will the minister comment on this week's announcement of the transfer of two senior and respected prison governors at Barlinnie and Peterhead out of front-line prison management, which has reduced staff morale even further and is seen as a deliberate move to ease in privatisation? Will he say categorically whether he agrees with Tony Blair who, before coming into power, stated:  "We consider prison privatisation wrong in principle and in practice ... A Labour Government would bring the prisons back within the proper public prison system at the earliest opportunity"?

Will the minister give way?

Congratulations are due not to any individual members or to a committee, but to the Parliament for having come this far. I would like to bring some clarity to the matter for elderly people. I think that I am correct in saying that the measures will apply only to those over 65. Obviously, some older people will suffer and pay for personal care and will not be caught up in the package. It is not fair to refer to "free personal care", because some people will continue to have to pay a portion of the costs of their care. I would like to know why there is some deviation from Professor Sutherland's recommendations. Page xix of his report states: "The costs of care for those individuals who need it should be split between living costs, housing costs and personal care. Personal care should be available after an assessment, according to need and paid for from general taxation: the rest should be subject to a co-payment according to means." In chapter 6, paragraph 6.38, the commission's recommendation is "first to take personal care costs out of the system altogether". The commission viewed the fixed costs as living and housing costs, which were to be a set figure. The rest would be paid "according to means". There are great variations in personal care. I was pleased to hear the minister say that £50 million is being put aside for care in the community. Such care is what most elderly people want; they do not want to be prised out of their homes. I note that the Minister for Health and Community Care said in her statement yesterday: "We applaud the efforts that are being made by local authorities, the NHS and the voluntary and independent sectors".— [ Official Report , 26 September 2001; c 2795.]  I want to focus on the voluntary sector. I want to know whether any of the £50 million will be directed towards it. If I remember correctly from a debate in February, we have about 585 day care centres, which provide 19,000 places. Many of those centres, whose existence means that people do not need to go into hospital, are on the brink of collapse because they cannot raise funds. They do not have enough money for the transport that is needed to pick up elderly people. I would like the minister to say how he will make the necessary assessment in Scotland.  I visited the Midlothian stroke club, which caters for elderly people who have had strokes and who are suffering great psychological problems after their strokes. Through its voluntary efforts, that club helps bring those people back into their communities. Such organisations are struggling, simply because they cannot afford transport and there are not enough volunteers. They perhaps need people to be partly paid to come and help. Their work is an essential part of the cycle of supporting people in the community and I would like to hear the minister's comments on that. Reference was made to aids and adaptations. In a debate earlier this year we heard, following a point that was originally made by Mary Scanlon, "that 10,000 elderly people had been assessed for aid and adaptations and 10,000 were awaiting assessment."— [ Official Report , 14 February 2001; Vol 10, c 1239.]  I would like to know what the position is now. If an elderly person is in his or her house and has no ramp or rail to get in, why are they still waiting for one? Such adaptations are essential for halting decline in people's physical and mental health. In the end, provision of such adaptations would reduce the bill to the state—we must always talk about pennies. In the same debate, I referred to the fact that the number of home helps fell by 9,000 between 1997 and 1999. That is the reality, despite the fact that home helps are essential to enabling elderly people to stay in their homes. How will the minister address that? I congratulate the Parliament on coming so far, but much more detail and many more practicalities must be considered. When those are delivered simply on the ground—such as through the provision of home helps, district nurses and ramps to houses—we will have delivered for Scotland's elderly.

As an initial signatory to the bill, I supported the principle of banning fox hunting with dogs on the basis that it was a sport that used one animal to hunt another for the purpose of human entertainment and so was essentially cruel. At that stage, the bill did not have form; now, in its early stages, it has. Of course the bill is not about fox hunting, but about wild mammals; it mentions neither mounted hunts nor the word "sport". However, this is a stage 1 debate on the bill's principles and on whether it can proceed to further scrutiny of amendments at stages 2 and 3, where it might be substantially reshaped. As it stands, the bill is definitely flawed; however, my question is whether it is so fatally flawed that it cannot pass the first hurdle. Although I remain prepared to support the bill at this stage, I will require to reassess my support if it proceeds beyond stage 1. The scope of the bill is too wide. It encompasses other forms of pursuit and killing in the name of pest control, which would criminalise legitimate activities such as a gamekeeper using dogs to dig out and kill predatory foxes. Although the Justice and Home Affairs Committee was most concerned at such aspects—including the proposed flawed licensing scheme, which we immediately sought to amend—it did not consider them enough to sink the bill. The committee also had reservations about the definition of the verb "to hunt", which is far too  wide. For example, section 1(1) of the bill makes it an offence for someone to "hunt a wild mammal with a dog." A further definition of "to hunt" is "to search for or course". There are substantial difficulties with the bill's wide scope. I have found limited evidence on the bill's cruelty aspects in the Rural Development Committee's report. That might be a consequence of the initial bill's width. Just this afternoon, I heard evidence from Robrie Tully, a master of the hounds, which called into question my understanding of the concept of cruelty. I have not yet reached a view on that point; for me, the jury is still out. Perhaps more evidence should be taken on that aspect at stage 2, when the bill's focus will be narrowed. Separately—and reflecting a constituency interest—I refer members to the impact of the legislation's success on the Scottish Borders if there is no investment in sustaining equestrian pursuits and ancillary industries. I do not accept Alex Neil's comments on that point—which should make it clear to members that this is a free vote for the SNP. The Borders has an impoverished economy; even the much-vaunted delivery of 200 call centre jobs is on hold. Foot-and-mouth disease has had a substantial impact not simply on farming incomes but on income from equestrian pursuits.

I am quite happy to accept Mr Tosh's point. I have already told the chamber that I disagree with Alex Neil on that issue. Wendy Turnbull—who is a groom and a very ordinary, hard-working woman—told me today that since the foot-and-mouth outbreak there are only nine grooms working in Berwickshire instead of 15. If we extrapolate that situation across the five Borders hunts, we could be talking about 100 jobs, which is a lot in a small area with an extremely vulnerable economy. Paul Allison, who is a farrier, has seen a substantial falling-off in income. Hotels, feed merchants, vets, grooms, livery yard owners, farriers, saddlers and others depend for much of their livelihood on sustaining horses through the winter months. That is what the hunt does. I am not supporting hunting when I highlight that aspect; I am just giving the economic picture.

I have no difficulty with that view; indeed, it should be taken as read. The bill contains no real alternative to substantive investment in the Borders. I will not mention the Borders railway line, but if we invested in the area, we could provide bridle paths and promote weekend horse riding, trekking and so on, and could offer something positive to the countryside. We cannot take away from such a vulnerable economy without giving back. Nevertheless, with all those reservations, I support the bill.

I refer the minister to a reply to my colleague, Richard Lochhead, about secure places for young offenders, which disclosed that for the whole of Scotland, there were 87 secure places in 1998 and only 95 in 2000. Indeed, there have been only 12 for the whole of Lothian in those three years, and there are no places in Mid Scotland and Fife. My information from senior police officers is that the lack of secure places is of great concern and leads to inappropriate placements for young offenders. Does the minister share that concern? If so, what will he do about it?

I thank the minister for the remarks that he made during stage 2 of the bill in the Justice 2 Committee, which is my former committee. As usual, of course, a little more time at that stage would have been useful. As the minister said, the fact that the debate on this bill was due to take place yesterday is a bitter irony, as images of a burning New York replaced it on our agenda and the agenda of the world. That was graphic evidence, if any were needed, that this is a small planet where our enemy can steal up on us and where the hatred of one nation or one people by another can be fought out on our television screens blow by horrendous blow. However, the bill does not concern terrorism; it deals with the crimes that are contained within the horrific walls of war and its consequences. Those crimes include "Wilful killing ... Torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments ... Wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health ... Unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement ... Taking of hostages" and, chillingly, "Attacking or bombarding, by whatever means, towns, villages, dwellings or buildings which are undefended and which are not military objectives". How that resonates in the current circumstances. There is, however, another irony from which I will not flinch: the United States has not signed up to this treaty. I hope that it does, because, without the USA, the treaty is lessened. The bill gives nations the opportunity to act as one on the small world stage. Barbaric men and women who have committed deeds that are often  too heinous to imagine against their fellow men have merged into the landscape for decades and have led the full life that they denied to others. For such people there should be no hiding place, no sanctuary and no escape from justice. They have committed crimes that will never be time-barred; for them, the passage of time, with the apparent legacy of a decent life, is no defence against their brutality. The will and the honesty of nation states are required for this legislation to work. If man's inhumanity to man continues, as it seems that it must, those responsible for it—no matter where they are or who they are—must be pursued, judged and punished. The bill and the corresponding legislation of other signatory nations represent a small but important start. The SNP fully supports Scotland's participation.

I thank the minister for his comments. I am greatly satisfied by what he has said this morning. It shows the value of lodging what might be called "testing amendments" at stage 2. As the minister will recall, he said at the time: "The current wording of section 12 achieves that aim"— the protection of capacity— "and also builds in important safeguards."—[ Official Report, Justice 2 Committee, 26 June 2001; c 301.] I am grateful to the minister for reconsidering the position and deciding that the earlier provisions were flawed. Given his comments, I believe that we should support amendment 43.

I am glad that the minister has such faith in the ICC, but I am concerned that the ICC might move slowly and a nation state with universal jurisdiction will be lost when there is an opportunity to detain and apprehend a suspected war criminal. Such a situation will happen in due course. I may be proved wrong, but I am greatly concerned. Extradition is not a quick process.

Does the minister accept that, if we had absolute universal jurisdiction and had detained, for example, a German mercenary on Princes Street but were unable to prosecute because of the difficulties of evidence, the ICC would take over at that point? The point is that in those circumstances the person would have been detained and would be in custody.

I do not seek to undermine the ICC in any way—I fully support its existence. I am concerned about the residence test. Aside from the uncertainty and how the test might be manipulated by suspected criminals—

I want to finish what I was saying. I want to ensure that there is no chance that criminals will escape or that there will be extensive delays in prosecuting criminals—that may occur with the operation of international law. The minister said that the ICC is complementary, but he is aware that the first port of call for prosecution is the domestic court.

It only varies because much of the residence test regards tax and immigration, which is, of course, UK-wide. In English law, the term residence "bears varying meanings according to its context, and great caution must be exercised before authorities on the meaning of residence in context such as bankruptcy, taxation, or ... poor law ... are applied .... In particular, it is clear that some degree of permanence is required for the acquisition of residence in some contexts, but not, or to a lesser extent, in others." That was Mr Maclennan's argument. It is an argument that is also sustained in Scotland, where many lawyers are well aware of the complexities of defining that difficult notion of residence. In the House of Lords, Baroness Scotland said: "One cannot say with any certainty, for example, that every person who has come to the UK and stayed for two or three years is definitely a resident here. On the other hand, someone who has been here for a matter of days but has displayed every sign of residing here on a more permanent basis may be considered a resident."—[ Official Report, House of Lords , 12 February 2001; Vol 622, c 85.] That is common sense. Robert Maclennan said: "The trouble is that definitions of residence will have little to do with the degree of moral culpability that is attached to the crimes with which they are charged. The definitions deal solely with the issue of jurisdiction. ... That means that the Bill will hinge on an uncertain test, or on a legally certain but narrow definition. We should not be happy with either."—[ Official Report, House of Commons, Standing Committee D , 3 May 2001; c 311.] Robert Maclennan made it clear that that was the  Liberal Democrat position on jurisdiction. It is interesting that during the debates at stages 1 and 2—brief though they were—the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats made no representations that reflected in any way the arguments that were put so well at Westminster. I refer to the deterrence element again. Absolute jurisdiction—which was argued for by Robert Maclennan—would have allowed the immediate arrest of the German car trader and the Italian businessman. The Scottish National Party wants Scotland to play its full part in bringing those responsible for crimes against humanity to justice; as Robert Maclennan said, residence deals only with jurisdiction, not culpability. It is petty-minded, as well as being an uncertain anchor for prosecution. I quote a contributor to the House of Lords debate: "This is an opportunity to offer a lead to other countries in an exciting new, international venture. ... We should not sidle towards ... the edge of the crowd; we ought to be looking to give a lead here."—[ Official Report, House of Lords ; 12 February 2001; Vol 622, c 74.] Well, I know sidling to the edge of the crowd when I see it. I move amendment 40.

What is Pauline McNeill's solution to the problem of, let us say, two co-accused, one of whom has a residence in Scotland and can be tried here—supposing it was appropriate for the case to be tried here—and the other of whom does not have a residence here and therefore cannot be brought to justice in this country? That would mean running a case against one accused, without the co-accused. Is not that a huge problem?

Would Tavish Scott have supported Robert Maclennan's position on the presence test?

Does the minister accept that, although the statute does not say that a  country must have universal jurisdiction, neither does it say that a country cannot have universal jurisdiction and that that is a matter for individual nations? Does he think that Canada has made a big mistake in accepting the presence test, for instance?

It is ironic that we are debating the bill against the background of the recent tragic events and also the death yesterday of Anton Gecas. That said, the bill does not deal with terrorism. Amendment 40 seeks to displace what I call the minimalism of the Scottish Executive test for jurisdiction in pursuing alleged war criminals. It will substitute what I refer to as absolute universal jurisdiction. Members will have to pin their ears back at this point, as there are two kinds of jurisdiction. I refer to the absolute kind, which, by means of amendment 40, I wish to incorporate in the bill. That contrasts with partial universal jurisdiction, which—to put it simply—is the presence test. If amendment 40 is agreed to, it will have the consequential effect of making section 6 redundant. As that is the subject of amendment 41, I will speak only to amendment 40. The bill is inadequate and dismally disappointing. A sullen adherence to the residence test is parochial when we have the opportunity to be truly international. Although amendment 40 is important, for many it is pretty esoteric stuff. As ministers and a few other souls in the chamber will recall, the  argument was aired at stage 2. Many members will not have read the Official Report of the stage 2 debate, nor will they have committed the proceedings to memory. I will refer liberally to the Official Report with reference to the residence test. There are obvious practical anomalies thrown up by the test. I will give an example. Mercenaries from many nations commit a heinous crime against humanity. It is committed against Red Cross volunteers who are engaged in humanitarian work. Two of the mercenaries are Scots; one is a German car trader who has just bought a flat in Glasgow, and another is an Italian who has commercial properties in Scotland and commutes here for business purposes. The latter two, when shopping in Princes Street, are recognised by one of their Red Cross victims. Are they resident in Scotland? Are they residents as defined under section 6 of the bill? I do not know and I suspect that neither do the ministers. During the stage 2 debate, Iain Gray, the Deputy Minister for Justice, said that a person's uncertainty about their residency would act as a deterrent. That argument was also used during a Westminster debate on the UK bill, to which I will refer later. The argument is that in the minds of the mercenaries there would always be an element of doubt whether the residence element of the legislation applied to them. They might think that they would be arrested and extradited to another country that has jurisdiction over them, or arrested and surrendered to the international criminal court in The Hague. That argument can be unpicked because uncertainty works both ways. If nations exercise universal jurisdiction, whether it is universal or partial, there is no hiding place. However, war criminals in Scotland might just have a long holiday, ensuring that residency—whatever that is—could never apply. Residency is a complex notion. As with immigration and whether a person is resident, there are many different tests: for tax, for matrimonial law and for education rights. If we have no jurisdiction, a criminal could flee while awaiting extradition procedures. With the right to arrest, as provided for by my amendment, or even on the presence test, there could be no flight, nor even a safe haven—no uncertainty there. The deterrence argument is a fig leaf for the flaw in the bill. The minister refuted the argument that criminals might visit Scotland with impunity by stating first that action is being taken to strengthen immigration rules. Does he really believe that a determined, guilty person could not work round those? Secondly, he contended that there might be insufficiency of evidence, even if we had universal jurisdiction. However, that would be determined by the Lord Advocate. If he were  unable to try the case for that reason, it could be remitted to the international criminal court—there are rules allowing that. Thirdly, the minister argued that we should move in step with the statute and the international community. Universal jurisdiction has been adopted by the following countries: Belgium, Canada, New Zealand, Switzerland, Germany, Argentina, Austria, Belize, Botswana, Dominica, Fiji, Finland, France, Ghana, Iceland, Italy, Lesotho, Luxembourg, Mali, Norway, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Spain, Tajikistan, Trinidad, Tobago, Venezuela. Residence has been adopted by San Marino, Gabon, the Marshall Islands, Senegal and, of course, the UK. I know which group I think is the international community.

It is nice to be called honourable.

That is irrelevant. As I move through my speech I will mention one country that has not signed up. Two men commit crimes against humanity. One is a Scot, the other is a Canadian. If they were both in Scotland—with the Canadian on holiday—we could prosecute only the Scot. If they were both in Canada—with the Scot on holiday—the Canadians, with partial universal jurisdiction or the presence test, could prosecute both. Under the terms of my amendment, if they were both on holiday in France, Scotland could prosecute them. In the first example, how could a prosecution properly proceed against only one of the accused, and not his co-accused? We might have two prospective war criminals: one in Scotland and one in Canada. The residence test means that if we had all the evidence that we required and wished to prosecute, we could not prosecute the two together. We must remember that the purpose of the bill is that the national court will be the first court to try the case. The ICC steps in only in other, special circumstances. That is poor law. Finally, I refer the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives to the House of Commons deliberations on these very issues earlier this year. There, the Conservative Crispin Blunt argued eloquently for absolute universal jurisdiction and pressed his argument to a vote, which he lost by five votes to 10. It was all aired far more thoroughly at Westminster than we have had the time and opportunity to do here.  Mr Blunt stated: "Under universal jurisdiction, we will be able to claim the right to protect ... citizens who are victims of such crimes, wherever they are in the world. We do not want to limit such jurisdiction to presence"— presence, not residence— "in the United Kingdom."— [ Official Report, House of Commons, Standing Committee D , 3 May 2001; c 306.]  He moved on to support the amendments of Robert Maclennan, Liberal Democrat, who was arguing for the presence test. Again, in an eloquent and well-argued position for partial jurisdiction, Mr Maclennan said: "The term 'residence' is complex."—[ Official Report, House of Commons, Standing Committee D , 3 May 2001; c 310.] He went on to define it in terms of English law, which varies slightly in some respects from Scots law.

On the matter of cross-border biosecurity, is the minister aware that, in England, no paperwork is required to show that animals being transported for slaughter are disease-free? Last week, that was dramatically illustrated when a cattle lorry broke down and caught fire at Carter Bar. The driver had no paperwork and no owner's documentation. Given that Scottish owners are required to have paperwork that shows that their animals are disease-free, will the minister take the first step to intervene and stop the movement of livestock from Northumberland into Scotland for slaughter? A failure to do that would prevent Scotland being granted disease-free status.

In today's budget statement, the Minister for Finance and Local Government announced an additional £28 million, on top of £100 million last year, to tackle drugs issues. That money is welcome. However, why is only £2.5 million over three years being directed at dealing with alcohol misuse, when alcohol abuse is a far greater problem than drugs misuse? The bill for drink-related crime is running at £50 million per annum and national health service costs for dealing with  alcohol-related illnesses stand at £180 million. Does the minister agree that that represents an enormous imbalance in resources? What is being done about that?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any concerns with regard to the provision of education in the Scottish Borders. (S1O-3650)

The minister is well aware of the £3.9 million hole in Scottish Borders Council's education budget, to which he did not refer. Is he aware of the consequences of that hole? Today, I received a letter from a teacher about the cancellation of national grid for learning computers. Her question, which I will adopt as my own, is: "How can we teach a modern course like Administration on 10 old Apple Macs for 20 pupils?" How can she do that? Will the minister put in place an independent inquiry into that growing crisis?

I sympathise with Mike Watson's experience of accountancy, because it was the only exam that I have ever failed and had to resit. However, the fact that we are able to scrutinise the budget each year is helping me to get better at it. That is also true for the committees. I would like to touch on the joint report of the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee, particularly as it relates to the prosecution service, prisons and—if I have time—legal aid. It was the first time that the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee had met jointly. That was only possible with the consent of the Parliamentary Bureau. If there continue to be two justice committees—which I do not want—they must scrutinise the budget together. Although this year we were able to provide better scrutiny of the budget, it was not good enough. We took evidence on only two occasions. I was frustrated by not being able to hear from enough outside witnesses, whose views on the budget we would have liked to put to the Executive. Tavish Scott mentioned the prosecution service. In evidence, it emerged that 60 per cent of the costs of the prosecution service are staffing costs. The Procurator Fiscals Society welcomed the fact that an additional 50 depute fiscals are ready to enter the service this year and another 10 next year, but it expressed concern that that will not help to deal with the current pressures on the service. That is because there is a time lag between new entrants starting work and their becoming fully effective. We all know about the high-profile cases, such as the Chhokar case. However, there are everyday fault lines in the prosecution service that the service's budget will not deal with. Those problems include trials being adjourned because reports are not ready on time, because witnesses are not present and  sometimes even because a sheriff is not available. That places additional costs on the justice system, while failing properly to deliver justice. The Scottish Prison Service is a topical issue. The first question that I want to ask concerns transparency. It took me and other members of the justice committees a year to draw out the difference between the cost per prisoner place and the actual cost per prisoner. After that difference was revealed to us by a representative of the Scottish Prison Officers Association, we were able to put it to the Executive. The cost per prisoner place is based on notional numbers, whereas the actual cost per prisoner is based on actual numbers. As we know, prisons such as Barlinnie sometimes work at double capacity. When one calculates the actual cost per prisoner, it is cheaper to keep a prisoner at Barlinnie than it is elsewhere. That is terribly important when one considers the impact of privatising prisons and the costs of prisons such as Kilmarnock. That is another mystery that we must still unravel. There was no transparency there. The SPS budget was predicated in part on a £5 million to £10 million saving, which in turn was predicated on a reduction of 250 in the number of prison staff. Staff numbers are already 100 below complement, so a cut of 350 is envisaged. That cut was predicated on the ending of slopping out. How can that work, when the Minister for Justice said recently that slopping out would not end by 2003, and that it might not end even in five years' time? If we consider the inhumanity of slopping out against the economics of the situation, we can see that the economics do not add up. If the current case leads to more successful cases going to the Court of Session, and to the Executive at least being ordered to accelerate the end of slopping out, I would like to know what provision has been made for costing such an exercise, what the costs will be and from which budget those costs will be met. That would allow people who failed accountancy but passed it on a resit to point with their little finger at where the money will be found to put an end to slopping out before 2006. I will conclude on that point, although I wanted to talk about the fact that the legal aid budget has been frozen for three years. Solicitors' fees—not a popular issue—will have been frozen for nine years. That impacts on the delivery of justice and it cannot be right that the profession has not had a raise for eight or nine years. Legal aid fees for solicitors are half what solicitors get from private clients and solicitors are not prepared to subsidise legal aid any longer.

Having been a practising lawyer in my previous life, I did not have to be persuaded that we needed such a bill. Anyone who has operated in family law knows the great difficulties that are faced and how one can feel unable to help clients, who—as I explained earlier—sometimes cannot understand those difficulties. I would have spoken more slowly if I had known that I would be summing up as well. I would have kept my second half for the second half. The Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Bill is a good stand-alone bill. I understand what Phil Gallie means by a plethora of legislation, but the bill is good because lawyers have to know where the law is. As Tavish Scott said, if important sections of the law are buried in a miscellaneous bill, which tampers with some primary legislation, some family law and so on—as has happened at Westminster—and one has to dig around in that bill, the process is made complicated. I know that we are professionals and we are supposed to know what we are doing, but there is no need for it to be like that. The clarity and simplicity of the bill are its great assets. The test is how the bill operates. We already have a system in place for powers of arrest attached to matrimonial interdicts. When one has an interlocutor with an interdict with the power of arrest, there is a requirement to notify the police constable in the area; I always made a practice of  notifying the local police station. In addition, I always gave a copy of that interlocutor with the power of arrest to the client and told him or her to keep it by the phone, so that everyone knew what the interdict said. In evidence to the committee, the police and others made it plain that the interlocutors had to be tightly drawn; people's liberties could be taken away if the interlocutors were fuzzy at the edges. In my experience, that did not happen, because sheriffs would challenge a solicitor who did not make it sufficiently clear what a person was being prevented from doing. If a certain street was involved, one had to make that clear, even down to the street numbers. Primary schools or places of work also had to be made clear. Interdicts—which take away people's liberty—are drawn very narrowly. They are specific and local; sheriffs do not prevent people from wandering the whole of Edinburgh. Notification is important. Something that is important and that may be of interest to members is the response time for police. I once had an interdict with a power of arrest attached to it for a lady who lived just outside Corstorphine. Corstorphine police were pretty handy, but—through no fault of their own—it sometimes took them six to 10 minutes to get to her door. In those six to 10 minutes, the woman's violent partner, who had a criminal record, could batter on her door and break windows; neighbours tended to back off. I found that, in practice, the lady would not use the power of arrest attached to her interdict. I would like the minister to consider the operational issue of whether, when violent people are involved, we can speed up police response times so that women—or men—have something in their hand that does not make things worse. In some circumstances, a power of arrest is attached and the violent person goes ballistic, to use the common expression; some partners see it as a challenge. Response times are terribly important. The person with the court order must feel that the interdict is a firewall. I hope that the committee gets credit for the bill and that somebody out there starts listening to the work that the committee is doing, which is at the core of the Parliament's progress.

It is a great pity that the Parliament has received such bad publicity, as it is ill deserved. People just see First Minister's questions, which tends to be a bit yah-boo. When we discuss a sensible and sensitive bill that has cross-party support and will impact on people's lives in an important manner, our discussion is not reported and is not considered spectacular. The minister outlined well the devastating effects of interdicts that lack a power of arrest for technical reasons. I hear what he says about finance and resources, but I hope that the bill becomes practical legislation as soon as possible. The SNP fully supports the bill and congratulates Maureen Macmillan and the rest of  the Justice 1 Committee—to which I am returning like a rubber ball, thankfully—which introduced the bill. I am mindful of Paul McCartney's "The Long and Winding Road" when I think of how the committee went up roads, down valleys and everywhere in trying to think of a way to attach a power of arrest to a common-law interdict. At first, we did not think of introducing a bill. We kept tinkering around with the Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981, which concerned occupancy of the matrimonial home and left huge gaps in the law. I am pleased that we will have a piece of stand-alone legislation that is easily accessible to practising lawyers, let alone anyone else. I will give two examples from my experience as a matrimonial lawyer of the great gaps that existed. I would often deal with a woman who was in a cohabiting relationship that had broken down and become somewhat violent at that stage or before. Such a woman would be under the misapprehension that she was in a common-law marriage and think that she somehow had the protection of the 1981 act—I realise that the issue is a slight diversion. I would have to explain to such a woman that to establish a common-law marriage, the elements of habit and repute must be present. The couple would have to hold themselves out as a married couple to the world and obtain a court decree to tell everyone that they were married. If people hold out to the world that they are living together, they are not married and will not incur the protection of the 1981 act. Many people had a shock when they approached a lawyer and said, "I can get a power of arrest attached to my interdict, can't I?" I would say, "I am afraid you cannot." Great gaps existed in the law when a decree for divorce was issued in the case of a particularly violent relationship. The interdict with the power of arrest would then fall because the two people were no longer married, despite the fact that great stresses might be placed on a couple at that stage, especially when access to and contact with children continued, which would leave an opportunity for violence to erupt or for someone to use children while being aggressive towards their former partner. Gaps existed for other people. I had a client who had a difficult neighbour—a lady who, at night, banged doors, ran water and poisoned my client's hedge, for example. After months of that, my client—a very nice woman—was in a terrible state. All that I could do was obtain a common-law interdict. I did not take decree on that interdict, because if I kept it as an interim order, I could keep returning to the court when the lady next door breached the interim order. However, I could not have a power of arrest attached and I could do nothing else. If I had taken a final decree on that  interdict and the lady next door had breached it, I would have had to raise a separate action for breach of interdict. That device was clumsy. I am pleased that, in such circumstances, it will be possible to attach a power of arrest, subject to important tests to protect the defender or the person who is accused of breaching an interdict. First, it must be necessary to attach a power of arrest—that places a high degree of evidential responsibility on the person who seeks a power of arrest to produce evidence to the court that they are entitled to take away those rights. Secondly, the interdict must be specific, so that everyone, including the police, knows exactly what the person is prevented from doing. I welcome the bill and look forward to its becoming law quickly.

The SNP welcomes these progressive proposals. We all hope that, once they are fleshed out, they will facilitate a balance between the release of those who have been convicted of serious violent and sexual offences—when they have served their time to a measure—and the absolute necessity of protecting the public within the framework of the requirements of the ECHR. I agree completely with Roseanna Cunningham that the test of whether something is ECHR-compliant comes when a case is raised, as it is case-based legislation. Article 5 of the ECHR, on the right to liberty and scrutiny, will undoubtedly be cited, as will article 11, on the freedom of assembly and association. Those are not absolute, but are designed to protect the public and their rights. In 2000, there were 6,963 convictions for serious assault and 1,822 convictions for sexual assault. It is interesting to note that 89 per cent of those who had an index conviction for violence in 1995 were male, and that 34 per cent of them had a previous conviction for violence. The more violent convictions they had had, the more violent they were likely to become. We are using the proposals not only as a monitoring measure but as a protective and preventive measure. There will be cost implications for the risk management authority, and it is made clear in recommendation 6 of the white paper that the risk management authority will have an operating budget. Gordon Jackson raised concerns about the pressures on the criminal justice budget due to existing issues, such as slopping out and the reduction in the number of women who are sent to prison. It is clear that there are competing priorities. Perhaps it is too early to know, but can the minister tell us what the resource implications might be for the operation of the risk management authority? Recommendation 21 states that a risk assessment order would authorise "the detention of the accused for up to 90 days, or up to 180 days on cause shown". That will have resource implications, as there are time limits. Perhaps, again, it is too early to know, but will those time limits be absolute and what will the resource implications be? Have they been costed? As many members, including Kay Ullrich and Donald Gorrie, have said, the test will be the quality of the risk assessment with regard to not only whether the scheme operates appropriately, but whether it secures public confidence. It would take only one case to go wrong for the system that  we all welcome to be challenged. Recommendation 13 states that the judge will set out "the circumstances of the offence as narrated in court, which report should be preserved with the case papers for later use if required." With regard to Kay Ullrich's point, it would be useful if the minister could clarify whether that is the kind of material that would be available to the social workers and those at a local level who prepare the risk assessment. Recommendation 23 involves the making of the order for lifelong restriction. The test is on the balance of probabilities. There could be difficulties with that in that it is a criminal provision that is being continued and the usual evidential test is that something should be beyond reasonable doubt. I would like the minister to address how safe the Executive feels that level of test to be. My party is interested in the detail of the proposal, which will be drawn out when the matter comes before a committee—and I hope that it comes before my committee. I am sure that there will be some interesting discussions that will help to make the proposal become effective and workable law, not just in the primary legislation but in the guidelines, which will be extremely important.

As the minister is aware, the Church of Scotland is a major provider of residential care, with 900 residents in 34 homes but with a running deficit of £1.5 million per annum. Has the minister been in contact with the church's board of social responsibility? If so, will the Church of Scotland's account be in the black next year, or will elderly people find themselves homeless?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of Scottish Enterprise Borders and what matters were discussed. (S1O-3598)

As the minister is aware, the Scottish Borders has a low-wage economy in which average earnings are some £50 a week less than the Scottish average. Does the minister agree that that depressed economic climate contributes to a lack of training opportunities and a skills shortage, particularly in the construction industry and related trades? From her discussions with SEB, is the minister satisfied that those skills shortages will be met, so that local businesses and not just large national companies will benefit from the contract opportunities that will come on-stream when the Borders railway build begins?

I want to make a rather personal contribution. My mother died relatively recently—when I saw the submission by the Carers National Association, I thought that it should have been entitled "You can take her home now". In November last year my mother underwent a serious operation. Six of the CNA's nine findings tallied with the experience of my father and my family. At the age of 79, my mother was discharged within five days of a major operation, to be cared for by my father, aged 86. He jokingly called himself the oldest carer in Scotland, but he probably was not. David Davidson spoke about support networks. In my mother's case, the family had to rally round, as there was no one else to help. A major cause of concern is patients being discharged too early. My mother certainly was, which led to her being readmitted to hospital within seven days with breathing difficulties. That also happened a second time. I am not saying that all her treatment was bad, but early discharge is a problem that the survey highlights. The survey also states: "40% per cent of carers said the person they cared for was not given enough support on returning home". My father had none. All he had was his family. Two of his children were in Edinburgh—my brother  and I—and the others were scattered throughout Scotland. Apart from the general practitioner, there was no one else to help. When the family asked whether my mother would be bathed by the district nurse, we were told that district nurses did not do that any more. My father and other members of the family ended up doing it. That is the sort of care that was provided. I merely provide an example of what is happening. In our family, this went on for only a short time, but for many people it is a long-term problem. At the age of 86, my father had to climb stairs to take meals to my mother, because there was no one else to do it until the family arrived. I want to highlight the situation of unpaid and elderly carers, such as my father, who are probably not included in the statistics and have realised that they are carers only since people started to carry out surveys into this question. They thought that they were just looking after people whom they loved. My colleague Margaret Ewing and other members have highlighted two of the policy recommendations that have been made. It is proposed that we monitor the implementation of the joint future group's recommendations on free short-term care and assess benefits to older people with carers. Many people provide free personal care at the point of delivery, just as my father did. We should make invalid care allowance a proper wage. I am not talking about my father's situation, but about that of long-term carers. They should be paid properly for the work that they do, which saves the state millions of pounds. My second point relates to respite care facilities. My father's respite was his family. However, when I asked the Executive in a written question about respite facilities for people caring for sufferers from conditions such as Alzheimer's, I was given the usual answer: that the relevant information is not held centrally. I do not blame the coalition Executive for that, but it is time that there was an audit so that we can find out what respite facilities are available. That would enable us to ensure that we develop and provide funding for them, in recognition of the work that carers do.

I congratulate Cathy Jamieson on securing this debate on her motion. I lodged a similar motion, although my motion was not for debate. My motion was prompted by attending the adult learners dinner and awards ceremony, at which the minister presented the awards. The diversity of the groups and individuals who won awards or who had been nominated for awards was an eye-opener. All had overcome enormous personal difficulties—physical, economic and so on—to make progress. Let me give members who were not there an idea about the ceremony. One of the award winners was a deaf and hard-of-hearing adult education group. I started off drinking with people in that group—that is not relevant to the debate. They are a jolly bunch, who did not tell me that they had been nominated. They participated in a learning programme about deaf literacy practices and now offer support and help to other deaf people. Their long-term aim is to campaign for equal rights for deaf people. A different example is that of a chap called Mark Fleming, to whom horrendous things had happened. He had been homeless and had had multiple health problems. He managed to get settled in a community care centre and then got on a computing course. From that, he moved on to develop editing skills in the production of videos and hopes to start a higher national certificate course. I do not suppose that any member has had to overcome anything like the difficulties that that young man had to overcome in order to make  progress. I may have found school and university hard, but I faced none of those difficulties. The third example is that of a group of Asian women who used their sewing skills to sew a banner. That banner became a bond, so to speak, which enabled them to express themselves when they educated people about the difficulties that they faced. That work built up their self-esteem and, as a by-product, members of the group have taken more independent actions, such as standing for election to a community committee, searching out information about education and job opportunities and improving their English. Building self-confidence and self-esteem is a large part of participating in the adult learner system. That ceremony led me to a meeting of ALFIE—the adult learners forum in Edinburgh. I was interested to learn that that forum has produced a bill of rights, which is called work in progress. However, while the document is a bit raw, it has an interesting aim. It states: "Authentic democracy is only made possible when citizens are engaged in a permanent search for knowledge about themselves and their society. This search for knowledge should be lifelong, lifewide and accessible to all, regardless of means or disposition. Essential for realising this commitment is the availability of a wide variety of adult education opportunities." The document goes on to list the articles of the bill of rights. I will list some of them in order to demonstrate that there are handicaps in the way of people who face the difficulties that I outlined. When I questioned members of ALFIE, they were clear that they wanted to be "involved in the formation of adult education policy at local, national and international levels." They wanted to be participants—they did not want to have adult education policy handed down to them. They knew what their problems were and believed that they should have an input into the system. Article 9 of the bill of rights says that they want "to be taught by qualified and competent tutors who have appropriate subject related knowledge as well as knowledge and understanding of adult learning needs". They told me that they often felt that they were being patronised or taught by people who did not know how to teach adults with the sort of difficulties that I mentioned. Article 10 speaks about "support for study at all levels, e.g. books, IT, tutorials and local study support centres to encourage all types of learning, including distance learning." Another handicap that forum members faced was that of travel to places of learning. Some of them lived in rural areas—one was from a constituency in the Borders. Forum members also  required "structures of social support, e.g. dependant care, childcare"— the forum involved single parents and all kinds of people who could not educate themselves and move forward because of practical difficulties— "travel costs and other financial assistance". This is a learning process for me. I was very impressed by the people at ALFIE, and I ask the minister to give their bill of rights serious consideration when it is complete and is no longer work in progress.

To ask the Scottish Executive what forms of compensation for losses arising as a  consequence of the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak will be made available to businesses in the Scottish Borders. (S1O-3564)

May I give the minister an example? McNab's, a saddlers with premises in Kelso and Selkirk, has produced figures showing a loss of £45,000 in turnover to the end of May, with projected turnover for the year halved from £250,000 to £125,000, which already has caused cuts in the work force. Will Mr McNab and others like him be entitled to direct compensation?

Will the minister give a definition of residence, as no one has given us one? A key problem, which was raised by Dr Scobbie, is the fact that there is no definition of residence in criminal law. Will the minister give us such a definition now?

I, too, echo comments that have been made about the time constraints that led to difficulties for the Justice 2 Committee. I want to underline that committees cannot continue to be put into that situation. We had only two evidence-taking sessions, held on 9 and 15 May, on what is a complex matter, one that was made more complex because of the interaction with UK legislation. In paragraph 9 of our report, we make a recommendation to the minister. We said: "The Committee also recommends as best practice that, where there is parallel UK and Scottish legislation as in this case, both sets of legislation should be considered simultaneously. This would ensure compatibility between them and allow the highest level of scrutiny, to the benefit of both pieces of legislation." I would like to hear whether the minister has considered that part of our report. Much has been said on the subject of universal jurisdiction. At this stage in the debate, I pity the speakers who are coming behind me, as I do not know what will be left in the pickings. Dr Scobbie, reader in international law at the University of Glasgow, gave us interesting evidence on the subject of universal jurisdiction. He said: "The trend is in favour of universal jurisdiction. The problems arise if we stay with the bill as drafted and go for a very vague notion of asserting jurisdiction on the basis of residence. What does residence mean? That is problematic. Residence means different things in different situations." Dr Scobbie also highlighted the fact that a bill that covers universal jurisdiction is going through the Norwegian Parliament. He said: "A coalition of non-governmental organisations put a strong argument to the Norwegian Parliament that Norway should adopt universal jurisdiction."—[ Official Report,   Justice 2 Committee, 9 May 2001; c 164.] I say to Pauline McNeill that we could have made a quick trip to Norway to take evidence. That would not have given us such a big bill as going to New Zealand.

No. I do not want a videoconference. I want a trip. So far, as a member of the Justice 2 Committee, I have visited only prisons—in a professional capacity I hasten to add. The problems of residence were put to us clearly in evidence. I quote from paragraph 17 of the report: "The Law Society of Scotland noted that the difficulty with residence was that it was not a common concept in criminal law ... Residence is interpreted differently in different legislation ... for the purposes of taxation law." I also refer to the quotation about universal jurisdiction that Lyndsay McIntosh included: "we should not be shy about embracing it if there is the political will."—[ Official Report , Justice 2 Committee, 15 May 2001; c 187.] We are stuck at that point. The International Criminal Court Act 2001 has not dealt with universal jurisdiction. We are not being given an honest chance to explore or consider universal jurisdiction. That is my view. The minister refers to paragraph 25 of the committee's report, which says: "We consider it preferable that there is internal consistency within domestic law, rather than trying to harmonise with the International Criminal Court in circumstances where that is not required." It is naughty of the minister to refer to that, because it is under the heading "Age of criminal responsibility". That was the area in which we were concerned about seepage. We were concerned about effecting such seepage, particularly in the current climate of opinion about the age of criminal responsibility. We were not referring to universal jurisdiction. We make the point clearly on universal jurisdiction that we did not have a proper opportunity to investigate it. I have no doubt that I and other SNP members will return to the matter at stage 2. I have one final point, which is very important. It was made to us in passing. I do not know whether I can find it—I have so many bits of paper. I would like the minister to comment on the point because we did not follow it up. It is about extradition. Asked about extradition and extradition warrants, Dr Scobbie said: "It depends on how a country's extradition system is set up. Currently, in the United Kingdom there is Executive discretion in deciding whether to extradite. I believe that the  extradition law will be changed to remove that discretion."—[ Official Report, Justice 2 Committee , 9 May 2001; c 165.] We did not follow that up because of the constraints of time. The minister might like to comment on those remarks.

With respect, the Scottish courts are not required to follow the decisions of the international criminal court. The evidence that we heard was that that court would be persuasive.

I am unclear as to whether Pauline McNeill is speaking as convener of the Justice 2 Committee. The last point that she made is not the view of the committee.

What evidence did the Minister for Justice  and his team take on universal jurisdiction prior to presenting the bill?

Perhaps I should clarify my point. Whose views did the minister seek in relation to universal jurisdiction and the Scottish legal system and practice before he made the decision not to incorporate it into the bill? In the evidence that the Justice 2 Committee took, only the ministerial team was opposed to universal jurisdiction—everyone else was fairly relaxed and some witnesses were quite positive about it.

Will the deputy minister consider additional funding for women's refuges in rural areas? For example, the only refuge in the Borders is in Jedburgh and to have several smaller units would undoubtedly be better. As funding is patchy and accessed from social work and housing budgets, will the minister consider conjoining the funding sources and ring-fencing those moneys?

To ask the Scottish Executive what proposals it has for the recycling of commercially discarded prawn shells. (S1O-3536)

As some of us are aware, crab shells are an essential ingredient in the production of bandaging that accelerates healing. Will the minister, or her colleague the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, consider an approach for funding from Heriot-Watt University at Galashiels for research into the feasibility of using discarded prawn shells from Eyemouth catches for that very purpose? Will the minister shell out and give that idea some muscle?

To ask the Scottish Executive, further to the answer by Ms Wendy Alexander to question S1O-3411 on 10 May 2001, how much of the £4 million of regional selective assistance offered to companies in the Scottish Borders has been disbursed. (S1O-3508)

I thank the minister for her answer. As the minister is aware, I raised the delayed payment of the first tranche of RSA to Signum Circuits at Selkirk exactly two weeks ago. Mr Guido Crollo, the owner of the company, told me that, following my intervention, he secured a meeting a week later with the minister's civil servants. The bottleneck has been cleared and I understand that the first payment should be made in the coming weeks. For that, I thank her. Will the minister now ensure that the second and final payment will be made before the end of this year so that a core manufacturing company that currently employs 270 Borderers survives and indeed thrives? After the disgrace of Viasystems, that is the least the Borders is due.

I feel like an intruder in a debate among members of the Health and Community Care Committee, but in speaking against amendment 34 I want to comment on some of the things that the minister has said. The minister spoke about equity and realism. How can there be equity when certain providers—those in the private sector—receive £50 less per  person per week from the local authority for providing the same service as homes in the public sector? The minister referred to meetings with COSLA. However, recently I heard a representative of COSLA say on the radio that the request for an additional £50 per person per week for private sector homes was unrealistic. The agenda already has its limitations. The minister said that not all contracts can come before him. Section 24A does not ask for that. It refers to providers who have "reasonable grounds for believing that the funding offered by the purchaser does not allow that provider to achieve or maintain the care standards required by the Commission". There is a reasonable grounds test that would sift out trivial applications. To John McAllion, I say that the commission's comments could be made public if a provider's application were upheld, which is very valuable. That test applies not just to private care providers, but to all providers. I did not understand the remarks that the minister made about the role of the commission. Section 1(1)(b) of the bill states that the commission will "have the general duty of furthering improvement in the quality of care services". The provisions of section 24A could be slotted into that. The duty for which section 24A provides is not an inappropriate role for the commission. The minister referred to quality, but he did not mention choice. The only residential home in Selkirk is in the private sector. Its budget is squeezed and it cannot meet its requirements. The local authority expects the home to ask the families of the residents to make up the difference, but the home will not do that. To John McAllion, I say that the home meets its requirements under the minimum income legislation, although it is struggling against the odds. If that residential home closes—as it might well do under the present circumstances and without the kind of protection that the bill might give it—the residents will be transported 20 or 30 miles away from their original residences and will lose contact with their community. For those reasons, and in the interests of openness, I cannot see the flaws in retaining section 24A. Therefore, I will not support amendment 34.

I am very pleased to hear that there has been a change and that there is to be an audit of swimming provision in schools. In that regard, will the minister consider the appointment of a water safety officer in Scotland, or even just investigate the costs of that? Will he consider such a measure together with a campaign on swimming combined with safety?

Swimming lessons were cut from Borders schools as a result of a spending review some years ago. I know that because a parent was in touch with me after her 12-year-old daughter drowned in the River Tweed last summer. The drowning was witnessed by her nine-year-old brother and three friends. The tragedy impacted  not only on the children who were there and their families, but on the entire community. I am not saying that swimming lessons are the entire answer—of course they are not—but learning to swim teaches children about the dangers, as well as the pleasures, of water. We all know perfectly well that, in the coming summer months, especially in rural areas, children will be drawn—as they have been since time immemorial—to rivers, burns, canals and reservoirs, which are perhaps the most dangerous of all. I lived in a house with two rivers at the bottom of the garden. When we bought the house, my husband and I thought, "Should we buy this house when we have a young family?" We decided that we would, but we decided that the children should learn to swim. The local school at Newton Stewart held swimming lessons for the classes. There was also swimming for toddlers and babies. I became my own water safety officer. I decided that the children would be attracted to the rivers, no matter what, so I took them to the river when it was in spate and they learned about all its temperaments and all its rages. I do not know whether that worked. I am sure that they took risks—children always will—but I did my best. As Kay Ullrich said, Scotland needs a water safety officer—that is part of the answer. ROSPA raised the issue with me. I had no idea what a water safety officer was, but there is one in England. The investment is quite cheap: it costs about £30,000 to employ a water safety officer. Part of that person's duty would be to educate people about the danger of water and water sports, including swimming. The issue has been before the Executive for a long time. I have a letter, dated 22 April 1998, in which a case is put for a water and leisure safety officer. The letter, which was sent to Sam Galbraith, lists reasons why a safety officer is required. Those include: "No requirements to carry an observer whilst towing water skiers ... No minimum age for being in charge of a boat, even high powered craft, jet skis, etc whilst on water." Some of that may have changed, but we still do not have a water safety officer. When I raised the issue with ROSPA, it sent me a letter, which is dated 6 October 2000, stating that Scotland does not have such an officer. ROSPA said: "such posts are grant-funded by government. While funding has been made available through the Scottish Executive to RoSPA's Home and Road Safety Departments, this is not so in the area of water safety." I humbly submit to Nicol Stephen that £30,000 would be a small investment for a water safety officer. If one child's life could be saved, the price  would be cheap. When I asked Mr Galbraith about a water safety officer last year, his answer was: "Scottish ministers regulate drinking water".— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 23 November 2000, Vol 9, p 106.]  The Executive had no idea who or what that person was. I hope that, after this speech, it will know.

I note what the minister said about the removal of disinfectant mats. Given that there have been two more confirmed cases in the Borders, with a suspected case in Jedburgh, none of which can be linked with previous instances, does the minister consider that the removal of disinfectant mats on main roads in the Borders two weeks ago was premature? Echoing Elaine Murray, I ask whether the minister will explain the seven to eight-week delay in giving payments to some farmers when they are some £200,000 out of pocket. Under the livestock welfare compensation scheme, there is a 21-day target. In response to a question that I asked, the minister said that payment would be made within 28 days. Is it possible to set a target for compensation payment under the usual compensation scheme that applies when sheep have been culled? Finally, I understand that a meeting is to be held on Tuesday about an economic recovery plan in the Borders. We know what is available to Dumfries and Galloway; can the minister give the chamber an idea of the capital available for the economic recovery of the Borders?

Does Pauline McNeill accept the evidence of the procurators fiscal that, while the appointment of those 30 new procurators fiscal is welcome, the problem is that they will be inexperienced? The great problem in the service is the inexperience of new staff. Fiscals who are not senior enough are dealing with cases.

Nora Radcliffe said that there are concerns about the criminal justice system—that is the first understatement that we have heard today. The SNP motion refers to "crisis" and "resourcing", which are both key to the debate. The Executive's response to a crisis is to ask, "Crisis? What crisis?" According to the Crown Office representatives who gave evidence to the joint meeting of the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee, there may be a wee problem out there, but nothing to frighten the horses and nothing to frighten the law-abiding public. In what one could call a very relaxed response to questions at the joint meeting of 16 May, the Solicitor General for Scotland said: "The other day, as I was considering various observations that have been made of the way in which prosecution is obtained in Scotland, it seemed to me that the notion that the system is cracking up has been advanced as an argument for the past 10 years at least. It is a perennial feature of the system that people make that complaint."—[ Official Report,  Justice 1 Committee and Justice 2 Committee (Joint Meeting) ,  16 May 2001; c 96.] There we have it—there is no problem out there, and the Solicitor General is quite happy. So, where is the evidence that the system is cracking up? I take members back to the evidence of some of the front-line people, such as Richard Stott, who is the president of the Procurators Fiscal Society, which represents 85 per cent of procurators fiscal. At the joint meeting of 8 May, Mr Stott was asked about discussions with the Crown Office on staffing. He replied: "Very little discussion about staffing levels took place between our society and the Crown Office. We expressed the general view that we are under-resourced and understaffed, but we were not asked to have specific input to the preparation of the bid for the budget." He went on to say: "The Crown Office management side was well aware of our views on under-resourcing. We know not what account was taken of those views."—[ Official Report , Justice 1 Committee and Justice 2 Committee (Joint Meeting) ,  8 May 2001; c 40.]

I suspected that that point might be raised. Those comments are on public record and it is appropriate to raise them today. The evidence that I quoted is not part of our inquiry—it was part of our joint consideration of the budget with the Justice 1 Committee. We have not yet started our inquiry into the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. As that evidence is a matter of public record, I am perfectly free—as are other members and the public—to read it and refer to it. On 16 May, we took evidence from the District Courts Association. Members may ask, "Who are these people?"—the witnesses from the District Courts Association included a lady who has spent 25 years in the district court service. She said: "The fiscals are not given sufficient time to train before they are put into court. I do not think that that is the situation only in the district courts. The fiscals are also being shoved into sheriff courts because of pressures of business there." She went on to speak of her concern that "The level of service that we receive from the procurator fiscal's office is declining."—[ Official Report,  Justice 1 Committee and Justice 2 Committee (Joint Meeting) ,  16 May 2001; c 67-68.] I want to listen to those witnesses and I think that the chamber should listen to them. It appears that there is a huge breakdown between the Crown Office and the Procurator Fiscal Service, which is not helped by the Solicitor General's remarks. At the joint meeting on 16 May, the Solicitor General referred to Richard Stott, who is a senior fiscal, saying: "He is negotiating for his society: a posture of happiness might not immediately fit in with his particular role."—[ Official Report,  Justice 1 Committee and Justice 2 Committee (Joint Meeting) ,  16 May 2001; c 87.] The members of the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee were not supposed to accept Richard Stott's evidence as bona fide—the Solicitor General put an angle on Mr Stott's evidence by suggesting that he was adopting a negotiating position. I am pleased to say that Gordon Jackson picked up that point and clarified it with the Solicitor General, although I thought that the Solicitor General's evidence was an outrageous way of dealing with a senior fiscal's evidence to the committee. Mr Stott's evidence did not come out of  the blue—what happens in the courts appears in the newspapers every day. To me, the situation looks like a crisis, sounds like a crisis, feels like a crisis and reads like a crisis, but it is not a crisis to members of the Executive parties, to the Executive's justice team or to the Crown Office. Apparently, the crisis is in our heads or has been sensationalised by the press. A smugness based on spin prevails. It is time for a reality check.

I am referring to a much wider point. The Chhokar and Collie cases failed, fines are time-barred and cases are set down and not followed through or are postponed. The system is clogging up—everyone in the chamber knows that. The system will continue to fail unless the Executive gives us what we need. The Executive is failing—not the Parliament—and must address the situation.

This debate is a bit like a coming-out; I also breastfed both my sons. Much of what Nora Radcliffe said was familiar to me. My sons are now 26 and 28 and are 6ft hulking lumps who will be really embarrassed that I have told the chamber that they were breastfed.  I am really sad that there has been a decline in breastfeeding. Like Nora Radcliffe, I experienced difficulties with the culture of the hospital where I had my first son. The only reason I persisted was that my mother breastfed all her children, except for me. I was just difficult—so nothing has changed. Having seen her breastfeed, I was able to see the advantages to the child and to my mother, who was able to rest a little and read the newspaper; indeed, she would breastfeed my sisters while she sat at the dinner table. When I had my second child, a nurse came and asked me, "Is your baby fed?" The child was sleeping. When I told the nurse "No," she was going to ping its feet to wake him up. I said, "Don't touch him; I want him to sleep. He will be fed when he wakes up." The hospital had a timetable for feeding. I trust that such a culture no longer exists. Mary Scanlon quite rightly pointed out that breastfed babies are not fat. When I sat in doctors' surgeries with my children, I would hear some women boasting about the weight of their children, who were in fact overweight. Breastfed babies were no bother; they drank until they needed no more and that was it. The early weeks of motherhood are tough. This is not to put people off; women should know this once they get into it: they will feel sore and believe that they are not up to breastfeeding, especially with a first baby, but they should let their babies do things themselves. They know what they are doing and will soon sort their mothers out. When a friend of mine was desperate to breastfeed and the staff at the hospital were not being helpful, I told her not to let them take the baby away in the night if it was crying and wanted to be fed but to pick it up and to take her time. I also told her not do it with people watching her. When I was there, people watched to see whether she was doing it properly, which was inhibiting. She succeeded because she relaxed and had faith in herself and the baby. We all know that once a baby attaches itself, it cannot be prised off with a wrench, so it is obvious when it is feeding. I am sad to learn that the situation in hospitals is no better 30 years on. I conclude with a word of warning for Karen Gillon. I stopped breastfeeding my first son at six months, because I thought that that was the right thing to do, but I decided to let Niall make up his own mind. It was only when he started to turn the pages of The Scotsman and take me with him that I decided that he and I should part company. I warn Karen Gillon that she may have decided to start weaning James, but he may have different ideas.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of Scottish Enterprise Borders. (S1O-3448)

When the minister discusses businesses in the Borders, will she intervene to accelerate payment of the first instalment of the £900,000 regional selective assistance awarded to Signum Circuits? It appears that only bureaucracy is impeding payment to the business, which urgently needs the assistance now.

First, I tender Alasdair Morgan's apologies. He is caught on business elsewhere. I may change the tone a little as I am that sad person who reads the Scottish Executive press releases on its website. I have some questions for the minister to which I genuinely do not know the answers. I do not expect to receive answers now, but I would like them some time in writing. An Executive press release on 28 March announced an additional £13.5 million Scottish emergency relief package for businesses because of the foot-and-mouth outbreak. The amount was split as follows: an initial £5 million for visitscotland; an "additional" £5 million that was made available to Scottish Enterprise; and £3.5 million of support to local authorities to provide rates relief. What are those amounts additional to? Are they from the agreed budgets? If not, from where is the money being diverted? An Executive press release on 10 May announced a payment to the local authority of "£2 million 'on account' to pay for costs in controlling the disease". Is that a loan? If not, from which budget will the money come? David Mundell asked about that amount at question time, but I am not sure whether he received an answer—if he did, I certainly did not catch it. The same press release refers to "Additional"— that word again— "funds of £5 million, out of Scottish Enterprise's existing budget". Is that amount the whole of the £5 million that was announced in the first press release? If so, does it mean that there is nothing within that resource for other local authorities? I am bewitched, bothered and bewildered by those figures, and I would like some answers. For example, how much funding is available to Scottish Enterprise Dumfries and Galloway and how much has been disbursed? How much  funding is available to Dumfries and Galloway tourist board, and how much, at the time of speaking, has been disbursed? I will move from the larger picture to the extremely important issues Elaine Murray and others referred to. I remind the minister of the petition—known as the people's petition—that was presented to the Parliament this week. The petition is fronted by a Stewartry businesswoman, Jane Sargeant, who headed the protest of more than 100 representatives from the region. The petition outlines the immediate and urgent difficulties facing small local businesses and seeks the establishment of a survival—an apt word—fund to alleviate the immediate cash flow problems that have been brought about by foot-and-mouth. That is what is really required on the ground. People who have lost grazing rentals, who are agricultural engineers or livestock hauliers or who run small independent tourism enterprises, need money now. Already, some rural businesses are being sequestrated or are in liquidation. Other members have referred to difficulties in relation to deferred payments. I have another set of questions for the minister, to which I would like answers at some point. How do small businesses access funding? I am not simply talking about rate support. How many in Dumfries and Galloway have done so? How much has been paid out, to whom and on what terms? For the time being, that is enough for the minister to be getting on with.

The minister has given a sympathetic response, but what about action? As the minister is aware, the provision of health care—if care is provided—from diagnosis to treatment and therapy for those who have ME is, to say the least, patchy in Scotland. Will the minister commit to undertake a national audit of provision for people in Scotland who have ME and to act on its findings?

I return to foot-and-mouth disease and refer the Deputy First Minister to the welfare slaughter scheme that is run by the Intervention Board. Will he confirm that additional helplines will be installed at the Intervention Board, as I understand from the National Farmers Union that farmers who are trying to get through to access the scheme cannot do so?

Rubbish.

I was talking about the reality.

Will the member give way?

Does George Lyon deny that the Scottish Borders has the lowest wages in Scotland, at £50 less than the Scottish average? Does he deny what I read in the Southern Reporter about the imminent redundancies, the downturn in farming and the general exodus of young people from the Scottish Borders? That is the reality test, which some Liberal Democrats  should take.

Of course   I will focus on the Scottish Borders. I never talk the area down but I am always straightforward and honest about it. The area has the lowest wages in Scotland—£50 a week less than the average—which is the legacy of 30 years of Liberal Democrat representation. No wonder Tavish Scott took a cheap and inaccurate verbal swipe at me. During his speech, I tried to ask him about the £6.5 million slice of the funding, and I say to the minister, who had better start paying attention, that I have before me two press  releases from the Scottish Executive that are relevant in this context. The second paragraph of the press release that is headlined "Minister announces measures to assist businesses affected by foot and mouth" refers to details of a £6.5 million European objective 2 support package for foot-and-mouth disease. But, lo and behold, in the press release that is headlined "Angus MacKay announces European structural funding for the south of Scotland" we once again read about the £6.5 million of EU money. That money has absolutely nothing to do with a rescue package for areas affected by foot-and-mouth disease but was structural funding that was going to the south of Scotland anyway. Confusing? Yes. Deliberately so? Yes. I look forward to clarification. The money that has been earmarked for the south of Scotland—£45.7 million, which, after match funding, goes up to £90 million—is peanuts when one considers that it would cost £200 million to reinstate the Borders railway line to Carlisle, which is not a big task and one that I have been known to talk about on occasion. It is certainly peanuts compared to the £1 billion that has been spent on the millennium dome. Furthermore, one of the conditions that attaches to structural funding that previously did not—that it cannot be used for main capital funding projects—will limit the impact that it will have on the rural economies that are under stress. The Borders has lost 1,000 textile jobs, and foot-and-mouth disease has put farming into suspended animation—that was an unfortunate slip of the tongue; I meant into suspension—at a time when the market was already economically depressed and tourism has stopped. Even the hope and glory that is the electronics industry is in trouble. The Southern Reporter today tells us that the sector is suffering a malaise throughout Scotland. Signum Circuits, a major employer in Selkirk and Galashiels, will put its 300-strong work-force on short time at the end of the week. Ernie Jamieson, the company's managing director, said that "the situation is so fluid that no guarantees can be given on the ability of the firm to survive a sharp downturn". Elsewhere on the front page, we read that at Sykes Europe, another electronics firm in Galashiels, 70 to 80 of the 240 workers may be made redundant this week.

I accept that there are problems to do with the electronics industry throughout Scotland, but the problems in the Borders compound the problems that are faced by an economy that has always been vulnerable. To regenerate an economy, certain structures need to be put in place. Suitable roads are needed, as are rail connections and telecommunications. I wanted to ask Tavish Scott about ADSL provision, as I understand that capital funding cannot be used to set that up and there is none in the Borders, which means that telecommunications in that part of Scotland is only slightly removed from tin cans with a bit of string. As for roads, the A68, the major artery to the centre of the Borders, has only two crawler lanes and was impassable for four days this winter because of the weather. How can such a road be said to connect the Borders to anything?

Ian Jenkins should watch what he says. After 30 years of Liberal Democrat representation, the Borders has no railway, no proper roads and a failing economy that is not being invested in. I have never heard any member of his party campaigning on those points in all the years that I have been campaigning in the area. I am not talking down the Borders; I am telling the truth. It is time somebody did. Those are the problems that the area faces. I certainly intend to raise the temperature of this debate as I am fed up talking mince in this chamber.

I am not giving way. I am nearly at the end of my time.

Tarmac, trains and telecommunications. That is what the Scottish Borders needs and the small amount of structural funding that is being given will not deliver anything in the area.

I am delighted to take Tavish Scott out of the pain of his confusion. An independent Scotland would be prosperous, but under the union we are diminishing. The two MSPs who are sitting behind Tavish Scott—Ian Jenkins and Euan Robson—represent, as constituency MSPs, the Scottish Borders, which is the poorest region in Scotland.

The minister referred to only £6.5 million.

Will the member give way?

The Executive has announced an objective 2 support package of £6.5 million for the south of Scotland—I take it that that is what the minister has just announced and led on. Is that money a slice of the total European funding of £45 million for the south of Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive what medium-term investment is being considered to assist farming communities in view of current difficulties. (S1O-3185)

I think that the minister would agree that the spread of foot and mouth has been compounded by the convoluted journeys of livestock to centralised abattoirs, which are a direct consequence of meeting rightly stringent European Community hygiene regulations. Will the minister consider making representations to appropriate authorities so that the costs of complying with those regulations are met by central Government, as they are elsewhere in Europe, and not by the producers, as in Scotland? That would allow more localised abattoirs to flourish.

At the risk of repeating everything that has been said, I will say that I remember Gordon Jackson's immortal words in the stage 1 debate that none of us would know a leasehold casualty if it fell in our soup. Now I would know one if it landed in my soup, but unfortunately it is being abolished just when I have learned to recognise it—one cannot have everything in life. I congratulate Adam Ingram on his persistence and shrewdness in picking up this legislation, which is essential to ordinary people whose lives are being made a misery. In an atmosphere of  consensus, I congratulate Iain Gray and the legal team on giving the bill a very fair wind. This is one of those moments when, in putting legislation on the statute book, the Scottish Parliament is not just a talking shop but a doing place. The interesting thing about the bill is that in four weeks' time or so, after it has received royal assent, it will be in force and will apply retrospectively to the day on which Adam Ingram introduced the bill. I do not want to sour things, but the same cannot be said for the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000, which many people think is in force, but is not. We will have several years of possible injustices. Perhaps the minister will take the opportunity of saying how the enforcement of that legislation is being accelerated, given that the title conditions bill has been deferred until the end of the year for early consultation. There is a huge scrap between the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee about the delights of land reform and the title conditions bill. I think that Pauline McNeill would say that we in the Justice 2 Committee are winning the debate to get land reform instead of the title conditions bill. I add my voice to the congratulations to Adam Ingram. Most of all, I congratulate the Parliament on passing much-needed legislation.

To ask the Scottish Executive, further to the answer to question S1W-13333 by Malcolm Chisholm on 27 February 2001, whether it intends to commission further research into the costs of free personal care for younger disabled people. (S1O-3050)

I am pleased to hear that. As the minister will be aware, the Sutherland report defines younger people as those who are between 18 and 64. Some of us here will be grateful for that definition. As the minister has agreed that further research is required into the costs of funding the care for that group, will he indicate if and when he intends to instruct that  research? Will he also consider as his starting point stopping personal care charges for those who access the independent living fund?

May I recommend in the nicest possible way a ministerial trip to Siberia? Even with temperatures of minus 57 deg Celsius and the worst winter in living memory, only 6,000 Siberians were disconnected for a short time, whereas in the Scottish Borders 40,000 people were disconnected, around 5,000 of them for as long as seven days.

Let me make it plain that I was not looking for long strings of abattoirs all over the place. Rather, my point was that where there is a serious area of production, such as in the Scottish Borders, we should have an abattoir that is up to European Union standards. I do not see why our abattoir in the Scottish Borders is at only 15 per cent capacity or why the animals are not slaughtered there instead of being shipped long distances.

As a member of the Royal Zoological  Society of Scotland, I thank Lord James Douglas-Hamilton for publicising my motion. I hope that his backing shifts me up the queue and allows me to secure a members' business debate on the subject. It is unfortunate that no other whips are present. Yesterday, I heard that an area south of Peebles, which includes some of the Ettrick and Yarrow valley, is part of an official exclusion zone because of a confirmed case of foot-and-mouth disease at a farm in Beattock. That has personalised the crisis for me because the despair and anxiety that foot-and-mouth disease brings in its foul-smelling wake has affected people I know personally. Deep in the Ettrick valley, I know a hill-farming couple for whom this disease must be the final test. That farmer told me that he had been in Longtown just before the outbreak was announced. The couple are locked in for at least 21 days with 60 lambs that should have gone to market weeks ago and with new lambs being born and requiring shelter. They have two cottages—which they rebuilt and refurbished with bank loans—that are capable of producing £250 a week through rentals to hill walkers and bird watchers but which cannot be used. All those elements count as losses that do not trigger compensation. Even before the present crisis, it was difficult to keep the farm going. The farm accounts showed me that without the farmer's wife's income from part-time teaching, subsidies and the income from the tourists, the farm could not survive and generations of work by the family would end. The farmer is without income and has liabilities to his stock and to his bank. As that farmer is only one among many in such a situation, I ask the minister to consider extending the compensation to the concomitant damage done by the loss of tourist income that supports the farm. I know that the minister has mentioned welfare relief measures that would allow farmers to move stock under licence, but that would not help the farmer about whom I am talking as he cannot move his animals anywhere. I should also mention to the minister that information about such initiatives is required now, because the National Farmers Union has told me that it is finding it hard to get to farmers in exclusion zones and those outside them. Many farmers would not know what was going on or what to do were it not for the NFU. In the longer term, we must police imports. Although, as John Home Robertson said, we should not jump to conclusions, we should remember that we have been free of foot-and-mouth disease for 40 years. It is therefore highly likely that the disease came here from outside—it  did not occur of its own accord. We need to pressure the EU to ensure that products are labelled with their country of origin, not the country in which they were processed. At the moment, Asian chickens can be labelled "Product of Europe" simply because they were processed here. We must review the location of abattoirs. I am engaged in a wee dispute with John Scott about this issue, but there is an abattoir in Galashiels that meets EU standards. Why are we not slaughtering our animals where they are produced?

The abattoir is slaughtering at only 15 per cent of capacity. It should be in full commercial production at 100 per cent. We should process meat in the areas in which it is produced to ensure that we do not transport animals hundreds of miles, thereby increasing the likelihood of transmitting disease and distressing the animals. What is driving all the problems is the culture of cheap food in the supermarket. The cost of that cheap food has been the destruction of Scottish farms. We must consider that seriously.

To ask the Scottish Executive what specific initiatives it has introduced or will be introducing to assist and develop tourism. (S1O-3023)

Does the minister agree that a report into the economic potential of tourism if the Borders railway were to be reinstated should consider the reinstatement of the whole line, from Edinburgh to Carlisle? Can the minister explain why the tourism report lodged as evidence in the feasibility study considered a railway only to Galashiels? On the subject of initiative, will the minister now show some and instruct a proper report?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Once the crisis is over—I trust that that will happen shortly—and in the medium to longer term, will the First Minister and the Cabinet consider locating abattoirs closer to the points of livestock production, given the spider's web of movement of animals, some of which travel 700 miles?

I thank Trish Godman for raising a point of order about the heating. My woolly scarf is not a fashion accessory; it is all that is standing between me and a great chill factor. At this rate, I may need primary care. I will focus on democracy and the balance of power in the various organs that deliver and administer primary care. Haylodge hospital, a successful hospital in Peebles in my constituency, is served by six GPs. It also houses the community centre. There are 50 beds—34 that are notionally for the elderly frail, although they are no longer used for that purpose. Unfortunately, a breach has developed between the Borders Health Board on one side and the GPs and the community on the other about the health board's plans for the hospital. At a recent meeting, 200 people turned up to oppose the plans. The health board wants to provide secluded long-term stay beds. As I understand it, that would involve the closure of the community hospital for some eight months at a cost of £1 million and with the loss of 14 beds. However, that is based on a three-year-old plan that criticised the long-term stay conditions at the hospital at the time. There was no consultation with GPs at that time and things have moved on. Bed use has changed; at the time of my recent visit, only three of the long-term stay beds were in use. All the other beds were being used for intermediate treatment and for convalescents from the Borders general hospital—they were being used as GP beds. Indeed, they were all full and there was no room for anyone else to be admitted. That reflects the national  trend in the treatment of the elderly, which rightly endeavours to maintain the older person in their home for as long as possible, rather than consigning them to a hospital bed unnecessarily. Nowadays, older people are more likely, if it is appropriate, to be moved to a nursing home. I will come to problems with that in a moment. The health board refuses to give ground and, when it does concede a little, it does so with bad grace. I wrote to the chief executive supporting the GPs' call for a moratorium. I mentioned updating the local care provision—remember that the report was three years old—bed use and what was required locally, given the democratic changes in Peebles. Behind the polite façade of the chief executive's reply, I detected a resistance to listening to local voices—she has rejected a moratorium out of hand. That shows little sign of the empowerment of professionals or partnership working to which the minister referred. I am concerned that the chief executive of the Borders Primary Care NHS Trust appears to have no profile in those decisions. The policy is driven by the health board rather than by primary care management or, better still, by locally informed requirements. I would like the minister to address the question that I have illustrated with the problems at Haylodge. Why should unelected administrators do something other than administer? Why are they interfering in policy matters? The minister and I have to listen to the general public, because our jobs depend on it. However, the jobs of the people at the Borders Health Board do not. Those people could drive through unwanted reforms. In my view and in the unanimous view of local GPs, the board's plans are out of date and out of touch. There is a huge fault line in the structure of health care at a local level when policy is driven by the board and the primary care trust is left with the role of delivery. The minister referred to cultural changes in the system. We have heard much today about the proposed changes to the administrative structure of health provision at a local level—the merging of boards and trusts. There have also been many references to LHCCs. However, as my colleagues have said, provision is patchy. The changes must be radical enough to meet the needs and aspirations of the local professionals and users, rather than simply demand compliance with some one-size-fits-all template. We must strengthen democracy and accountability in primary care services. The other issue that I want to raise is what happens when a patient is transferred from hospital to a nursing home because it is not suitable for them to return home. The Borders Health Board will not pay for an additional GP to  visit the people who have been transferred to a nursing home. That is not necessarily what happens elsewhere in Scotland. In the Lothians and in Grampian, services continue, whereas in the Borders only crisis treatment is provided—there is no physical therapy or occupational therapy. One day patients receive such treatment and the next day they do not, simply because they are in a different venue. We are back to postcode care, which is unacceptable. Does the minister intend to do anything about that problem? She has talked about additional GP funding. Will she iron out the unfairness in the delivery of GP services to elderly people who have been transferred from a community hospital to a nursing home?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it is taking to encourage social inclusion in rural communities. (S1O-2994)

Does the minister intend to act upon recommendations 17, 18 and 19 of the Rural Development Committee's first report, on the rural economy, which underlines the requirement for more investment in rural infrastructure, such as railways? If so, will he say when he hopes to buy a ticket for the Borders railway line?

In a former, former life I was a secondary school teacher, and I remember the halcyon, pre-comprehensive days. I was opposed to comprehensive education when it was introduced, but I soon converted and saw its huge advantages—in justice for children in the education system, who were able to move freely as their talents developed, either up or down, and also in social justice. I will not say more about that now, because the Conservatives will never be in power, so we will never have to deal with what their amendment says. The SNP welcomes the McCrone report. However, we must look forward to a period of stability in Scotland's classrooms. Teaching was a hard enough job when I did it and I know that it has become a darn sight harder with the blizzard of paperwork that teachers have to do and the huge assessment input that they have had to submit to the Scottish Qualifications Authority. There should be a period of quiet and consolidation now, and I congratulate Jack McConnell, whose old teacher genes are coming through, thank goodness, on agreeing a reasonable pay award that recognises the professionalism and skills of the class teacher. Good teaching is at the heart of developing an educated and, perhaps more important, compassionate society. I want to say something about assessments. I have received correspondence from headmasters  in the Scottish Borders. They say that one set of data on the assessment and attainments of candidates would be sufficient. I know that the Executive is looking into submissions of data. Those headmasters want submissions of data to be earlier. I understand that information was requested during the summer holidays, when key personnel were not available, and the headmasters hope that that will not recur. I wrote to the Executive on that matter. The reply, dated 28 December 2000, indicated that the SQA is conducting a feasibility study with regard to implementing a simpler system of assessment. Will that feasibility study include consultation with head teachers associations and representatives of the profession? As they are being asked to deliver, it would be suitable if they were part of that feasibility study. I am pleased that there will be financial recognition of the role of markers, although we know that many teachers have said that they undertake marking as a form of professional training for themselves. I am sure that the minister will confirm that inexperienced teachers will never again be appointed to mark papers. The discovery from a series of questions to the minister that that had been the case was astonishing. We must return to the previous status quo, which was one of security in our exam system and its results. I want to move quickly to league tables or, as Mr McConnell would call them, publications of statistics. In my view, they are an anathema to a healthy education system because, as Mr Jenkins said, they falsely drive the teaching agenda. They make us start teaching to the test and return to the horrible days when—believe it or not—I was young and we taught to the old qually. Children spent term after term working on old papers to try to push up their marks. That is not education. Of course, schools must maintain standards. We have Her Majesty's inspectors of schools. I am pleased to hear that the minister is separating the role of inspection from the role of policy. HMI drove the higher still programme, which was a real conflict of interest. There are school reports and school handbooks, but best of all, there is the word on the street—parental word of mouth—about a school's real value. Finally, my colleague Mr Russell referred to the spectre of privatisation the Blair way: pitching school against school and breaking the homogeny of our school system and the curriculum within it, which—this is not a contradiction—allows schools to develop their own educational personalities and specialisms. As far as I am concerned, we cannot build a high enough Hadrian's wall between the English education system—I say that, and my mother is  English—and the democracy of the Scottish system. I support the motion.

rose—

I am intrigued by the democratic line that Brian Monteith is taking. Can he tell me how the child of somebody who is living on benefits on a more impoverished estate in Edinburgh and who chooses a school on the west side, for example in Barnton, will get there? They do not have money for transport. He is proposing a divisive system.

I thank Rhoda Grant. I want to focus on the urgency with which the minister should act on this quality report. He should not proceed with his amendment. Everyone would endorse the right of every older person to remain in his or her own home in the community for as long as is practicable and for as long as he or she so chooses. There is, however, a difficulty in the circumstances that prevail in the real world. Incontrovertible evidence of that lies in the simple example of home helps. The number of home helps in the Borders alone dropped by 260 between 1997 and 1999. In Scotland as a whole,  the fall was some 9,000 during that period. Who on earth is looking after older people in their homes? Who gets their messages and cleans for them? All that is part of preventive care. In Scotland as a whole, there are some extra health visitors, but not many—and because they are tending to more clients, they are seeing each client less often than before. There were fewer than 300 additional district nurses for Scotland in 1997 to 1999. They, too, have more clients and less time. I could not contribute to this debate without mentioning day care centres, which are crucial to maintaining people in the community. They offer preventive care. They allow people respite while a partner with, for example, dementia is taken into the day care centre two or three days a week. Most of those centres are run on a voluntary basis and have to scramble around for funding. There are 585 of them in Scotland, providing nearly 19,000 places. I know that, in 2002, the Scottish commission for the regulation of care will assume responsibility for regulation and inspection of the centres, but will the Executive provide funding to accompany that regulation? In a debate in this chamber in November last year, Mary Scanlon made the point—with which I agree—that 10,000 elderly people had been assessed for aid and adaptations and 10,000 were awaiting assessment. No finance was available. A total of £5 million of expenditure has been announced, but what kind of dent has that money made in those figures? Those figures represent real people. We want to keep them in the community, but we do not have the services they need. If we add to all that the removal of lighting services, tucking in and sleepover cover, we get a pretty grim world in which to be elderly and frail. Around 3,000 Scots die each year from cold-related illnesses—a figure that compares very badly with our Nordic neighbours—and a total of 70,000 live in severe poverty. We now have a report, resulting from the national nutritional audit, that tells us that 29 per cent of people in long-term care are undernourished. That is proof, if proof were needed, that there is no place like home. However, that home requires real support and funding. The report clearly underlines that. A rich nation such as Scotland should be ashamed of those statistics. Stamped all over the committee's report—and the national nutritional audit report—are three words: "For urgent attention". That is why the Executive should act on the committee's report, and not simply take note.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether elderly people are safe from abuse in institutions. (S1O-2924)

Is the minister aware that the action on elder abuse helpline, which has revealed that 26 per cent of perpetrators are paid  workers, is underused in Scotland and requires additional funding to publicise its service? Will he give the chamber and elderly people his assurance that he will use his best endeavours to secure that funding, so that the elderly, frail and frightened will know that they have somewhere and someone to turn to?

To ask the First Minister whether the recently announced increases in water and sewerage charges will be affordable for those on council tax benefits. (S1F-841)

Is the First Minister aware  that all 30,000 band A and band B houses in the Scottish Borders—the households with the lowest incomes—will benefit not one penny from the proposed water and sewerage relief scheme? Is he also aware that the money raised from those households alone will benefit East of Scotland Water by £3 million? Does he therefore agree with his Westminster colleague, Brian Wilson, who said that an increase in water charges is an "assault on the poor"?

Volunteering makes one feel better and is good for the people who are on the receiving end of it—unless it is a boy scout taking somebody across the road who does not want to cross. In my experience, it is mainly older people who volunteer. During volunteering week, I went out with the Peebles WRVS—whom I accidentally called the WRI, for which I was nearly shot—who  are mostly older ladies. They are essential to maintaining deliveries of food to some people in the Peebles area. In one instance, we went into a house and the elderly lady was still in her nightwear. The lady whom I was with was concerned that something had happened. She checked to see whether the elderly lady had called the doctor and had taken her medication. That was done discreetly, as an ancillary to the meals-on-wheels service. I applaud the older people taking part in that. More recently, my mother was taken to the oncology unit at the Western general hospital. The WRVS volunteers run the tea and coffee service and water the plants. They make sure that the place is not grim, but homely and cheerful. Their manner and chat is an important part of dealing with people. As Fiona Hyslop said, it is often the case that septuagenarians are helping nonagenarians. I am not referring to the WRVS at Peebles—I have to say that or they will be on to me for calling them septuagenarians. However, we should not exploit these people. Members' mailbags are full of correspondence about voluntary organisations that are under pressure for funding. I am thinking of day care centres, in particular, which have become much more professional over the years. Such centres must find finances from many different sources and are being squeezed by social work budgets. We all know that; it is not a party political issue. As Fiona Hyslop suggested, the decisions that the Scottish Parliament makes will impact on the voluntary service. I want to emphasise that older people, who are often seen as a liability—how will we pay their pensions and what will we do with them?—are a huge asset to society, whether they are volunteering as granny and granddad as part of the domestic routine or in a crisis, or are working more formally for the WRVS or other voluntary organisations. We underestimate the value to society that our older people bring.

That is not an appropriate remark, given that I did look at the substance. I went through the clauses where I had concerns as quickly as I could. As I said, if either of the justice committees had had an hour, we could have looked at those areas of concern. Perhaps then we would have agreed that everything was fine, but we have not had the chance to consider it.

The point that Michael Matheson made is that we have not had enough time for scrutiny. We are having only a half-hour debate. Everything that the Executive says may be correct, but we do not have time to consider it. Neither the Justice 1 Committee nor the Justice 2 Committee has considered the relevant clauses. I do not know whether they have been sent to the usual suspects—if I may call them that—such as the Law Society of Scotland and the criminal defence fraternity; it would be useful to hear from them. Everything may be hunky-dory, but we have not had the opportunity to find out. That is the issue.

I thought that the Conservatives had come round to accepting devolution. The bill deals with devolved issues that involve the Scottish criminal justice system. Generally, we risk allowing some legislation through on the nod. That may not include the bill in the motion that we are debating, but we have not had the opportunity to scrutinise it adequately. I will raise some questions that the bill brought to mind and to which I do not know the answers. Clause 45 relates to disclosure of information from one public body to another. How will that be regulated? Will that be done by warrant? I do not know. I cannot find anything about that in the bill or in its explanatory notes, which have been made available by the House of Commons. How does the measure connect with the huge list of affected statutes in schedule 1? I do not know.  Were I to be the subject of a criminal investigation—who knows?—could my building society be required to disclose the balance in my account? I do not know. Could the Inland Revenue declare the state of my assets? I do not know. I would like to know the answers to those questions before agreeing to the motion. What if items and assets were disclosed wrongly or I was wrongly suspected of criminal activity? Would I ever be told about the disclosure? I cannot answer that question. I appreciate the need to be rigorous in pursuing crime and its proceeds, but what about the honest citizen? Part III of the bill concerns powers of seizure. I will quote from the Financial Times.

I am being quick—I have three minutes. The Financial Times said that the Law Society in England "was 'very concerned' about the increased power the bill would give police to seize material" and considered that "there were no safeguards to prevent confidential or third party information being taken." Clause 53 refers to items that are "subject to legal privilege". Will authorities have to read such items to decide whether they are subject to legal privilege and no longer deserve that security? I do not know. I would like to make another point about clause 53, but I must move on swiftly. Clause 58 is meant to provide a right of appeal, but instead provides a right of return. If someone's assets are wrongly seized, they can get them back, but they will have no remedy against the state. If such a remedy were available, I would like to know what it is. If the Justice 1 Committee or the Justice 2 Committee had conducted a short one-hour investigation, all those questions would have been discussed.

On spending commitments, as the First Minister will be aware, I have been pursuing the issue of the allocation of the £10 million UK-wide textile rescue package. In yesterday's debate on textiles, I asked the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning: "To clarify, will the minister tell me—in one word,  please—the exact figure for the amount of that £10 million UK rescue package that has come to Scotland?" The minister replied: "The answer is £1.2 million."—[ Official Report , 31 January 2001; Vol 10, c 798.] First Minister, I have confirmed with the Department of Trade and Industry that the £1.2 million is being allocated over three years at £400,000 on a UK basis. The allocation will not be determinable until the three years are up. I believe that—

I believe that the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning misled the chamber yesterday, albeit unintentionally. Will the First Minister take this opportunity to put on record the correct position? That is my question.

That is not the same as allocating £1.2 million.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

It is. I gave the First Minister the opportunity to correct something that was on record in the Parliament, but he refused. I seek your guidance on how I should proceed to have that corrected.

Will the minister take an intervention on another point?

rose—

rose—

Will the member give way?

As is the custom, I congratulate Ian Jenkins on securing this debate—and so soon after Euan Robson's debate on the Scottish Borders labour force. It truly pays to be a Liberal Democrat here at times. I have had only one members' business debate, and that was almost a year ago. Ian knows that I lodged an earlier motion on this topic, but I have to say that, true to form, it was couched in less comfortable terms with regard to Scottish Enterprise and the coalition. But then that is what the Opposition is for: to expose the spin and the shine and reveal what is often the very unshiny truth. I endorse everything that Ian Jenkins said about the workers, whom I also met. It is very hard meeting people who find their lives upside down and in turmoil. They were dismayed and hurt, but they were also disgusted. Five months previously, they had applauded Columba Reid of Clan Douglas Ltd when he told them how wonderful they were. He knew even then that he would be making some of them redundant. At First Minister's question time on 18 January,  Ian Jenkins got this response from the First Minister regarding the 40-plus Murray Allan redundancies: "The Executive has made a commitment to use the new facilities that are available through PACE, the partnership action for continuing employment, to ensure that the skills training, specific counselling and every assistance that may be required are given."—[ Official Report , 18 January 2001; Vol 10, c 429]. He did not use that awkward four-letter word: jobs. Counselling and retraining are not good enough. In Euan Robson's members' business debate, he quoted the new ways strategy as follows: "Future success depends upon the willingness and ability of people in the Scottish Borders to compete. Skills, know-how and creativity will help promote individual and business success."—[ Official Report , 10 January 2001; Vol 10, c 53]. No doubt they will, but what about jobs rather than fine words? Let us be clear about the prospects for the textile industry in the Borders and elsewhere. The prospect for that industry is not, as Tony Taylor of Scottish Enterprise Borders said it was on 10 January 2001, that: "the textile industry in Scotland is in better shape than it has been for a long time". Within days, those Innerleithen redundancies that he must have known were in the pipeline were announced. When Clan Douglas announced just two years before that it had bought Mansfield Mills to expand, that was heralded as a job expansion and good news for the Borders economy. In reality, it was the start of redundancy notices for 40 or more Innerleithen workers. Since new Labour came to power in Scotland, 5,000 textile jobs have gone. According to the Executive's figures, between 8,000 and 9,000 are predicted to go this decade. Yet, of the £10 million UK rescue package announced in June 2000—I am glad that Wendy Alexander is here because I have not had an answer to my question about this—I understand that not a penny has been spent. I will give way to the minister if she can give me an answer.

To clarify, will the minister tell me—in one word, please—the exact figure for the amount of that £10 million UK rescue package that has come to Scotland?

At last I have an answer. I was expecting one, because I knew—

I have been told about the £1.2 million only now. I could not withdraw the question until I had an answer. Now that I have been told, I have an answer. I lodged that question several times. The most recent answer I got was this week, when the minister's response was "I will reply to the member as soon as possible." I am not surprised that this debate has been chosen as the moment for me at last to get the answer. Since I lodged my question, the Scottish textile forum has met three times. I knew that it was meeting today; I expected that. The minutes of the forum include a very important point, to which the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning will perhaps be able to respond. It is still not known whether the bond scheme, which was introduced last year, could be reintroduced in the event of a cashmere crisis—a banana war, to use shorthand. I took that from the forum's minutes. I appreciate that they are truncated, but the most recent information that I have from the most recent minutes from September is that people do not know the answer.

The minister's answer to my first question was satisfactory, but that one is not. It is three months since the textile forum raised the issue and people still do not know whether the bond scheme can be operated. Finally, I come to Helen Liddell, who made a most interesting comment in her new role as Secretary of State for Scotland. She listed, among the industries of yesteryear, the coal industry, engineering and textiles. Having placed those industries on the back burner, she trumpeted the knowledge economy as the future economy. I have knowledge, but it is of gesture politics, of which we have far too much in this chamber. Words come cheap, but it seems that real investment in jobs in the Borders is too expensive. I am sorry to get aggressive in what is supposed  to be a cosy members' business debate, but this is far too serious. It is time that the Scottish textiles industry was given proper, serious investment so that Helen Liddell will not again stand in Westminster and consign the textiles industry to yesteryear.

Given that the Executive has turned its back on the recommendation of the Borders rail feasibility study for a further study into transporting timber from Kielder by rail and that the report states that "The existing road route is of variable standard and in many areas is particularly unsuited to significant volumes of freight traffic," which of the nine proposed road improvement schemes following on that has the Minister for Transport discussed with the Deputy Minister for Rural Development?

Why is it taking two years? The Sutherland report will be two years old in March. Why has it taken the Executive two years to set up a development group?

rose—

Richard Simpson referred to beginning a journey with the development group. As Mary Scanlon said, that journey began on 4 December 1997, when the royal commission was required to report, within 12 months, on long-term care for the elderly. It did. The report has since lain around for nearly two years. Do not frown at me, Labour members, I am coming to the point. The Health and Community Care Committee took it upon itself to follow up the work of the report and it produced its own recommendations. I commend Mary Scanlon, Margaret Smith, Kay Ullrich and many others for that. I, too, followed up on it, lodging the first motion in Parliament calling for full implementation of Sutherland on free personal care. I proposed a member's bill at the same time. Since then, I have tinkered with that bill and put it on the back burner because I thought—I foolishly thought—after hearing Mr McLeish's words in this chamber that Labour would deliver on free personal care. Mr McLeish  flirted and teased, here and in the press, on this serious and crucial issue. Today, we are coming to a test for this Parliament on delivery for Scotland's elderly people. Down south, Labour's parliamentary colleagues say that implementing Sutherland in full would help rich pensioners. Well, yes—all these years since 1997, rich pensioners have been selling their council houses to pay for their personal care. Richard Simpson knows that not all pensioners who are selling their houses are suffering from dementia; many are sentient and know that they are losing their homes and their possessions. Families sometimes lie to them and tell them that their homes remain. Of course the personal care that they seek is not free: they have paid for it for years, with their taxes and national insurance. All they ask is the same treatment and care in their old age as others expect in a civilised society. Yesterday, the minister announced a review. There is to be a report in another six months—conveniently after a general election. The leader in The Scotsman today is headed: "McLeish plays for time on care of the elderly". I count the delay from 1997 to now at three and a half years—not bad at playing for time. The one thing that Scotland's frail elderly do not have is time. The delay is the Executive's disgrace. There is a coalition in the chamber on behalf of Scotland's elderly. I hope that the Parliament will tell Scotland loudly and clearly that across this chamber we stand by Sutherland and we stand by the frail elderly. That coalition is asking with one voice on personal care—when?

The blinding flash that Pauline McNeill referred to came from Sheriff Wilkinson of the Sheriffs Association, who put us on the simple path that Gordon Jackson is talking about. I can remember the moment.

I practised obtaining and resisting matrimonial interdicts as a civil legal aid lawyer. I congratulate Maureen Macmillan on her efforts. I do not want to steal her thunder but, at the very first meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, I raised the prospect of a committee bill on domestic violence. She, however, has the hearty backing of many women in the Parliament in her attempts to deal with domestic violence. It was high time that something was done. The Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981 is more than 19 years old; it is way past its sell-by date and is no longer effective in dealing with the changing relationships within families. Its main aim was to protect occupancy of the matrimonial home, whether that was rented or bought. Trish Godman was right to say that the act focused on property rather than on people, although the aim was indeed to prevent the man from throwing the woman out.

I cannot give Johann Lamont a categorical answer to her first question; it was just to do with how the instructions arrived. I would act on behalf of a client without taking into account whether they were a man or a woman. I represented mostly women, but that simply reflects the proportion of people who came into my office.  Pauline McNeill raised a point about harassment legislation. I am not clear about this, so perhaps the minister can tell us how often the legislation has been used. I suspect that it has not been used very much for parties who have been harassed, which is why we need to create other legislation. I mentioned the importance of changing domestic situations. It was Maureen Macmillan, I think, who pointed out that the abuse or harassment does not always take place in the home, but can happen at school, at a supermarket or when a woman or man is visiting friends—it can happen anywhere. We have to be careful and ensure that, when someone obtains a common-law interdict, the terms of that interdict are extremely specific. The subject of that interdict must know what they are prevented from doing. The current problem with the common-law interdict, which is available to people who are not married, is that, if there is a breach, a separate action has to be raised. That is cumbersome; it takes a long time and does not resolve the problem. That is why bringing the power of arrest to ordinary interdicts is so important. I say to Bill Aitken that interim interdicts are granted before the service of the writ—that is the whole point. There is no hearing, except that the pursuer's solicitors seek the interdict from the sheriff on cause shown. The interdict is then served and it is effective from that moment. As quickly as possible thereafter, a second hearing is offered to obtain an interim order for continuing the interdict and to get a power of arrest attached. That takes care of the requirement under the ECHR—an issue that was raised by Nora Radcliffe—for the defender to have a hearing, as would also be the case under the proposed bill. I am rushing, as I have only a couple of minutes left, but I have a number of ancillary issues to raise. Legal aid is a nightmare both for the practitioner and for the victim who comes into a solicitor's office. The last thing that the victim wants to speak to their solicitor about is getting statements from the Scottish Legal Aid Board within the 28-day deadline following the granting of emergency cover. They do not want to be asked about their finances when, first, that will be the last thing on their minds and, secondly, they may not be aware of the state of their finances. In the middle of the chaotic mess that their lives may be in at the time, money may not be coming their way from a partner or spouse and they may not even be receiving social security benefits. They might be living from hand to mouth, yet they still have to fill in a form that has to be signed. The system is chaotic and has to be examined. People used to receive emergency legal aid and pursue it on cause shown without having to do everything within a deadline. Perhaps we should turn back  the clock. In my experience, the police, certainly in Edinburgh, try to do their best when someone has an interlocutor—an order of the court—with a power of arrest attached. However, there have been occasions on which, even though the power of arrest has been properly intimated at police headquarters and to the local police, the police have turned up at my client's house to ask what the court order said. It hardly gave my client comfort to learn that the police did not know what the order said, even though the agent had taken all the proper steps. We have to examine response times—10 minutes can be too long if someone has a violent partner outside the house. In such circumstances, people simply do not call the police, because 10 minutes is too long. I congratulate Maureen Macmillan and my former committee on the proposed bill. It shows the Parliament at its best—it shows how we can respond to concerns that have been raised outside the Parliament. It also shows that the committees are the future of the Parliament.

I am sorry that Mr Rumbles has got that flavour from the report. If I may say something for my happy old committee, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee did not consider matters in a sexist fashion. What Mr Rumbles has read out is a quotation from someone who gave evidence to the committee; it is not our view. He is using Anne Smith's words, not the words of the committee.

Power of arrest being attached is a serious thing. Perhaps, in the interests of justice, the new bill should allow the defender, through his agent, an opportunity to be heard before a power of arrest is attached. Does  the member agree?

It is empty today.

Consensus is breaking out, which is a nice way to end the week. I think that everyone here agrees that victims being given their proper place in the criminal justice system is long overdue. I would like to associate myself with Johann Lamont's words on the progress that has been  made through pure victim pressure and through the organisations that represent victims. For far too long, we have been treating victims—and I use that word in all its senses, to include the families that are affected—in a casual manner that did no credit to the justice system. There has been a long history of non-communication. I say to Bill Aitken that the first time that I, as a civil lawyer, walked into a criminal court, I did not have a clue what was going on—not a sausage. Everybody was whispering at the desk. Anyone who came in, either as a witness or as an observer, had even less chance than I did of understanding what was happening. At least I was allowed to go to the desk. Then there were the negotiations and the whispers between the procurator fiscal, the sheriff and the clerk. Nobody told the witnesses who had turned up, or who had been sent home if there was an adjournment, anything. All those problems could be remedied simply, by practical measures. I hope that the strategy paper addresses that. I note, Mr Wallace, that the word victim refers also to families of those who have been killed as a result of a criminal offence or a road accident. That is important. I would like to emphasise a couple of points that were made by Roseanna Cunningham on communication. Communication should take account of cultural and linguistic difficulties. I suggest that it should also take account of the different levels of understanding—for whatever reasons; for example, stress—among our fellow men and women. One must be patient with people when explaining things to them. One must not drift into legalese, which is so easy for those of us in the profession. We talk about pleas in mitigation, but what does that mean to people who are involved in cases? The minister spoke about financial support. I want to emphasise the importance of central core funding. Many organisations, such as the Scottish Rape Crisis Network and the refuges for victims of domestic violence that Gil Paterson referred to, have to grub around for several sources of funding—and they have to do so annually. Most of us—although perhaps I am wrong to speak for others in the chamber—know that that is the case. I have raised the issue of funding for refuges in my area with Jackie Baillie, the Minister for Social Justice. It would help if those refuges had secure funding, so that they could plan for the coming years. Roseanna Cunningham also referred to the victims steering group. It will be important to find out what its standing will be in consultations, Mr Wallace, and how inclusive it will be. Victim impact statements are very important in  this discussion. Like others, I have great reservations about them. I listened carefully to what Cathy Jamieson said. She feels that people just want to be heard and do not want to influence the sentencing, but that could be an indirect result of going down the route of such statements. They would be given in public, the press would get hold of them and there would perhaps—I say, perhaps—be impacts on the justice system that we would not want. It is very important that victims are involved, but I go back to evidence that we heard at the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. I asked a question, honestly seeking information, and expected the Scottish Rape Crisis Network to echo what Victim Support Scotland had said to us on victim impact statements. Victim Support Scotland was generally in favour of them, but Sandy Brindley took me aback when she said that such statements would be of limited value and that rape crisis centres did not see them as a priority. She also said that there would be a hierarchy of impacts and that different people react in different ways. I was taken aback. We have to address the issue, and not put it away for ever. In many cases, the victim is the key witness when a case goes to trial. I accept that there are difficulties if a case does not go to trial. It would be churlish not to give a warm welcome to the initiative, but I would like the minister to address the issues that I have raised and tell us whether there is a time scale for assessing the impact of the strategy. How will it be monitored so that the justice system and the Parliament can assess whether it is progressing and evolving?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it is taking to improve children's health. (S1O-2774)

In Scotland's schools, it is commonplace to bump into vending machines purveying chocolate bars, fizzy drinks and every variety of crisps under the sun. Those machines provide not a healthy diet, but a healthy input into the school's beleaguered finances. Is the expansion of such commercial outlets in our school corridors an integral part of the Executive's plan to improve our children's health?

Against that background, will the First Minister explain why, according to health professionals I have spoken to recently, his Government is unable to meet, because of chronic underfunding, the recommendations of a 106-page document that was published in January 2000? The document to which I refer is called "Protecting Children - A Shared Responsibility". The First Minister's share of the responsibility is proper funding, but when will he provide it?

That is why I asked a serious question.

Will the minister give way?

It is one point.

I asked about the submission on tourism, which is in the minister's remit. Will he look into that? The paper is from 1996. I do not know whether the Government has looked at it carefully but I would like a minister to consider the quality of that submission, given that it is so outdated and the remit was narrow.

I will touch on a few issues only. The Borders has an aging population: the problem is to do with keeping in the Borders the young people who live there, rather than forcing them to move away. That problem is linked closely to the infrastructure in the Borders. As Alex Neil and other members have said, the road links are very poor and the Borders has no railway line. As a matter of interest, I believe that my figures are different from those mentioned by Euan Robson. My information is that only eight school leavers went into the textiles industry last year, while 12 joined the army. Last year, out of 1,200 school leavers, only 300 went into employment, while the rest went into higher education or on to the dole. I got those figures from Scottish Borders Enterprise this morning, and we have great concerns about them. On the textiles industry, which falls within the minister's remit, £10 million was announced in June last year to regenerate the industry across the UK. However, I have discovered that none of that money has been used yet. We are still having meetings in the Borders, and while a meeting has been set up for 31 January, that is not good enough. We are seven months down the road from that announcement of £10 million, but that money has not been applied to the textiles industry elsewhere, let alone in the Borders, although the industry needs urgent attention. I also draw the minister's attention to the cashmere situation. Cashmere provides substantial employment in the Scottish Borders, as the minister is aware. Figures that I received indicated that, should anything happen to the cashmere industry, the loss to the Borders economy would be between £116,000 and £133,000 a week, with an indirect loss to the economy of an additional £26.8 million. I bring that information to the minister's attention because, with the change in the presidency of the United States, it is not unreasonable to be concerned about a possible change of policy towards the tariff and the US trade carousel act, to which Euan  Robson referred. While those matters were put on the back burner while President Clinton was in operation, we must start to anticipate a change, and I hope that the minister is addressing the situation as a matter of urgency with his Westminster colleagues. Proper capital investment in the Borders is needed. Unfortunately, there is a bad smell about the conversion into a call centre of Claridge Mills in Selkirk at a cost of £600,000, as the call centre has not appeared. Worse still, £70,000 was spent on training people who then found that they had no job. Anything that is being done on capital expenditure or on training must be real—people cannot be led down a horrible garden path. I must refer to the railway, which might bring trades to the Scottish Borders. At page 10, under "Direct Impacts", the Scott Wilson report says that "Local contractors could carry out non-specialised parts of this task . . . boosting the local economy." The report also says that there would be an impact on housing in the Scottish Borders. People would build on the fringes of the railway line, if they knew that they would have access to transport. Then people in the Scottish Borders could share in Edinburgh's economy. On page 11, under "Directly Induced Business Impacts", the summary report says that 300 jobs would be created "due to accelerated inward investment;" that 135 jobs would be created "due to expansion of existing firms;" and that there would be 290 new jobs "due to creation of more and more successful firms". I believe that those figures are fairly restrained. Before I conclude my comments on that report, I stress my concern at the references to tourism in the brief for the feasibility study. I have obtained the papers on tourism for the feasibility study and, to my horror, the submission by the Scottish Borders Tourist Board was dated 1996, predating the report by about two to three years. The submission did not address the southern part of the line, taking as its remit the reinstatement of the line from Edinburgh to Galashiels, yet the board admitted that the majority of tourists who visit the Scottish Borders come from the north of England. I would like the deputy minister and the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning to address that huge, glaring gap in the Scott Wilson feasibility study.

You could thank Michael Forsyth.

In what has been quite a dry debate, I have been longing to refer to the raider of the lost titles, because that is who we are talking about—although I was sure that someone would do so before me, I got to say that first.

I pipped Lyndsay McIntosh to it. This is a serious matter. As I said, although the debate is dry—

Perhaps Gordon Jackson does not think it is a dry debate. There has been a great deal of suffering and personal unhappiness behind leasehold casualties. Other members were right to address that fact. I was interested in Professor Rennie's evidence on behalf of the Law Society of Scotland. He said: "The rental value casualty is the most pernicious because it involves a calculation of the current market rental value. It can mean a bill for thousands of pounds coming out of the blue."—[ Official Report, Justice and Home Affairs Committee , 11 September 2000; c 1696.] People who thought that they were secure in their houses received such bills, although they may have a remedy somewhere down the line. Sloppy solicitors—I would rather call them  negligent ex-colleagues—can be sued and people do sue them. People can also sue the Keeper of the Registers of Scotland if he gives them a guaranteed title that is not what it ought to be. In reality, however, that takes years. Life goes on, and people are left paying expenses. Adam Ingram has just told me of someone who ran up a £20,000 court bill that had to be paid there and then. The person may get some of that money back, but that is a long way down the track. This is a serious and important piece of legislation for individuals and it deals with a feudal anachronism. I would like to comment briefly on compensation. We should have been more robust about compensation and not included it in the bill. Perhaps it is not worth going to the wire on this bill, but it might be worth doing so with others, so that the Parliament can test things in court and see whether we are getting the balance right on ECHR compliance. I would like to explain again to Phil Gallie the prescriptive period mentioned in section 4. The section amends the Prescription and Limitation (Scotland) Act 1973. What I said earlier about raising and serving an action stops that prescriptive clock running. Imagine that four years and 364 days down the line, a person manages to serve their writ on that 364 th day. That person will have protected himself or herself and protected that right. I hope that that clarifies things.

I would like to talk about the "relevant day", which is mentioned in the bill. Few bills become acts retrospectively, but this one is interesting because it goes back to the day it was introduced. That is excellent. The legal advice that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee heard in evidence was that that was unusual but not improper in this case. I would like to raise one issue with the minister. I may be nit-picking for the sake of it, because we have really had nothing to get our teeth into. The point concerns final decree. I have raised this point before in debates. Section 7(3) provides:  "For the purposes of this section 'final decree' means any decree or interlocutor which— (a) disposes of an action; and (b) is not subject to repeal or review." That last part is okay, but I would like clarification that the phrase "disposes of an action" refers to a decree for expenses as well. That may be the most substantial part of the whole court proceedings. We remember the lady with her £20,000 bill. We want to thank Mr Brian Hamilton—I will say it again, the raider of the lost titles—for finding these buried treasures, because he has put the spotlight  on an injustice. Finally, I need a footnote, Mr Gray, on the prerogatives at our disposal, granted by "our royal superiors". I would be delighted to hear an explanation of that.

It is my understanding that the landlord simply has to raise the action and serve the writ to stop the prescription of the debt.

Will the member give way?

At last. I fully admit that there was an enormous amount of legislation in the early months of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. A backlog built up over a long time before the Parliament came into being and then we had to deal with emergency ECHR legislation. However, that situation has levelled off and there is now no requirement to do that kind of work. My committee colleagues would agree on that point. Three parties in the chamber do not want the changes. Two justice committees are not required for the work load, so why are we doing any of this?

rose—

Does the minister know of any other legislature that has two justice committees with identical remits?

Unfortunately, the low morale in Scotland extends beyond Peterhead. I quote from a letter from the Prison Officers Association: "Openness, fairness, integrity etc are all words supposedly to state how staff will be treated by management, but it's all hogwash and jargon to tell anyone who asks how we are treated. Staff now no longer believe anything." In the light of those comments and the recent near escape of Tony Cameron from a vote of no confidence by governors, does the First Minister recognise that the chief executive is not the cure for low morale in Scotland's prisons, but the cause?

I am glad that Iain Gray is here, because on 20 January this year I raised the issue of alcohol misuse with him. He gave his word then that we would have a debate. It is wee bit late, but he has kept his word, which is a good thing for a man. It is a start, and I am allowed to be sexist. I thank Donald Gorrie. We both lodged motions on this subject. There was an interesting members' business debate about a month ago, which many members here present were at. In the previous debate, I referred to the estimated 200,000 people in Scotland who misuse alcohol. I am sure that members will agree that that figure is the tip of a very large iceberg. I was told this week in a written answer: "There were 340 drug-related deaths and 1,103 alcohol-related deaths in Scotland during 1999." — [ Official Report, Written Answers , 4 December 2000; Vol 9, p 190.]  Alcohol-related deaths are coded under the international classification of diseases, which covers illnesses such as alcohol psychoses, alcohol dependence syndrome, non-dependent abuse of alcohol and so on. It does not, however, take account of the many deaths that occur in  Scotland because of over-consumption of alcohol, but which do not have that specified on the death certificate. It has been estimated that almost a third of hospital beds are occupied by people who landed there after abusing alcohol. That is a measure of the problem. We all know about it and we have all talked about it. In honesty, the minister must see that, unless he is going to come up with other figures, the funding does not even begin to approach the size of that aspect of the problem in Scotland, let alone the other aspects. I want to let others speak in the debate, so I will say a few brief things about the national strategy. More money must be made available. On the membership of the Scottish Advisory Committee on Alcohol Misuse, I have looked at the papers and see that the police are represented, but that there are no other representatives of the justice system. It would have been useful to give sheriffs or justices of the peace an input. They deal with the consequences of alcohol misuse all day in court. Prison officers also see people who are involved in alcohol misuse in prison and could have an input to alcohol programmes. Local authorities are mentioned in the strategy. Will the strategy home in on social work departments, which must be involved, and education authorities? From the justice perspective, I welcome drugs councils. Is there any thinking along those lines for people with alcohol problems who get themselves into the criminal justice system? Perhaps such people should be dealt with a little differently from the way that they are dealt with at the moment. In short, I welcome the steps that are being taken. Many members want much more to be done. We are too politically correct about drugs. We are keen to get involved in other drugs issues, which are serious, but we keep quiet about this other rather large issue that Scotland faces. Other European nations do not have to face it—they enjoy their drink, but do not abuse it.

In the members' business debate on alcohol misuse, the minister addressed that point and said that £2.5 million was earmarked for strategic development. He also said: "However, much more money than that is being used."— [ Official Report , 9 November 2000; Vol 8, c 1623.]  That was a month ago. Given the imbalance in the amount of money that is spent on other drug issues—bad as those are—will the minister be more specific about how much money is being spent on alcohol misuse?

As the minister may be aware, the First Minister was rather rudely described by a leading Italian academic on "Newsnight" this week as "an  irrelevance". Does the minister agree that, following the successful referendum, his party would have some relevance at last—as members of the Opposition in an independent Scotland?

Certainly not together.

Euan Robson heard what David McLetchie, who is on that group, said in the chamber. He made it clear that we will end up with something that has the same processes of enforcement as have poindings and warrant sales.  Is he wrong?

As the minister knows, the first date that was set for a meeting of the working group was cancelled. I was unable to attend on the second date. I attended the next meeting, which was to ratify the remit. That was the first time that I had seen the remit, which has been read out correctly by Tommy Sheridan. I was unhappy with it because it reflected neither what my party nor what the Justice and Home Affairs Committee understood the remit of the group would be. We wanted to discuss a workable alternative—full stop. We did not want to discuss a workable alternative diligence against moveable property.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister accept an intervention?

The Justice and Home Affairs Committee also said: "The first step is for the Executive to acknowledge that poindings and warrant sales must go, and that efforts should be concentrated on finding a workable but humane alternative." It did not say "alternative diligence against movable property". It said "alternative"—full stop.

Mr McLetchie has disclosed that his understanding is that the same procedures—charge, poinding or warrant sale—will be used with whatever system the Executive comes up with. That was certainly my understanding.

Will the minister give way?

I am curious as to how that  alternative would be implemented. Would one serve a charge on the movables, poind and have a sale? That would be poinding and warrant sale by another name.

Having practised law I know—as a practising lawyer so will Mr McLetchie—that poindings rarely go to the warrant sale because the value put on the goods is worthless. In fact, as Alex Neil suggested, poindings and warrant sales are generally used as a sword of Damocles to threaten the poor into paying up. Poindings are rarely pursued to the sale and are used as a form of humiliation. Would Mr McLetchie concede that point?

I am trying to understand the idea of an alternative diligence against movable property. If that is introduced into the system, will it be exercised only against a certain type of debtor—the kind of fraudulent, mischievous, criminal to which Euan Robson refers? I do not know how it can operate. Either it operates against people at large or it does not operate at all.

I must advise Mr Gallie that the group is not a cross-party group any more. Neither the SSP nor the SNP are represented on it. [Interruption.] It is not our fault. I have made clear the reasons why, after considerable thought, I removed myself from the group. I object to the minister's response to my comment, as I thought that Tommy Sheridan and I conducted ourselves with considerable dignity when leaving the group. We did not storm out; we addressed arguments at that meeting.

The SNP welcomes amendment 1, whose import is that the effectiveness of the abolition of poinding and warrant sales cannot be deferred beyond December 2002. However, SNP members—as is apparent from our amendments and from our contributions to previous debates—wish the deferment to be retracted even further. I remind the minister of what the Justice and  Home Affairs Committee said in its stage 1 report on the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill. At paragraph 46 on page 11 of the report, it stated: "Despite the reforms made by the Debtors (Scotland) Act 1987, it is clear that the current law of diligence does not get that balance right. Poindings and warrant sales are the clearest example of that, and it is right that they should go, but other reforms are needed." The committee went on to say, at paragraph 50: "We therefore believe that there is a strong case for amending the Bill during its passage to provide that it does not come into force until a specified future date . . . We are of the view that this should be done sooner rather than later." I remind the minister of what has happened since then in the cross-party parliamentary working group, which Tommy Sheridan and I left for very similar reasons. Tommy can speak for himself, but I would like to outline to the chamber my reasons for leaving the group. First, it is very sluggish in its operations. When we have had trouble with the European convention on human rights, legislation has been whizzed through this Parliament. I do not think that things have been whizzing along in the cross-party parliamentary group. Secondly, I had serious concerns about the remit of the group, which appeared to be to find an alternative to poindings and warrant sales for movable property. That amounts to doing the same thing, but calling it something else. At the meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee of Tuesday CAPut!' September, Euan Robson expressed disappointment that 1 April 2001 was not a realistic possibility for implementation of the bill. Scott Barrie also indicated that he was disappointed that things were not moving forward faster. There is cross-party concern in this Parliament about apparent delaying tactics aimed at kicking this legislation into touch. I hope that that is just a perception. The will of this Parliament has been clearly expressed. The Executive abstained in the vote on the bill at stage 1, but Labour back benchers voted for it. I hope that the bill will move forward very quickly. I support amendment 1, but I hope that the chamber will also support the other amendments with earlier dates.

Does that mean that Lyndsay McIntosh will support our amendment?

As I have only three minutes, I will have to take my speech at breakneck speed. As usual, Phil Gallie generated more heat than light. Although this is an industrial dispute, that does not exonerate the Executive. As Michael Matheson pointed out, the ultimate responsibility for justice in Scotland lies with the Executive and the minister. In saying that, I am not underestimating the consequences of the dispute for some of the victims. I will touch briefly on some funding issues; in fact, I will simply refer the minister to particular columns in the Official Report . For example, he should take a look at the evidence of Helen Murray from the District Courts Association at columns 1306 and 1307 of the Official Report of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee meeting of 22 May. She made it clear that the district courts are underfunded, which can only impinge on the current situation. Phil Gallie did not address the transfer of administration; instead he lingered on more sensational issues. I respectfully suggest that that matter must be seriously addressed in the review. I reiterate Michael Matheson's point that there is merit in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee's having a copy of an interim report to hand. As for the point raised by the minister, Phil Gallie and Bill Aitken about what is happening to cases, it would be useful if the minister could write to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee giving us the facts about cases that have been affected by the dispute. If such a letter is not forthcoming,  members can lodge written questions and get the answers that way. In fact, I think that it was Euan Robson who quite rightly raised the issue of getting those figures. Bill Aitken made very fair points about automatic disqualification; indeed, I had not considered the totting-up procedure. Perhaps the minister should touch on that issue in his summing up. There might be some difficulty, however, as the procedure would apply to untried cases.

I understand that and am again grateful for Bill Aitken's specific knowledge. Perhaps the minister might address that serious matter. On continued offending, I had not actually considered the lack of a trial as a licence to proceed. If Mr Aitken has real evidence of that, he should give it to the minister and the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. As I have said, it would be useful for the Justice and Home Affairs Committee to see an interim report of the review. Furthermore, I want to know whether the District Courts Association—which said that it would monitor the situation—has been in touch about the number of cases in progress. It has been suggested that there has been a reduction in the amount of district court work, which was not the association's position.

rose—

Will the member give way?

You know very well, Phil, that a report is in hand, as we were told about the on-going review of district courts at the meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee on 22 May. I believe that that report is in its interim stage and will be available in the spring, which is why the SNP addresses that matter in its amendment.

Will you—

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to alleviate family poverty. (S1O-2578)

It has been consistently claimed in the chamber that the union is a success—Hugh Henry did so a short time ago. If so, why does Scotland—which is one of the top ten richest nations in the world—have levels of child poverty that are among the highest in the developed world?

When the Deputy First Minister is on those doorsteps, are pensioners not telling him—as they are telling me and all their organisations—that they want the link with earnings to be restored and that they do not want the indignity of applying for benefits?

Does the member agree that the loud message from pensioners' forums is that they want the link between pensions and average earnings to be restored?

It is apposite that I follow Hugh Henry, because I think that things can only get better for Scotland's pensioners. I would call the recent announcement damage limitation, following the two-packets-of-crisps-a-week rise that pensioners received this year. Hugh Henry may think that what I am about to say is dreary, but the reality is that since new Labour came to power in 1997, Scotland's pensioners have seen no change in their poverty. I did not dig that up; the Liberal Democrat MP, Robert Maclennan, issued a press release which stated: "The figures showed that a third of pensioners in Scotland are living in poverty, exactly the same figure for the period 1996-97 when the Labour Government came to power." Mr Maclennan said: "Labour has wasted valuable years in the battle against pensioner poverty." I have no doubt that Mr Maclennan's colleagues in the chamber and Mr Wallace, in his summing-up, would want to support Mr Maclennan. Today, we do not start from fresh on pensioners; we started three and a half years ago. Age Concern's statistics show that there are 70,000 Scottish pensioners living in severe poverty, many of whom have income that precludes them from the national minimum income guarantee. I will return to the problems of benefits and the minimum income guarantee shortly. With a rise of 73p or even £5 a week, pensioners still face the real world, in which heating bills and water charges are rising. Pensioner may get free eye tests, but they pay for their glasses, which cost a lot. There is no doubt that the nearly 1 million pensioners in Scotland—all of them voters and those most likely to vote—the pensioners' forums and their representatives, Age Concern and Help the Aged, pushed London into a partial U-turn on pensions. However, it is only partial, because the essential link between pensions and average earnings has not and will not be restored. The link was introduced by the feisty Barbara Castle—who still fights for its restoration—and abandoned by the Tories and now new Labour has adopted the Tories' clothing, as it has with so many policies. We do not want bits and pieces and neither do Scotland's pensioners. We want a decent basic state pension, linked to the nation's profits and wealth through earnings. In the 1970s, the average pensioner income was 25 per cent of average earnings. Today, the gap between earnings and pensioner income has grown and that income now stands at 17 per cent of average earnings. We are witnessing the  deliberate demise of the universal state pension. Incidentally, if the link between earnings and pensions had not been broken, a single pensioner would have had an additional £29.95 a week and a couple would have had £47.90. That puts the £5 rise, next year's £8 rise and the following year's £3 rise into context. Something else puts those rises into context: the cost of a residential place in the Scottish Borders is £265 a week, the cost of a nursing home place is £355 a week, and the cost to the pensioner is the sale of their home. Yet the Executive dithers and swithers over the funding of personal care. I am proceeding with my member's bill and meeting the non-Executive drafting committee next week. I held off doing so because I thought that the Executive was going to deliver, but I do not think that it will. I refer the Executive to its equality strategy document, which says that it is "taking steps to make real improvements to the lives of older people, working in partnership to improve take-up of income and benefits". That is not what Scotland's pensioners want. They do not want to go out with a begging bowl for benefits. Currently, two out of 10 pensioners are obliged to fill out a 42-page form listing their income and savings before they can receive benefits. It is forecast that six out of 10 pensioners will face means testing in the next three years. An article in today's Daily Mail refers to independent examination by the House of Commons library that has unearthed that statistic. Incidentally, 33 per cent of pensioners who are entitled to take up the minimum income guarantee do not do so. There are a variety of reasons for that, among which is pride. The minimum income guarantee is no guarantee to 33 per cent of pensioners. I should point out that 17 per cent of the funding for a benefit system goes on the administration. I say this to the pensioners: there are some touchstones that would be put right in an independent Scotland. The Executive cannot deliver equality, dignity, independence or choice. An independent Scotland would. It would deliver personal care free and would deliver a decent basic state pension that was linked to earnings.

I do not know whether Hugh Henry is aware of a difficulty with the working families tax credit. When people switch from their previous benefit to that benefit, they find that it is paid a month in arrears, which means that for a whole month they find themselves in difficult circumstances. I wonder whether the Executive could make representations on that issue to the UK Government.

rose—

Although local authorities have submitted their bids and the sums have been agreed, the answer that I was given did not make it clear what that money would be used for. I was told merely that it would go "towards other services". Is the minister telling us now that those other services will be services relating to older people, rather than buses, rubbish collection or whatever local authorities feel they need the money for?

The point is that the debate on the report of the Health and Community Care Committee cannot take place for eight to 10 weeks. I know nothing about that report—I am not on the Health and Community Care Committee—but I have carried out my own inquiry, which I was compelled to do because the Scottish Executive could not tell me how many elderly people had been assessed for care in residential and nursing homes. As at 17 October the Executive had no idea. I managed to find out. Those people need something to be done now. I read bits of the Health and Community Care Committee's reports, I attended the committee when Sir Stewart Sutherland gave evidence, and I have visited him myself. I do not think that I am not entitled to speak in the debate, when about 2,000 people have been assessed for residential homes and cannot be placed. I say to Hugh Henry that that figure is mainly due to lack of funding, although part of it can be attributed to a lack of places. I have the answers from authorities and they are available to any member who wants to see information on their constituency. I have a whole folder of information that the Executive should have known. Page 6 of the Executive's "Response to the Royal Commission on Long Term Care" says: "Sadly, as many as 1 in 5 . . . already in residential or nursing home care might have been looked after at home had the necessary support and services been available." We all agree with that. We want people to stay in their homes, but the reality is that the services are not available. Home helps are being cut and, in the Borders, the number is down by 21 per cent. Health visitors and district nurses have also been cut. A written  answer to Donald Gorrie shows that the figure for health visitors and district nurses in the Borders has remained static for the past five years. The number of wardens in sheltered homes has been cut. A headline from South Ayrshire says: "Two wardens to take care of 612 elderly residents". That is because of cuts that the local authority made to save £100,000. It made 19 full-time wardens into 19 part-time wardens. That is happening now. I say to Margaret Smith that we cannot wait 10 weeks to talk about those issues. We must highlight them now, to assist the Health and Community Care Committee. The Parliament can shine a bright light on those dark corners.

I believe that there is some cross-party consensus, but I have doubts about whether the report would have been accelerated to allow it to be debated in two weeks' time. I will return to an important issue that Ian Jenkins raised. Day care centres are under serious pressure. I have visited some in Glasgow, I have been to Broomhill day centre and I will visit some centres in East Lothian. They are at the heart of services to maintain people in the community. They provide social contact, lunch clubs, somewhere to go and somewhere to get dressed up for. I was canvassing in Anniesland yesterday and could find nobody to canvass. Why? They were all at their local community centre. I was pleased that they were there, even though it meant that hardly anybody was in that day. That is what it should be about—keeping people stuck in their homes is not the answer. We must progress on the role of day care centres, giving them much more secure funding. Broomhill day centre's funding has remained static for the past six years, yet 30 dementia patients go there to socialise with non-dementia clients. That is essential to the community and gives carers the respite they need. My final point concerns the £10 million that the Executive has put into delayed discharges. On 1 November, I lodged a question—S1W-10377—on  the £10 million. The answer I received was that local authorities could apply any balances that they had to other services. I have a series of questions in today's business bulletin, reflecting my concern that those balances might be artificial and that money that was meant for older people will be deployed elsewhere. I ask Malcolm Chisholm to consider my questions, which I hope are fairly specific, and give me straight answers about how those balances will be monitored.

I received the same paper as Ian Jenkins and I support everything that he says. However, he should know that I asked the minister to make day care centres a statutory requirement of local authorities and that the minister said no. Does Ian Jenkins support me in pursuing the point that day care centres should be a statutory responsibility of local authorities because they are essential in allowing people to stay in their own homes, but ensuring that those people are in the community and not just stuck in their homes?

That is very obliging of you, Presiding Officer. I thank Donald Gorrie for mentioning my motion. I am glad that we may get somewhere on the issue. I first raised this subject on 20 January in the debate on drug abuse. The then Deputy Minister for Justice had not even mentioned it. In that debate, I quoted the following statistics: "There are 200,000 people in Scotland who misuse alcohol. In the past 25 years, the recorded increase in deaths for which alcohol is recorded as cause of death is 552 per cent for males and 760 per cent for females." Those figures are gross understatements because they refer to deaths directly attributable to alcohol. There are alcohol-related illnesses that are not in that category. Another staggering statistic is that "One third of general hospital beds contain patients who have an alcohol problem."—[ Official Report, 20 January 2000; Vol 4, c364.] In his reply to that debate, the then Deputy Minister for Community Care told me: "I want to deal early in my speech with the issue of alcohol abuse, which was raised by many members . . . one message that the Executive must take away is that of considering an early debate on alcohol abuse, to give the subject the time that Christine Grahame's statistics show that it warrants.—[ Official Report, 20 January 2000; Vol 4, c384-85.] The statistics are not mine; they are from an alcohol abuse organisation. We are nearly through the year and we have not had that debate. I have questions for the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care. Drug-related problems have just been given £100 million over the next three years, yet I was told in a parliamentary answer that there is only £2.5 million over the next three years for alcohol  misuse. That is an enormous difference. In 1999, 1,013 deaths were directly traceable to alcohol and 340 deaths were directly traceable to other drugs. We have got things askew. Those 1,013 deaths does not include deaths that are related to alcohol through other diseases, fire, accidents, violent attacks, murders and so on. I will not go into the criminal impact of alcohol; someone else may, perhaps, address. I challenge the minister to introduce measures to assist in educating children on the issue, because there is now evidence that it is not so much cannabis as alcohol that is the gateway drug to other drugs. A further issue is that of children living with a parent with alcohol problems. It is estimated that 85,000 Scottish children are likely to be living with a problem drinker. Consider what that must mean in those children's lives. When I asked—yet again—for a debate, I was told by Iain Gray in an answer on 30 August that it would be scheduled. I spoke to him recently, informally, and he said that the Executive was setting up a programme this month. I hope we can have the debate before we begin another year.

I congratulate the minister on the announcement that she is about to make available £1.9 million for a further Borders rail study as a result of the actions of 17,000 people outside Parliament, the Campaign for Borders Rail and the Public Petitions Committee. My question is—

Will the minister confirm that she is ever mindful of the motion that was agreed to in Parliament on 1 June, and that she will work energetically to have the railway line reinstated to Carlisle, rather than merely to Gala and no further?

It is mince.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am not in the mood for a group hug. I have been trying to decide what this document is. It may be mince, it may be blancmange, but it is not of substance and it is certainly not in plain English. As soon as the Executive starts resorting to glossaries, it loses me and everyone else. Page 9 of the document states: "The Scottish Executive wants an open, just and inclusive Scotland." I have no quarrel with that, but what is the point of saying it? Only if the Executive said the opposite would there be an argument. However, from the perspective of Scotland's almost a million older people, Scotland is not very just and inclusive—and that is after three and a half years of a Labour Government at Westminster. In the debate almost a year ago on equality, the minister referred to "the problems of fuel poverty, inadequate incomes and isolation—all of which were highlighted in . . . eloquent contributions".— [ Official Report , 2 December 1999; Vol 3, c 1210.]  Things have not changed over the past year.

We need to see how that develops. It is only a consultation and we do not yet know what the system will be. For the time being, I reserve my position on the initiative. In the glossy document, the Executive says that it is taking steps "to make real improvements to the lives of older people . . . to improve take-up of income and benefits" and that it is "Investing in health and social care services." We all agree that poverty is unjust, so let us have a reality check on what is happening instead of all this puff. I have an equality communication for the Executive. At £67.50, the basic state pension is now worth only 15 per cent of average weekly income. In the 1970s, when it was linked to average earnings, it represented 25 per cent of average weekly income. In Belgium, it represents 60 per cent, in Denmark 40 per cent and in Luxembourg a whopping 83 per cent of average weekly income. In Scotland, 165,000 pensioners rely on income support and 225,000 claim housing benefit. Forty-four per cent of pensioners have savings of less than £1,500. Let us hope that they do not need their roofs fixed.  The minimum income guarantee has failed to protect Scotland's pensioners from poverty and there is 33 per cent non-take-up of benefit. Some 70,000 of Scotland's pensioners live in severe poverty, one in three in fuel poverty. We know that if people are poor they are not equal. One third of Scotland's pensioners live in poverty. The figure is the same as it was three and half years ago, when new Labour came to power at Westminster. I know because Robert Maclennan, the Liberal Democrat MP for Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross, got that information in a written answer earlier this year. Another reality check concerns health provision and is on the minister's theme of investing in health and social care services. Is someone charged for personal care? The answer is yes if they are an old person. That is age discrimination. Where is the equality there? I and many others in this Parliament and outside it call for implementation of the principal recommendation of Sutherland in full—no payment for personal care, wherever it is delivered. There is another equality communication on investing in health and social care services, minister. There has been a 21 per cent decrease in home helps in the Borders. That was revealed in a recent answer to Kenny Gibson. As well as that, it was revealed in a parliamentary answer to Donald Gorrie that the number of health visitors and district nurses has remained static since 1995, yet the Borders has the highest proportion of older people in Scotland. According to replies that I am receiving from local authorities on delayed discharge, hundreds of older people who should be in residential or nursing homes are trapped in hospital beds. They are trapped for want of funding. I received an example today from Perth and Kinross: 86 older people are in hospital and 11 are at home. That is the wrong place for the wrong reason—there is no money. How is this strategy going to sort that out for them? So much for investing in health and social services. In the recent debate on Sutherland, Susan Deacon delivered the required soundbite: "We want to add life to years, not just years to life."— [ Official Report , 5 October 2000; Vol 8, c 1014]  Reading yet another of these glossy brochures is not half putting years on me. The reality is a million miles from this management-speak, this puff, which Miss Campbell would not have let anyone get away with in primary 7. Equality and justice for Scotland's pensioners start with a decent basic state pension linked to earnings. That will do for a start. Just ask them.

I have other information for the minister. She is not aware—because she could not supply the information in a written answer to me—that 111 older people in Glasgow hospitals were assessed last month for residential care, but have  nowhere to go. That means 111 delayed discharges, to use the euphemism. What does the minister intend to do about that autumn crisis?

The member can try mine if she wants.

First, l congratulate Donald Gorrie on at last securing a members' business debate on alcohol misuse. Does Maureen Macmillan agree that it is time that the Executive allowed us to have a full debate in the chamber on alcohol abuse? Iain Gray has been promising such a debate for some time.

Hold the paper further away.

Oh no, not at all.

You are forgiven.

Same as me.

See me later.

I stayed   at the debate because although I do not like sport and do not normally watch it, I saw the Paralympics as my television was on unintentionally. I was doing parliamentary work at the time and I stopped doing it because I was drawn to what seemed to me the old-fashioned spirit of the Olympics—I watched those competitors working hard to win but also glad to be competing, and saw the real team spirit among them. I became intrigued. I watched the lady to whom Ian Jenkins referred. I also watched a programme about the Olympic village where for once disabled people were in the majority and were delighted to find themselves "normal"—whatever that odd word means. Therefore, I am very pleased that the motion was lodged, and I am ashamed that I had not previously paid attention to the Paralympics. Sydney has done it proud. It was right to bring it so far up the agenda and to draw it to the attention of people like me who are usually hostile to sport. That is for several reasons—I was no good at it, but also it seems so often that commercialism has taken over. I felt that the true spirit of sport was reinstated by the Paralympians. I also thought that for once taking part was very important, just as winning was. That is why I wanted to speak in the debate. The suggestions that have been made should be considered by Parliament, particularly that of an  award or ceremony for the Paralympians, because they certainly enlightened me. I may even watch sport again now.

It looks as though my member's bill on dementia and personal care will have to continue—with cross-party support, I hope. I want to be constructive. The minister talked about independence and choice, and there is much in her speech to be commended. As she is aware, during the past four years of new Labour, the percentage of the over-75s who are being helped to live at home has decreased by one sixth to just under 13 per cent. That is not a good record. Day care centres play a central role in sustaining older people at home and in their community, yet they struggle to get funding from local authorities and—for goodness' sake—from the lottery. Can the minister reconcile, on the one hand, a laudable commitment to give priority to maintaining the elderly in their homes, with, on the other hand, no commitment to require local authorities to provide day care centres and no commitment to funding them?

My question follows from the minister's previous answer. Will the minister confirm that, if the link between pensions and average earnings had not been broken, a pensioner couple would now have an extra £2,500 and a single pensioner £1,800, which would be enough to install their central heating now, next year and the year after?

It appears to me that Mr Monteith is giving supplementary evidence on behalf of Mr Allan Barns-Graham. If Mr Monteith considers the evidence that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee took, he will see that we heard from hutters who were not in dispute and from representatives of the Carbeth estate. Our approach was rounded. We took all views into account; we did not listen to just one side of the story. Moreover, Mr Monteith thinks that we restricted our report to the Carbeth estate. However, although we were dealing with a petition about the situation at Carbeth, we were aware of other hutters elsewhere.

As I was pressed for time I was not able to say so, but I understand that the position is that the assessors roll was out of date and many people were unfortunately omitted from the survey.

That was useful background to what happened in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, but it would be helpful to take a step back to the Public Petitions Committee, which I was on when this issue was presented to it, and to look at the public petition from the Carbeth hutters, which was brought to the committee on 21 September last year. It asked: "that the Scottish Parliament, as part of the first Land Reform Bill, brings in legislation which will ensure that people who have owned property on rented land for at least four years, where that property cannot be removed without being destroyed, have secure tenancies and access to rent control, to ensure that rents cannot be arbitrarily increased above inflation without reason, and that such owners cannot be deprived of their property without fair cause." That is what was addressed in the evidence that we heard in committee. This issue is important, because the Parliament has taken it from the Public Petitions Committee to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, which has heard evidence in great detail on three occasions and has received written submissions as well as oral evidence. Now this issue—which is at the heart of people's accessibility to this Parliament—has moved on to the parliamentary chamber. Sometimes it does us good for people to bypass politicians and to have a direct input into parliamentary procedures and legislation. I have concerns about what happens next. So far so good, but this issue came to the Parliament in September last year. In the report from the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, which came out in November, we say on page 3: "In summary, we believe that the transparency of an independent system of rent control and arbitration would benefit responsible landlords and their tenants and consequently we support the introduction of such a system."  That is what the Carbeth hutters were asking for. On page 5 of our report we say: "We would be grateful for the considered views of the Executive on this issue and, in particular, its opinion on whether its forthcoming Land Reform Bill offers a suitable opportunity to address this issue." We are still waiting. On 6 July a Scottish Executive official wrote to my colleague Mr Fergus Ewing and said: "Mr MacKay has explained that the Executive intends to consult on both the principle and details of possible legislative proposals in this area. Any decision on legislation would only be taken after responses to the consultation had been considered." The Executive also issued a press release along the same lines on the same day. Since then, we have had the document "'Huts' and 'Hutters' in Scotland". I will address some of the issues in it. It is not a report following on from the work of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, but a separate background report. My colleague Fergus Ewing is not taking part in this debate because he has an interest in the matter, but in his letter of 11 September to Angus MacKay he drew the minister's attention to the fact that he had had a meeting with the trustees of the Carbeth Charitable Trust, who also are members of the Carbeth Hutters Association, and who drew his attention to substantial defects in "'Huts' and 'Hutters' in Scotland". Paragraph 4.12, when talking about access to sites, states: "On the other, Carbeth, the site owner takes a very proactive approach to creation and maintenance of access roads and thinning or planting of trees as part of a long term development programme to benefit both the hut occupiers and his land holding as a whole." That is disputed by the hutters. That is not how they describe the roads that they have to go on. It appears from Fergus Ewing's letter that they were not fully consulted. I understand that questionnaires were given out, but not all hutters got them. Paragraph 17 of appendix A of "'Huts' and 'Hutters' in Scotland" states: "It was recognised that any information available from occupiers was likely to be a mix of fact, recall and, possibly, supposition, particularly over past history of use, not just by current occupiers but, even more, when a tenancy/licence changed hands, whether by purchase or by handing down by inheritance, some huts being thought to have been owned by a number of generations of the same family". It seems that the views of the hutters are already prejudged in that document, which gives me concern. We ought to be able to say that the process so far has been open and democratic, but the Executive document does not appear to fulfil that test.  We are concerned by the tone of "'Huts' and 'Hutters' in Scotland", because of the issues that I have raised and for other reasons. We are concerned that the consultation that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee was told about is not yet under way. We are also concerned that this worthy public petition has, to some extent, been posted missing in certain respects. I hope that what the minister has to say will give us some indication that the Executive is taking the matter seriously in considering land reform, and I ask him to give us a timetable of when he will report back to the committee. I also want him to say whether he will meet the Carbeth hutters to respond to their views on the Executive document.

The member has spoken about tenants and tenancies. The difficulty is that these are not tenants or proprietors, but people without a contract of lease in the usual sense. We are not talking about rents; it is service charges. Is that correct?

What?

By when? The amendment does not say by when. It does not commit to personal care, which is the first problem; the second is that it does not have a time scale.

Come on.

The minister may live to regret what he has just said. He said that the Executive welcomes the report, that it is important and that much of it is being implemented. He is not, however, implementing the crucial recommendation: that personal care should be free wherever it is delivered. I remind the minister of just some of the organisations that contributed to the document. They include big hitters, such as Alzheimer Scotland—Action on Dementia, Age Concern, the Carers National Association and a whole range of others such as the Disablement Income Group, ENABLE, various elderly forums, the National Pensioners Convention and many individuals, the Association of Charity Officers, the Association of Hospice and Specialist Palliative Care Social Workers, the Association of Directors of Social Work (Scotland) and the Liberal Democrat party. The two-column list of contributors runs to almost 20 pages. That is roughly 8,000 contributors, starting with Abbeyfield Northern Ireland and ending with—whoever she is—Zlotnick, Annie. That wealth of diverse experience has been distilled into a gem of a report, which is readable, comprehensive and costed. It was delivered on time—after one year—18 months ago. Apart from, apparently, the Deputy Minister for Community Care, no one in the chamber does not know the report's two key recommendations, one of which is that personal care should be free wherever it is delivered, whether at home or in a nursing or residential home. For 18 months, the coalition Executive has been steadfastly silent on personal care, but we all know—the minister has just disclosed what was an open secret—that there is no intention to implement that recommendation. I quote from the  minister's letter to me of 19 September: "Ministers are conscious of the Royal Commission's recommendations on charging for personal care in residential and nursing homes and of the relatively small number of people"— they will love that description— "who would benefit from them. The Scottish Executive considers there are better ways to help people with the considerable additional resources required for long term care." That is the Executive's position. We are back to that depersonalising buzzword—targeting. The Executive is not listening to the royal commission, to those who gave evidence or to the older people who will continue to fight today, tomorrow and the day after for justice in old age, which is what the matter comes down to. People are compelled to sell their homes, or to wait stacked and depersonalised, like unwanted goods, in a hospital bed where they should not be, because social work has run out of funds to pay for their care.

No, I am not stopping. As the minister and I know, there is no fund of money in the settlement between central and local government that is ring-fenced for care of the elderly in the community.

No. Haud on and answer later. There are no protected funds for those who need our protection. Older people who, perhaps through sheer frailty, require to stay in residential accommodation, watch the home in which they have lived for decades being put up for forced sale, not just to pay their living and housing costs, but so that they can have a daily bath and be helped from their chair to the garden. Families, already fraught with guilt for placing parents in residential accommodation, oversee the sale. The deputy minister may wish to live in that kind of Scotland, but I do not. Even if he tells me that only three out of 10 people are affected, that is three out of 10 injustices too many. The Labour party once spoke up for the welfare state, for the underprivileged and dispossessed and all those who had no voice, but it does not seem to listen to those voices any more—or if it listens, it does not hear. A fine party that once thought big now seems to think small. At the Labour party conference yesterday, the party failed to listen to the constituencies and trade unions and to that wonderful nonagenarian, Barbara Castle: it will not restore the link between pensions and average earnings. The Labour party  will pay for that, one way or the other; its politicians fail to listen at their electoral peril and, I regret to say, their failure brings this Parliament into disrepute. The Conservatives introduced care in the community 10 years ago and made mistakes, but I am not going to dwell on past frailties because they have seen the light. I am pleased when people see the light, and I thank David McLetchie for his gracious mention of my work on the issue. I hope that he will now sign up to my proposed bill on Alzheimer's and dementia care, if I have to proceed with it. I know that honourable people in the Liberal Democrats are struggling with other members of their party on the issue and I exempt them from what I say next. The Liberal Democrats hold the balance—that is the privilege of coalition—but there is a price. They think they made a good deal over tuition fees without breaching their contract with the Scottish people. I beg to differ, but we will let that pass. The Executive amendment has "Lib-Dem get out clause" written all over it; small print for small ambitions, but with a big price tag: the integrity of the Scottish Liberal Democrats. The Liberal Democrats gave evidence to the royal commission and their election manifesto says about this Parliament: "Our strategy therefore is to set our own distinctive policies before the electorate and point out that the more people who vote for us, the better the chance that those policies will be implemented after the election." This morning is a key moment. The Sutherland report's recommendation on personal care for the elderly is a key Liberal Democrat commitment. Do not let older people in Scotland discover that that commitment was only political rhetoric. Sign up with the SNP, the Conservatives and, I have no doubt, Tommy Sheridan, Dennis Canavan, Robin Harper and some other good people from the Labour back benches. If need be, after today, sign up to my bill and let the Parliament deliver something far more worthwhile than a building at the foot of the Royal Mile—justice for Scotland's older people. I finish with something that Hubert Humphrey said, quoted in Sir Stewart Sutherland's report: "The moral test of Government is how that Government treats those who are in the dawn of life, the children; those who are in the twilight of life, the elderly; and those who are in the shadows of life—the sick, the needy, and the handicapped." Let this Parliament meet that moral test.

As the minister is aware, on 11 September, Clive Fairweather gave evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee about Barlinnie prison, which has 17.5 per cent overcrowding. The fact that the refurbishment programme there has been put on hold links to Roseanna Cunningham's question about slopping out. Given Clive  Fairweather's extreme concerns, which he could not have stressed more than he did, what assurance can the minister give us that, in this budget, the problems at Barlinnie will be given the priority that Clive Fairweather thinks they require?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether ministers were advised by Her Majesty's inspectorate of schools of any difficulties concerning the implementation of higher still within the required time scale. (S1O-2263)

I find that reply extraordinary. Given that HMI led the development unit to brief schools on higher still and that 85 per cent of the Educational Institute of Scotland—the teachers whom the minister has complimented—voted against implementation, why did he press on with it in any event?

I was a practising family lawyer until I was elected to the Parliament and in that time I am afraid I dealt with only one reconciliation. I have three small points—

They are very short questions. Would Mr Wallace reconsider the position on grandparents, who will not have recourse to mediation services at the moment? I welcome the movement on property law for cohabiting couples, but I ask the minister how far that will go. He does not intend to equate cohabitation with marriage—I am not quite sure about that, we will have to see the detail. I ask the minister to consider that the stand-alone bill that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee has proposed, to extend the power of arrest to certain kinds of interdicts at the sheriff's discretion, would be the faster response that many organisations wish to see.

I knew which way the wind would blow from the moment I stood up to speak. It may not be the point of the exercise, but I shall be interested to see how many members will break ranks and vote for my amendment. Angus MacKay raised the issue of significant risk. The test of significant risk rests with the authorising officer, so a disclosure will not get past him if he thinks that there is a significant risk. John McAllion made some valid points. Of course the wrong people will be put under surveillance for the wrong reasons, but they will not be told about it. There is no way of compromising on this. If John wants people who have wrongly been put under surveillance, and who should never have been put under surveillance in the first place, to be told about it, he must vote for the amendment. This is not something that he can fence; the Executive has never been prepared to move further on the matter. The provision in my amendment to notify surveillance subjects would be triggered only when surveillance has been quashed, ceased or cancelled, and then only if no other investigations into criminal operations would be imperilled. It is nonsense to suggest that people would be notified otherwise. Dennis Canavan mentioned political figures, and his point was quite right. It is a bit of a red herring to keep talking about serious criminals, felons and heavy-duty drug dealers in relation to the bill. Of course the bill deals with the activities of such people, but it also deals with what might be considered criminal activity in relation to public order as defined by the authorising agencies. He is right to say that other activities such as industrial and political activity or demonstrations could come within the remit of the bill. I do not know what else I could have done to satisfy Scott Barrie's concerns. I have put everything possible into my amendment, including a catch-all and all the safety guards that I could have included, to ensure that the state is not imperilled at all and the community's rights are given as much protection as possible. Gordon Jackson will wait a long time if he wants to legislate in an ideal world. We are legislating in the real world. I shall quote the words that he used at stage 2. He said: "There is any number of ways of dealing with this . . . I do not think that it is impossible to strike a balance".—[ Official Report, Justice and Home Affairs Committee, 4 July 2000; c 1557.] What has happened between stage 2 and today that he now finds it impossible to strike a balance? At stage 2, he said that he would not teach his granny to suck eggs and that he could think of all  manner of ways of dealing with this problem. Did he put those suggestions to the Executive? Was he asked to do so? I have not seen any constructive attempt to bring forward an Executive amendment.

I take it Gordon Jackson is saying that there are not any number of ways of dealing with this, which was his position at stage 2. It is not his position any more. I cannot argue if he has changed his mind. Euan Robson used the word criminals again, which I think is misleading. The amendment is not directed at the real criminality that is under surveillance. He also, intriguingly, asked what the problem was if somebody had been under surveillance and no harm or prejudice had come to them. If my privacy has been invaded, I consider that harm or prejudice has been done to me. I do not want people opening my mail, listening to my telephone conversations and looking through long lenses at me and my cats. I have real problems with that.

If Euan Robson would not be unhappy that people had followed him without him knowing, that is okay for him. I would be unhappy about it. Euan Robson's other point is that the wrong person would be making the decision. Why did he not discuss that with me, if that is his major objection to the amendment? I was open to listening to people's arguments and he never discussed that with me. The amendment is fine as it stands. I will ask Angus MacKay a final question. Who on earth will apply to the tribunal if they feel that there is a complaint about procedure? I would like  an example—we failed to get an example on the miscellaneous and the catch-all.

So it would not be somebody who had been under surveillance and did not know about it—they would not be able to come before the tribunal?

That does not satisfy me. Angus MacKay has already said that there will be no fishing expeditions, so it will always be in the hands of the authority to say that there has not been surveillance. The person will never know.

I am grateful for that clarification, because that was not in the minister's letter to me. The letter states: "Although the rules for the tribunal's operation have not yet been finalised, it is clear that the tribunal will not allow fishing expeditions." It does not say "for criminals", just "fishing expeditions". I will press my amendment.

I do not think that the police witnesses were terribly interested in the line that I was taking, but we must remember that the bill does not just deal with criminal investigations and drugs; it deals with public disorder and other issues. As I said earlier, I foresee that notifying people of surveillance would be more likely to happen in those circumstances where entirely innocent individuals are also involved. The problems raised by the surveillance of known felons whose associates and families are unaware of their activities are provided for under my amendment. The police witnesses focused mostly on criminal activity, which is why I quoted Gordon Jackson at length. A tribunal is referred to in section 19. However, I do not understand how a person who has been under surveillance can use that tribunal to make a complaint. The tribunal is concerned with procedure and is a creature of the UK, operating under UK regulations. I received a letter from Angus MacKay on 28 August, when I addressed this matter. He wrote: "I do, however, continue to have a fundamental objection to the principle on which your amendment is based, namely that there should be a duty in each and every case, irrespective of whether the surveillance was properly authorised and carried out in accordance with the appropriate code of practice, to disclose the fact of that surveillance unless the authorising officer perceives a significant risk in doing so." That is not fair to my amendment, and reduces considerably the number of people who might be notified. In the same letter, he says:  "You say that your proposal would be more efficient than relying on the tribunal to disclose to people who had a suspicion that surveillance had taken place. Although the rules for the tribunal's operation have not yet been finalised, it is clear that the tribunal will not allow fishing expeditions. In other words the tribunal will not confirm to someone that surveillance had taken or was taking place unless there was a case to consider." How on earth—apart from tumbling over the infamous binocular man in the lupins—will someone ever get a tribunal to find out about surveillance? A suspicion will not clear it. The tribunal is a red herring of democracy. At the meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee yesterday, I listened carefully to Jim Wallace's views on an open and democratic Scotland. He spoke about that in the context of the future freedom of information bill. This information on surveillance is not going to be available to anybody, and that does not reflect an open and democratic Scotland. I want the Liberal Democrats to consider that, as their party has a fine record on civil liberties issues. This is a free vote for the SNP. I hope that it is a free vote for the other parties. These are serious arguments. I hope that it is not the case that we are not going to consider this issue seriously because the new English legislation does not consider it. I am not charging the Executive with that, but I hope that—as it did earlier, for the smaller but nevertheless important issue of the catch-all subsection—the Parliament will consider this matter in the context of Scottish democracy. Recognising the openness and all the safeguards that I have built into it, I ask the Parliament to give amendment 8 a fair wind. I move amendment 8.

I hope that members will bear with me, as I have a lot to say about this amendment. I have battled long and hard and have gone through many hoops for Angus MacKay. I should at least get brownie points for persistence. I think that this is my third draft and, like Topsy, it has growed and growed. It has done so, however, in response to matters of concern that the minister raised about the main point of my amendment. I should make it plain from the start that my amendment does not give carte blanche to inform all and sundry who have been under surveillance that such surveillance has happened. Although I will see what Phil Gallie has to say about his amendments, I think that they are in the same spirit of mischief that he deplored in Gordon Jackson earlier. I have a feeling that Phil is not going to vote for my amendment anyway. Members should bear with me as this is a long and complex amendment about civil liberties, which is a very serious matter. I will go through the  amendment in some detail, as I know that members are all very busy people and will not have had the time to consider its various parts. Subsection (1) of the amendment makes it mandatory to inform surveillance subjects. Perhaps members think that that will happen once a certificate has been quashed, ceases to have effect or is cancelled. Indeed, alarm bells might be ringing that all and sundry will be told. However, that is not the case. Subsection (3) of the amendment lists a whole lot of safeguards, including, in subsection (3)(d), the much-maligned catch-all safeguards that we have just got rid of in an earlier section. Let us examine subsection (3). The recommendation to inform a former surveillance subject that surveillance has ended would not be given if it carried "a significant risk of prejudice to any ongoing or future operation;" if it carried "a significant risk of compromise to the techniques used in ongoing or future operations, or the general capabilities of the police or the National Criminal Intelligence Service to carry out such operations;" if it carried "a significant risk to the personal safety of— (i) any person authorised to carry out surveillance; (ii) any covert human intelligence . . .; or (iii) any person from whom information is obtained or access to information gained by such a source;" which might be the casual person to whom Ben Wallace referred; or the catch-all: if it did not pass "any further test set out in regulations made by the Scottish Ministers." That leaves the matter subject to positive affirmation by this Parliament. Angus MacKay should be fair. I have tried to do everything in this amendment to build in protection for surveillance systems. However, I still think that there is room in this legislation to tell the wholly innocent party about surveillance. Subsection (4) builds in a timetable for informing the person, which might not be of such significance. Subsection (5) introduces a method of informing a person that they have been under surveillance, and members will see that it is fairly restrictive. When it has been decided that a person ought to be told that they have been under surveillance because there was no reason for them to be under it, they are told "(a) the period within which the authorisation had effect; and (b) whether the authorisation was for intrusive surveillance, directed surveillance, or the use of a covert human intelligence source." That is all that the person will be told.  Subsection (6) says that: "It shall be the duty of any relevant public authority . . . to provide an ordinary Surveillance Commissioner" with any information that he or she requires. My amendment contains many safeguards to ensure that when the commissioner makes up his mind about whether to advise the party that they have been under surveillance, he must be fully informed of all the facts. He would be able to postpone the decision for a six-month deferment period to ensure that he is able to take his time about the decision. Those safeguards are built in to provide protection for the state and the rights of the community as opposed to the rights of the individual. Subsection (8) provides regulations on which amendment 9 is consequential. In all the circumstances that I can foresee in practice, my amendment would apply only to a few subjects of surveillance when the authorisation had come to an end. Because of the protective subsections (3)(a) and (3)(b), the amendment would not apply to known felons and drug dealers even if the instance of surveillance—over however long a period—had delivered nothing. It would also not apply to the innocent friend of a known dealer who had been put under surveillance and been found to be unaware of their friend's nefarious activities. Again, that would be because of the protection of subsection (3), with its references to situations such as "any ongoing or future operation". However, the amendment would apply to the person who has been wrongly placed under surveillance but who has no connection with wrongdoers. Even then, though, the tests under subsection 3 would apply. It was interesting to see Jim Wallace rise to speak instead of Ben Wallace when the name "Mr Wallace" was called out. As the bill stands, if a similar cock-up occurred during a surveillance operation and a person with the same name as a suspect was targeted, that person would not be told that they had been under surveillance. I do not know how much more I can do to accommodate the deputy minister's concern. In that case, why am I bothering? Simply, because it is plainly right for the state, if it has erred and infringed an individual's liberties and privacy, to tell that person what has happened. In support of that view, I enlist the aid of Gordon Jackson's comments in the stage 1 debate. I am not quoting him, but he will agree that he said that if something is right, it is plainly right to do it. The other reason that I am bothering is that I believe that the bill, unless amended, could be  challenged under the European convention on human rights. Article 8 states: "1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his correspondence. 2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others." The key part in all of that is the word "necessary". Subsection (2) of article 10, which deals with the exercise of freedom of expression, states: "The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime". Again, the test of what is necessary is important. Professor Alan Miller of the Scottish Human Rights Centre said, in Holyrood magazine of 24 April 2000, that this bill is, in effect, the Scottish part of the UK Regulation of Investigatory Powers Bill that is currently proceeding through the House of Commons and attracting significant criticism regarding ECHR compatibility from within the legal profession and from human rights non-governmental organisations. Giving evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, Professor Miller said: "On the one hand, I do not think that the draft bill deserves excessive criticism." I agree with that. He continued: "It should be welcomed. Its stated aim is to provide a legal framework for police surveillance to attempt to achieve ECHR compatibility, so it will be an improvement on the present situation. I think that that is recognised by everyone. The draft bill tries to find a fair balance between individual privacy rights and the public interest. On the other hand, we all know that, to all intents and purposes, this is a UK bill. We should be aware that the UK has a poor record on the issue of surveillance and ECHR compatibility. Members should also be aware that the ECHR is really only a safety net; it is the lowest common denominator among the states of the Council of Europe . . . Therefore, a certain amount of vigilance is required over the bill."—[ Official Report , Justice and Home Affairs Committee , 10 May 2000; c 1208-09.]  The Law Society of Scotland has stated its concerns. A Law Society witness told the Justice and Home Affairs Committee: "However, the right of privacy exists under the convention and if that right is invaded, there has been a violation . . . When that law comes"—  he was referring to the RIP bill— "there will be a need for some analogue of the regulation of investigative powers legislation in order to cope with private investigations into fraud or whatever."—[ Official Report , Justice and Home Affairs Committee , 15 May 2000; c 1247.] I also quote Gordon Jackson, speaking during the stage 2 debate—this is his starring role. I warned him of this, as it was only fair. I have not been cruelly selective; I think that this gives a fair flavour. I do not think that everybody wants to hear everything that he said, but I quote him from the Official Report of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee's meeting of 4 July. "The bottom line is that there will be occasions where people are wrongly put under surveillance. I do not say that because of some conspiracy theory, but because that is simply the nature of such things: whether it is a cock-up, a conspiracy, a simple mistake or bad faith, it will be clear that certain people, over the years, should not have been put under surveillance." Gordon went on to say that "there is no reason why, when it is clearly discovered that a person has wrongly been put under surveillance, that person should not be told. That seems to be a reasonable and fair safeguard for the rights of the citizen. The presence of such a provision is likely to focus the mind as to when it is appropriate to conduct surveillance operations." He continued: "My point is very simple. There should be a provision in the legislation so that where it becomes clear after authorisation has been given that, for whatever reason, a citizen should not have been the subject of a surveillance operation, the system is open about it . . . As I said in the chamber, that is the nature of the modern world. I am against secrecy whose only purpose is to cover up a mistake that has been made . . . There are several ways in which provision could be made—I will not teach my granny"— I think that Gordon was referring to the Minister for Justice— "to suck eggs. It could be done by spot checks, or the power to tell people could be given to the surveillance commissioner . . . There is any number of ways of dealing with this . . . I say that the purpose of such a provision is not to compromise operations or to help criminals, but to ensure that where someone has been put under surveillance wrongly, for whatever reason, they should be told that that has happened and it should go into the public domain. That would give the public the comfort of knowing that although the power of regulating serious powers is being given to law enforcement agencies, if someone is wrongly surveilled that fact will become public and will not remain a secret. I do not think that it is impossible to strike a balance here. I hope that the Executive will introduce such a provision before we have to argue this matter seriously in the chamber." In correspondence with Angus MacKay, I have tried to achieve that, and I think that I have come to the bottom line. My view now is that the minister is simply opposed in principle to cases of wrong surveillance becoming public.  I also quote Scott Barrie, speaking in the same stage 2 debate. He said: "I have a great deal of sympathy with what Christine Grahame has tried to do. I am not sure that I would have voted for her amendment, because it is too wide-ranging". Well, it ain't wide-ranging now, Scott. Euan Robson said: "The minister will agree that there is a degree of cross-party concern on this point. Almost all of us are concerned that the tribunal will have very little work because people will not know that they have been the subject of surveillance."—[ Official Report , Justice and Home Affairs Committee , 4 July 2000; c 1556-57.] Those comments were made at stage 2, which is a much happier place than stage 3.

It seems that there has been a shift in the balance of power. As section 17 stands, the tribunal determines what it may require. Under amendment 62, which is more than technical, it is the chief surveillance commissioner who decides what is appropriate.

I have some sympathy with Phil Gallie. I have looked at section 16 on cancellations and seek clarification of when exactly an authorisation is cancelled—when the decision is made or when the source is told. I seem to recall that that was to be included in a code of practice but I may be wrong. I cannot see it in the draft codes of practice. Perhaps it would be appropriate to include clarification of exactly when a cancellation is effective.

The member is making it sound as though obtaining information in such a manner is incidental to the relationship, but the definition relates to relationships that are set up for the purpose of obtaining covert information, so I do not see why we need the amendment.

The amendments are very interesting. It is obvious that Ben Wallace has a great deal of experience. I did not think that someone who said that their neighbour was up to something funny would count as a covert human intelligence source. Section 1(7) defines a covert human intelligence source as a person who "establishes or maintains a personal relationship or other relationship with another person for the covert purpose" of facilitating the doing of something as defined. The relationship is established or maintained for a specific purpose. This is not about information that is passed willy-nilly. I would like further information on why Ben Wallace does not think that that definition is tight enough.

I could start with some statistics—for example, the fact that 61,000 people suffer from dementia—but it is important to focus on the individuals who are dementia sufferers and their families, and the difficulties that the state places in their way by not operating fairly. I will come to Sutherland's views on that in a moment. People who look after either their parents or their spouse at home are unpaid carers who carry great burdens. They do so with love and affection, but they carry great burdens, both physically and emotionally. If the parent or spouse reaches the stage at which they have to go into a nursing or residential home, we all know what happens: if the people have assets, their house is sold from under their feet to pay the bills for personal care. Like Sutherland, I have no problem with people paying for their housing or living costs, but I am talking about personal care. It is wrong that people should have to pay such costs. Even when a house has been transferred several years before into the name of older children in the family, the family is affected. Such a transfer does not protect the home, which can be clawed back by the state if the transfer is considered to be an attempt to avoid paying for personal care. That causes stress to a family at a time when dreadful decisions are being made about putting a husband or wife, or a mum or dad, into a home. That is a terrible decision to have to make. We have all met anxious people with great concerns about such decisions, which they have deferred until, perhaps, they had no option. I will focus on three matters—quickly, so that as many others as possible can speak. First, the Scottish Parliament must implement the Sutherland report and make personal care free at the point of delivery wherever it takes place. We owe that to the Scottish people and a just society depends on it. We are talking about only £110 million, a figure that must be compared with the obscene amount of money that is being thrown at  the millennium dome. I know everyone thought that I might bring that up, but we must get our money priorities right. As Malcolm Chisholm says, it is unjust that only people with this illness pay for personal care. The second matter is day care. I visited the Broomhill Day Centre, which integrates dementia sufferers with other elderly people who are there for respite. The centre has to grub around for funds from various sources such as the lottery, social work departments and voluntary organisations, but it performs a fundamental service in retaining elderly people in the community and sustaining their carers. I have lodged a question to ask whether the coalition will make a commitment at some point to make day care provision a statutory requirement and to underpin it with proper funding. My third point relates to the carers who are faced with the dreadful decisions that I have mentioned. I want carers to be paid an allowance, the use of which would not be determined for them. It is a radical idea. They could blow their allowance on some clothes from Marks and Spencer or use it to take a week's holiday. That would give them a lift, a bit to themselves to keep them going while doing a task that they do with love and care but that often undermines their health, which can have an impact on their ability to care for their ailing relative. On 14 September, a march of pensioners in Edinburgh will address not only the failure of the pension, which is another matter entirely, but the failure to implement the Sutherland report in England and the decision to refer to just nursing care. I hope that Mr Gray listens to the pensioners and to the many cross-party voices in the Parliament and does the right thing by our older people.

Paul Martin called this a serious debate. It is very serious for Scotland's ill when the attendance of Executive members is such as we have this afternoon. I want to raise serious issues concerning the older people in Scotland. On 17 December, I asked in a written parliamentary question whether the Executive had evidence of age discrimination in the NHS, and whether it would initiate a full and comprehensive investigation. Susan Deacon answered: "There is no evidence to suggest that elderly people are being refused NHS care solely on the grounds of age." — [ Official Report, Written Answers, 17 December 1999; Vol 3, p 302.] I have here some evidence of such discrimination, which I shall present in the format that is used by the Minister for Health and Community Care. Fact 1: more than three quarters of family doctors believe that the NHS discriminates against elderly people. Fact 2: two thirds of family doctors support an inquiry into agism in the NHS. Fact 3: 43 per cent of GPs would be worried if a frail and elderly relative went into hospital. I also have quotations to support that evidence. Dr Brian Williams, the president of the British  Geriatrics Society, says: "There is good evidence to say that the NHS harbours institutionalised ageism which is morally indefensible." Dr Bill O'Neill, the Scottish secretary of the British Medical Association, says: "There is ageism in the society and the NHS is not immune from it." Here is more evidence. Fact 1: breast cancer screening is rarely offered to the over-65s, although more than two thirds of the mortalities from breast cancer are within that age group. Fact 2: one third of coronary care units refuse to admit over-65s who are referred to them by GPs, thus forcing them into general wards. Fact 3: elderly people are routinely excluded from drug trials, although the drugs that are being tested may help them. I ask members to remember Jill Baker, aged 67, who read in her case notes—for the first time—that she was not to be resuscitated in the event of her having a stroke. That was written by a junior doctor who never met her. I shall now speak on long-term care for the elderly. In March, Dr Williams and the heads of the Royal College of Physicians in Edinburgh, Glasgow and London branded long-term care of the elderly a national disgrace. Sir Stewart Sutherland's report gathers dust. The truth is that, if someone has Alzheimer's, they are subjected to the worst age discrimination of all—paying for nursing that is free to people suffering from all other illnesses. People who have Alzheimer's are compelled to sell their homes to pay for nursing care or—what a choice—confined to a hospital bed because there is no money in the social work budget to pay for their care costs. The only treatment someone suffering from Alzheimer's can be guaranteed is to be treated as a non-person. Of course there is rationing. The Dundonald GP who spoke so frankly at the recent BMA conference was saying what we already know to be the case. If there is to be rationing because of medical progress and limited resources, let it be on the basis of assessed individual ability to benefit, not on the basis of age any more than it would be on the basis of skin colour. My speech is bursting at the seams with evidence and I have only a minute and a bit to go. The cure for the ailment is for older people to be seen by politicians and society as the individuals that they are and that we see ourselves as. I have a poem for the minister, for the holidays. It is on individual rights and called "Warning". When I am an old woman I shall wear purple  With a red hat which doesn't go, and doesn't suit me,  And I shall spend my pension on brandy and summer gloves  And satin sandals, and say we've no money for butter. I shall sit down on the pavement when I'm tired   And gobble up samples in shops and press alarm bells  And run my stick along the public railings  And make up for the sobriety of my youth. I shall go out in my slippers in the rain  And pick the flowers in other people's gardens  And learn to spit.

Given the late but welcome conversion of the Tories to Sir Stewart Sutherland's report, will they now support my proposed Alzheimer's and dementia care bill, which has Sir Stewart's support and completely implements his recommendation to make payment for personal care illegal to ensure that dementia sufferers are treated like every other sufferer?

I call upon the member's professional expertise. In a letter to The Herald on 9 June, Andrew Muirhead, a consultant orthopaedic surgeon at Ayr Hospital, referring to a 67 per cent cut in the funding for nursing homes in his unit, said: "I would like to record a vote of 'No Confidence' in the present Labour administration, which has undermined the NHS in our area." The minister would not comment on that. Will Dr Simpson?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I have raised this matter in a letter to the Procedures Committee. I hope that the committee will address the issue after the summer recess.

As the Deputy Minister for Justice is aware, a person has no right to know whether they have been under surveillance, even if they are as clean as a whistle. That issue was raised at stage 1. I refer the minister and the Parliament to today's business bulletin—this is a plug. On page 25, my substantial and comprehensive amendment seeks to redress that imbalance. Given that that amendment has cross-party support, as he is aware, will he now support my amendment in principle?

I will preface my remarks by saying that I will not tell any of the very bad jokes that people have been giving me to try to liven up this debate.

No—but I will write to Angus later. I echo Gordon Jackson's statement that the Executive's amendments are to be commended—but be fair to us, minister, they did not come out of the blue; they came because members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee said that they would support the bill at stage 1 only if significant amendments were made, especially in relation to part-time sheriffs. Having seen that red flag, the minister went ahead with the amendments. That is to be welcomed. If I may say so, the Executive was a bit sloppy with the policy memorandum that accompanied the bill. Despite its claims that there had been consultation, we found out in evidence that witnesses had not been consulted on detailed provisions. It also blithely states that there will be no impact on equal opportunities, human rights or local government. Before the amendments were made, that was not the case. It may be the case now, as we move towards a more transparent procedure for the appointment and removal of part-time sheriffs, but there may still be problems over the failure to give a right of appeal to part-time sheriffs when they are removed from their posts. The Executive should be careful in its  statements in policy documents. Jim Wallace's announcement of amendments is generally to be welcomed. He is to be congratulated on recognising the position he got himself into. The regulations are important. The drafts are to come before Parliament after the summer recess. We need to see them. The Sheriffs Association made it plain that the regulations were very important indeed. As we all know, in law, the devil is in the detail. The points that Fergus Ewing raised about the nature and class of people who become sheriffs should be considered. I am not one for political correctness or for enforcing balance, but we must concern ourselves with the range of people on the bench. A lot of people seem to have summed up before me, so I am summing up the summings-up. Members have said that there ought to be an appeal mechanism for part-time sheriffs who have been removed from their posts. That point was raised by Winnie Ewing and James Douglas-Hamilton among others. The fact that there is no such mechanism could rightly be challenged under the ECHR by part-time sheriffs who are removed. Bill Aitken and Kenny MacAskill asked why part-time sheriffs were not put on the same basis as permanent sheriffs. Like them, I do not understand that. The Justice and Home Affairs Committee heard evidence from Jamie Gilmour, who thought that the reason was simply to avoid having to pay them pensions. Why not put part-time sheriffs on the same basis as permanent sheriffs? We are asking for the same quality of justice from them, so I do not see why there should be two classes of sheriff. There is also a feeling that people who are taken on as part-time sheriffs might feel that they are on probation. They might not feel that they rank the same as a full-time sheriff. That came out in evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. The problem may have been partly cured by the fact that part-time sheriffs, subject to certain conditions, can now be reappointed after their five-year period is up. The Law Society of Scotland has been in touch—I think with everybody—with a recommendation that I do not necessarily subscribe to but which the Executive may want to consider. It is recommending that part-time sheriffs sit for an increased minimum of 40 days and a decreased maximum of 80 days. The minimum is higher so that they have sufficient skills to exercise their authority in a judicial capacity; the maximum is lower so that they are not overused and abused by being on the bench for almost as long as full-time sheriffs. I would also like to raise the issue of the booking  of part-time sheriffs, which I understand is in the power of the Scottish Executive's justice department. It will have to be careful to ensure that part-time sheriffs are used in specific ways—to plug emergency gaps in the system when a sheriff is ill or on holiday or when there is an unusual work load, but not simply to augment the system or to be used as cheap labour, which I think they suspect has been happening. Fergus Ewing made some good points about the 88 justices with experience in local areas. Particularly—as David Mundell said—in rural areas, local knowledge can be very important to the quality of justice. Also important is that no case has been raised on whether councillor JPs are in breach of the ECHR. Roseanna Cunningham suggested that barring councillor JPs from sitting in their local authority area might be sufficient. She also raised the issue of clerks of the court. When we took evidence, a suggested solution to that possible problem was that their advice should be given to both sides in a case. Bill Aitken raised the issue of the SCA, rather than local authorities, funding district courts. I suspect that that will come up in the review of the district courts. The SNP accepts that the bill will have little impact on bail. We see no merit in the criteria being incorporated in statute. There was conflicting evidence on victim impact statements at the bail stage—remember, we are dealing with someone who is only accused and is innocent until proven guilty beyond reasonable doubt. It should always be borne in mind that we are talking about alleged victims and the accused. Victim Support said it wanted to see some kind of victim impact statement, but the Scottish Rape Crisis Network did not because of the risk of a ranking of such statements. Some people—like me—look cool, calm and collected although they are really in a terrible state and others look as if they are in a state but may be less so, so it can be very difficult to measure from someone's behaviour exactly what the impact is on them. The minister spoke about discussing strategy with the police. Please get a move on with that. What Kenny MacAskill described—people meeting the accused on the street—really happens. That reduces everyone's confidence in the justice system. We must address that. Subject to what emerges at stage 2, since we have not seen the proposed amendments, the SNP supports the bill.

Oh no, please.

I found the minister's response very interesting. As he is aware, Scotland's timber harvest is set to double over the next 15 years. Kielder forest is the biggest forest in the UK. I refer the minister to the Scott Wilson report. Is the minister aware that the main recommendation under freight options for the southern half of the proposed Borders rail link was for further study into the potential export of timber from Kielder to the south, using the southern section? Given what the minister has just said, will he undertake to instruct further study into the freighting of timber from Kielder forest along the southern section of a Borders rail link?

Cashmere production in the Borders involves 40 companies, employs 2,000 people directly and currently has a £21 million order book, mostly directed to the United States. Is the acting First Minister really satisfied that Labour's Stephen Byers is treating the drastic threat to this vulnerable Borders economy as a priority, given that the deadline for returning cashmere to the 100 per cent plus tariff carousel levy is 19 June?

I echo what Phil Gallie has just said about the Justice and Home Affairs Committee being  rushed. We do apply ourselves, but the pressures that we are put under are becoming quite ridiculous. I accept the minister's apologies for the rush job on the bill, but ask him not to let it happen again too often. The Scottish National Party, like all the other parties, welcomes the bill's principles. It regulates what is already taking place, and operates—I hope—on the principle of transparency, which is what this Parliament should be about. We have already heard from all parts of the chamber that there was no conflict between the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and Professor Alan Miller, which was refreshing to us all. We are not dealing with a minor matter: there are at present 1,500 surveillance operations in Scotland. Since Labour came to power, the number of phone taps has gone up. The number of bugging operations is at its highest since the second world war, and I say to Janis Hughes that Big Brother is watching her—that gives new meaning to the term "the listening party". I just hope that it is listening to crooks, not to other people—we do not know. I hope that the bill, and what I will come to later, will make improvements. We are in favour of the broad sweep of the bill, but there are problems with the detail. There are difficulties, in the view of the SNP, with ECHR compatibility. This bill is not just about crime or serious crime. We should focus also on what is contained in section 3(3), which deals with other matters, including "public safety", "public health" and "preventing disorder". We have no difficulties about preventing serious crime, if that is defined. There is a serious problem with paragraph (d) of that subsection, which reads: "for any purpose (not falling within paragraphs (a) to (c) above) which is specified for the purposes of this subsection by an order made by the Scottish Ministers." In the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, I asked ACPOS, the Law Society and the Executive to give examples to demonstrate why that catch-all was there. I got no examples, and the paragraph looks like a blank cheque—and nobody likes signing blank cheques. I am unhappy about that, and so is my party. We might seek to lodge an amendment to delete that paragraph, unless examples can be found of what would fall within section 3(3)(d). There are other problems with the independence of authorisations, which have already been raised. Given that Scottish ministers have the power to designate persons within relevant public authorities—the definition of which is also a problem—by order, I must ask the minister  whether the Justice and Home Affairs Committee will have advance notice of what those public authorities will be, apart from the ones already mentioned in the bill. In any event, it is the SNP's position that a surveillance officer is required to make those appointments more at arm's length. As we know, the ECHR insists on separation of the various power bases. That separation is insufficient when police officers, albeit senior police officers, are making those appointments. There are also problems of definition regarding the grounds for authorisation of surveillance operations. I agree with Gordon Jackson that the bill as it stands represents no more than tweaking of the draft legislation. However, if the Law Society gets it wrong, someone else is likely to get it wrong. There are more serious problems to do with the threshold tests. As Donald Gorrie, John McAllion and others have said, one person's disorder is another person's demonstration. That is where the codes of practice come in. The Justice and Home Affairs Committee has not seen those codes and they are vital. In his evidence at the committee's meeting of 10 May, the minister said that the codes would be attached to the legislation, that they would have statutory force, and that there would be consultation on them, which is crucial. He also said that Parliament would have the opportunity to discuss them fully before they came into effect. When I asked Professor Miller at the Justice and Home Affairs Committee whether we must see the codes before considering amendments at stage 2, he answered in the affirmative. The obligation for such codes to be in statute and for us to see them is also enshrined in section 20 of the bill, entitled "Issue and revision of codes of practice". Stage 2 of the bill is scheduled for next Wednesday. What stage have the codes of practice reached and when is consultation on them likely to begin? As we cannot see them before the deadline for amendments, will the minister comment on Professor Miller's view? Is not this a consequence of rushing into legislation—in this case, to suit a Westminster timetable? Section 19, on complaints to the tribunal, is another problem area under the ECHR. Article 6 of the ECHR concerns the right to a fair trial. I appreciate that this is a Westminster matter, but I want to say for the record that being able to examine only procedures and not substance will cause difficulties, as substance is at the heart of the matter. It is easy to prove or disprove procedural difficulties, but proving what the authorisation was based on will be crucial. There are also problems to do with rights of appeal to the tribunal. All the members who have spoken have raised that issue. Unless they fall  over binocular man among the lupins or see themselves reported in the Sundays, it is difficult for people to know that they have been under surveillance. As Ben Wallace and others indicated, there will be circumstances in which it will not be appropriate for that information to be divulged—when the subject is a known criminal, for example. However, other individuals who have proved to be wholly innocent should be entitled as a right to know that they have been under surveillance. I am glad that Gordon Jackson, Ben Wallace and SNP members agree that that issue needs to be addressed in order to get the balance right. Although the SNP supports the thrust of the bill, in the spirit of greater openness and accountability and so as to enshrine in statute regulatory powers—powers that are used for society, on behalf of society—we must draw attention, as we have, to areas where the balance might have tipped too far, with the result that the rights of society impinge unnecessarily on the rights of the individual, as underscored by the ECHR. If, as Gordon Jackson said, it is right that these things should happen, they should be done.

On the issue of balance, I am interested in Ben Wallace's professional experience. Does he think that, in spite of his reservations about the individual's right to know, individuals should sometimes have the right to know whether they have been under surveillance when such operations have proved fruitless?

Under the legislation as it stands, there are certain circumstances in which an individual has no right to know whether he or she has been under surveillance. Is Gordon Jackson content with that situation, or would he like such a right to be included?

I take slight offence at the suggestion that it is rash and raises false expectations to seek to re-establish a rail link in the Borders. For me and others campaigning on this issue, this is a matter of vision, justice and economic necessity. As has been stated, there is money around to fund the line. First of all—rather like at the Oscars—I want to thank some people for getting the debate this far. The members of the cross-party group on Borders rail made me their convener and, although some minor party differences still exist, most differences have been put aside as we fight in common cause. I thank Alex Johnstone and the Rural Affairs Committee for securing this debate. Alex knows that I tried to make the motion tougher; however, it will suffice. Furthermore, I appreciate the support of the Equal Opportunities Committee, the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, the Transport and the Environment Committee and the Enterprise and Lifelong  Learning Committee, all of which wanted this debate. In particular, I praise John McAllion and the other members of the Public Petitions Committee. John fights for that committee's special democratic role in the Parliament. That committee alone may have given 20,000 Borderers a voice in demanding a return of the railway that was axed by Beeching in very dubious circumstances and with devastating and continuing consequences for the economic and social well-being of the entire Borders area. John took the Public Petitions Committee to Galashiels to hear presentations of passion and clarity from petitioners of all ages before a packed gallery. Before that, the individual members of the Campaign for Borders Rail stood for months on end on street corners and in supermarkets gathering the petition's 20,000 signatures. We should also remember the campaigners on this issue over the decades. Even today, the small public gallery here is filled with Borderers, many of whom left their homes before six o'clock this morning to hear what Ms Boyack and the Executive intend to do. What does the Executive intend to do? The case for the return of a Borders rail link is irrefutable. We need only compare and contrast the area with similar areas in Scotland. For example, the Scottish Highlands has 208,000 people and 57 railway stations; the Borders has 106,000 people without a metre of track, no railway stations, no ferries and no airports. Road links in the Borders are inadequate and tortuous; even if they were suitable for dualling—which they are not—such improvements would be more costly than a rail link. In an area where people without cars are almost disconnected, only one in three people own one and, for car owners, rural petrol prices are punitive. This is not solely a transport issue; transport routes are the arteries where the life-blood of economic and social well-being flows. Alex Neil will deal with some of the social aspects; I want to headline some of the economic realities. The main industries in the Borders are textiles, farming, electronics and tourism. The chamber hardly needs reminding of the 2,000 jobs lost in textile manufacturing in the past three years alone; of the drastic fall in farm incomes; and of the ruthless closure of Viasystems, with the loss of 1,000 jobs. As a result, the Borders has suffered a population loss of young people in an area with the highest percentage of older people in Scotland. Furthermore, it now has the lowest average weekly income, which is £50 under the Scottish national average. The Scott Wilson report estimated that 900 jobs could be created simply by making a line from Edinburgh to Tweedbank. The cost of investment  for that distance would be £73 million. For an extra £20 million plus, we could reconnect the Borders to the UK. That south link is essential, not optional. Together with a branch towards Kielder, the line could carry freight with the option of having a passenger service. Ms Boyack has conceded that Scott Wilson's report says that the line could be reinstated in a relatively straightforward manner. That would also clear heavy transport lorries off small country lanes, which would end the devastating effect that they have on the villages that they go through. The SNP has long been committed to the creation of a link from Edinburgh to Carlisle. I have already given the reasons for that commitment. Only by opening the entire route can the Borders be connected to the markets of Scotland and England. The benefits of a Borders rail link would be felt in Dumfriesshire. There would also be benefits to the city of Edinburgh with its crowded suburbs. The link would breathe life into the Borders and give breathing space to Edinburgh by alleviating congestion and opening expansion to the south. Think of the transformation that Fife has undergone in the decades since the Forth road bridge opened. Just as Perthshire and Fife were disconnected from the capital by the Forth, so has the Borders been disconnected by the loss of rail. Jobs and people have flowed both ways between the city and the kingdom. Why has a similar flow not happened with the areas south of the city, to Galashiels and beyond? It is estimated that a rail journey from Galashiels to the heart of the capital would take only 45 minutes. There is the potential not only for economic expansion and the dispersal of jobs but for the dispersal of population. People could live in a beautiful rural environment and counteract the effects of the aging population. Young people could live in the Borders and commute if they needed to. A reconnected Borders would also be able to tap into tourist potential. Day trippers on rail could rule, okay. I will address some words to Jack McConnell. Some £60 million went on consultancy fees for the modernising of London rail, £250 million was spent on the Manchester metro and £1,250 million was spent on London's Jubilee line. Given the benefits to Scotland and the Borders of the investment of £100 million, the rail link is cheap at the price. Indeed, when did a road ever have to pay its way commercially? Reopening the Borders railway line is necessary, but the petitioners expect more of the Parliament than good wishes, and so do I. Many years ago, I stood in the rain that usually accompanies street campaigning with an earlier petition for a Borders railway line. Many people signed, but all said the same thing: "Lassie, I'll  sign, but it will never happen." In my members' debate last year, we debated the case for a Borders railway. Last week in this chamber, we debated another glossy Executive brochure, "Rural Scotland: A New Approach", which is all about a commitment to the rural economy. I said then, and I say now, that the Executive should prove that it is capable of more than gloss and call on the strategic rail authority to provide the necessary funding. This is a question of vision and hard cash. One vision is a terminus at Galashiels, trains with Borders rail livery, cycleways parallel to the track, bridle paths, local industries flourishing alongside the line, villages in which the schools remain open because families live there and a community at last repaid long-overdue debts accrued in the time from the closure of the railway to the closure of Viasystems. That would be a tangible achievement that would last for centuries. It might not be the rail that Jack would build, but it would be the rail that this Parliament would build. Most important, it would be a lasting testament to the tenacity of the Borders people.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive has issued any guidance about age discrimination to the public bodies for which it has responsibility. (S1F-339)

As the minister is aware, 61,000 people in Scotland are victims of dementia. Unlike any other group, they are liable for their nursing costs if they are treated in a residential or nursing home. My question is in two parts. With respect, I would be pleased to receive a clear and direct answer to each. Part one: does the acting First Minister accept that compelling older people to sell their homes to meet that liability is a brutal and indefensible example of age discrimination? Part two: will he support the principles of my dementia bill, which would outlaw the practice at the stroke of a ministerial pen?

There is nothing in it.

And a railway.

I am afraid that I am rather cynical when faced with another shiny, new brochure. I say to Mike Rumbles: the brochure contains an awful lot of rhetoric and not a lot of specifics. Perhaps Mike Rumbles has a different copy, which has the Liberal Democrats' input, rather than a rehash of the Labour party's 1997 document. I will try to be fair and see whether, a year down the road, the principles in the brochure match the reality. I have no problem with the Executive's statement, on page 5, that in rural areas it is supporting "employers and communities to stimulate local and national economic success." However, to do that, there needs to be a healthy infrastructure and supported and integrated services. We would not dispute that. I will test what has been stated. I will start small and move big. Rural schools, which are at the heart of the success of communities, are referred to on page 20. The Executive's statement is, to say the least, disappointing. It simply reiterates: "From time to time it is necessary for local authorities to review whether the network of rural schools in their areas continues to serve modern needs." The report goes on to say that consultation must take place "to ensure that the . . . issues relating to the closure proposal are fully aired and taken into account." So what? We want leadership in the promotion of the continuance of small rural schools, because that is how we get generations to continue in villages.

The member is being unfair: I welcome anything that helps rural schools to stay open. The fact is that the Public Petitions Committee receives petitions from parents of children at schools that are perpetually threatened with closure. Of course I welcome the steps, but I also want leadership. I want more: I want the Executive to say that it is committed to this.

No, I want to move on. Members can no doubt raise the issue later. I want to talk about post offices. I am glad that there has been a reappraisal of the attitude towards rural post offices, which are at the heart of rural communities. They sustain the grocer's shop and the area. Once those key things go from a small village—I should know because I lived in a village for 15 years—the community dies on its feet and young families move out. Health and community care, too, is essential in sustaining rural communities. As rural communities have more than the average of the older population, the demands on social work departments are sometimes way beyond their means. Again I refer to my experience on the Public Petitions Committee. We constantly receive petitions from rural areas; we have received petitions from pensioners in Irvine and from Oban because services for the elderly are being removed. We are not being fair to the people who have lived their lives in those areas and who find that they do have the facilities to stay in their own community. There have also been problems in the Borders and East Lothian, where there have been closures of residential homes because social work departments do not have the money to make placements. I will say more on that later, at question time. According to the Executive's figures, investment in Scotland's trunk roads and motorways in 1998 to 2000 will amount to £23 million. In 2000-01, £14 million will be invested and in 2001-02 the figure will be £17 million. We do not have many motorways or trunk roads. In fact, the Executive gets round the problem in the Borders by detrunking the A7 so that the local authority has to pay. I would never get up to speak without mentioning railway lines. I am grateful to Alex Johnstone for putting the Borders rail link on the agenda. The document says: "Other rural areas have lost their link with the rail network, but, as the Borders railway feasibility study shows, the case for reinstatement can be investigated against the  background of changing patterns of travel." So what? There has been no leadership, commitment or money. Last week, I made the point that for £63 million, 700 jobs were created in Fife; £73 million in the Scottish Borders would create 900 jobs. That is the test of a new approach to rural Scotland.

rose—

I shall be extremely brief. I commend Dorothy-Grace Elder for lodging the motion. I associate myself with the remarks of my fellow members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee; there are six of us here. The most compelling evidence that we heard about slopping out came from prison officers, who made it plain that the practice was degrading for prisoners and for them, as has already been said. Taking £13 million out of the Scottish Prison Service budget has had an impact on the slopping-out timetable. There is no longer additional space for displaced prisoners to go to while cells are being modernised. It is not simply a matter of capital. It is essential for a civilised society, and a civilised Scotland, that slopping out is ended even sooner than the original target, and certainly not later. I urge the Executive to address the matter again.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has for capital investment in rural economies in the current year. (S1O-1723)

I am obliged to the minister for his reply. I am sure that everyone welcomes capital investment, wherever it occurs. I welcome, for example, the £63 million investment in Motorola in Fife, to secure 700 jobs. Is the minister aware that the Borders rail feasibility study predicts 900 jobs for a £73 million capital  investment on track and so on? Will he therefore apply the Motorola principle—if I may call it that—and give a like capital commitment to Borders rail today?

rose—

I am sorry that Iain Gray has left the chamber, as I intend to make him an offer that he cannot refuse. Perhaps he will read about it later. First, I welcome the comments about an application by Relatives Association Scotland being considered. I adhere to what Sylvia Jackson said: they were smashing people, who deserve funds. Secondly, I also welcome—this is becoming a habit—the Scottish commission for the regulation of care. I hope that Iain Gray will take on board my concerns regarding mandatory police checks for those who care for the elderly, and will set about implementing that by establishing an official, regulated and approved carers register. Thirdly, I fully endorse everything that Nora Radcliffe said about the young carers, although that issue is not within my remit. They are lovely people who deserve all the assistance that the Parliament can give them. I now move on to my main comments. Iain Gray—poor lad, he is not here to hear this—has  his heart in the right place, but we should be using our heads. I cannot agree with the last part of his motion, which reads: "in a Scotland where everyone matters." That simply is not the case for the 61,000 sufferers of dementia and, more important, the carers who look after them. He knows where I am coming from: I am again pressing for the Executive to take on board changes in the regulations and rules for the payment of personal care for the elderly. On the anniversary of the Sutherland report, Alzheimer Scotland said: "The current system is viewed as fundamentally unfair because dementia is not treated on a par with other chronic illnesses such as cancer and heart disease under the NHS. People with dementia are means-tested for many essential services to meet their needs and many have to forfeit their house to meet care costs." That is a shame on all of us. Further on that specific aspect of the Sutherland report, I refer to Carers National Association Scotland, which represents 500,000 carers. It says that implementation of the proposal—that is, the payment of personal care from the NHS budget—would reduce the confusion over charging for care, reduce the poverty caused by charging for care, increase carers' security in old age, and improve joint working between health and social work departments by removing disagreements over who should pay for services. We know that that is the reality. Finally, I come to my offer that Iain Gray cannot refuse—my proposed bill, entitled the "Dementia and Related Illnesses of Old Age (Care) (Scotland) Bill". Section 2(2) covers the apportioning of costs for the recipients of long-term care. Subsection (4) states:  "The costs attributable to personal care costs shall be paid from the Scottish Consolidated Fund." Subsection (5) states: "This section shall apply notwithstanding the location of delivery of personal care." How would we pay for that care? I have a wee idea. The Government will receive £22 billion from the sale of mobile phone licences, Scotland's share of which will be £2.2 billion. The cost of providing care, under the bill, would be £100 million, which is cheap at the price. Iain Gray was looking for a vision—here is that vision. If the Scottish Parliament delivers that, he can take the credit—I do not care, as long as the job gets done.

Can the minister tell us whether we know who owns what percentage of land in Scotland?

I want to refer back to what Tom McCabe said on the benefits of the union. I want to put the benefits of the union for Scotland's pensioners to the test. There are a million people of pensionable age in Scotland, more than all the schoolchildren at primary and secondary school put together. The basic state pension, however, is only £66 for a single person and £106 for a couple. That places Scotland third from the bottom in Europe's pensions league. According to Age Concern statistics, 185,000 Scottish pensioners rely on income support, 70,000 already live in severe poverty and one in three lives in fuel poverty. I think that that makes my point. Ask any Scottish pensioner what he or she treasures most in life and will fight to retain, and the answer that will come uniformly and in one word is independence. Central to that independence is a basic state pension that  secures dignity and choice. However, I recall the scaremongering when we were campaigning for independence that pensioners would not get their pension the next day—scaremongering of the "The buses will not come the next day" type. Have their pensions been secured? No, they have not. Pensioners were vulnerable to persuasion then, but not any more. Grey power is alive and kicking back—kicking out against a 73p per week increase in the basic state pension. Shame. That is not enough for a cup of tea and a scone, let alone for paying for the increase in water charges. I could have used these quotations instead of my speech—and Richard Simpson should not shake his head. This is Labour's pre-election pledge to pensioners. It is headed: "The Tories have betrayed . . . pensioners." That is from Tony Blair, John Prescott, Harriet Harman and Gordon Brown. It would be educational to read this unabridged, but I shall give members the flavour, with a few representative highlights. I quote: "Too many of today's older people do not enjoy security in their retirement." I quote: "Having paid tax all their working lives a whole generation now finds it cannot be sure of the national health service or the continuing care they have provided for others." I quote: "Millions of people face poverty in retirement—today's pensioners have lost £20 a week through the Government"— the Tory Government— "breaking the earnings link with pensions." That situation is being continued by the Labour party. Labour is continuing Tory policies and, courtesy of this Executive—

No. We should ask Strathclyde, Troon or Fife elderly forums what they have to say about that. Pensioner poverty and fuel poverty in an oil-rich Scotland: it should be an embarrassment to Labour members to defend what I would consider the indefensible, but I suspect that it is not. What could independence do? Look to Ireland: it is smaller than Scotland, with less by way of natural resources, yet the Irish Government has put in place a programme to secure a first-level pension of £80 a week by 2000. Ireland has a fuel allowance, which covers standing charges and so many free units of usage. It has a telephone rental  allowance, with 20 free calls in a two-month period. Ireland has a national travel concessionary scheme: all public transport is free and a substantial number of private operators, including—

I am sorry. I do not want to hear from George Lyon. Average male life expectancy is 74, yet in Ireland, everyone over 65—not just those who manage to reach 75—qualifies for a free television licence. No wonder Scotland's pensioners are angry and I am angry. Ireland, once mocked as the poor relation, puts the Executive to shame. What of an independent Scotland? The link between pensions and average earnings would be restored immediately. The minimum income guarantee would be universal.

The member can sit down. Independence would mean universal cold climate allowance of £9.20 a week for the five winter months. Standing charges would be a thing of the past and television licences would be free for all pensioners; longevity would not have to be guaranteed. A national concessionary fare scheme would be introduced, with through-ticketing and, at last, Sir Stewart Sutherland could toast the implementation of his report. Independence is the solution. It is what Scotland's pensioners fight for day in and day out. It is time that the Parliament, which grandly calls itself Scottish, demonstrated the same spirit and did the same.

Age Concern statistics reveal that 70,000 Scottish pensioners live in severe poverty. Will the member comment?

I will be brief, as we have talked long enough. I just wondered where the gentle Angus MacKay was. Perhaps he has had enough of feudal tenure. The bill is to be welcomed, but it is not radical enough for the Scottish National party. The issue of public interest will be revisited. Unfortunately, as Roseanna Cunningham said, the opportunity to introduce a comprehensive land register for Scotland has been missed. We must address that issue, so that, as Roseanna rightly said, we know who owns Scotland. Finally, on agricultural communities, I hope that  the minister will return to part 4 of the bill, which he says will be deferred. I took against the minister on a small point. There are problems with section 16; there is a conflict and the minister should take the opportunity to sort it out.

I am a bit confused by all the amendments. I do not support Brian Monteith's amendments, partly on the basis of the former superior's rights in retention. However, I have sympathy with the arguments put forward at committee about agricultural land. I should take this opportunity to say that I will not move amendment 29. There is a specific reason for that: on rereading the section, I can see that, by the definition of land in that section, it would be referring to the land that is the dominant tenement. That would be increasing the former superior's rights. I was caught out myself by that. I am content that a later amendment will deal with the problem of the arbitrary nature of the 100 m rule, which was addressed by Maureen Macmillan. We all tried—including, to be fair, the Executive—to think of a way round this. Fergus Ewing's solution is the one that probably gets closest, because it simply does away with an arbitrary distance and uses other tests. That is a more proper way to proceed.

I will not move amendment 29 because of the technical definition of land, which refers to the dominant tenement in this section.

That does not pertain for damages, but what about expenses that would accompany an order of the court? Substantial expenses may be awarded. Has the Executive considered that and, if so, what view has been  taken? Are there ECHR implications?

I do not think that that assists us with the decree of expenses. The section reads: "any decree . . . pronounced in proceedings for such enforcement". A decree for expenses would be in those  proceedings and deemed to be reduced. I do not think that we can detach the decree for expenses from the judgment itself.

I support Phil Gallie's amendment, because we all know the dangers of retrospective legislation. For example, someone who has reached the stage of receiving a judgment and an award of expenses and of having the account taxed will incur considerable expense if the decree is reduced. Will someone in such a situation receive any compensation? As the issue might have ECHR implications, I seek the minister's assurance that he has considered that possibility.

I will try to be brief, because I see members keeling over and eyes glazing as we get into the minutiae of this issue. After the Justice and Home Affairs Committee debated the bill in April, I received a helpful letter from Angus MacKay, in which he advised that the Executive's amendment was for the "avoidance of doubt". That is the problem—there is still doubt. It is buried in the second paragraph of his letter, in which he states: "The general approach of the Bill is to treat the Crown like any other feudal superior." There is the rub: the Crown is not like any other feudal superior, but is the ultimate superior. That means that we are dealing with a one-off, unique position. There has been talk of the opinion that was given by Professor Rennie, but—I do not know whether it is in the red corner or the blue corner—I have Professor Gretton. I get quite excited about this stuff, but professors of conveyancing can knock even me into a glazed state. In the "Stair  Memorial Encyclopedia", Professor Gretton states "in feudalism, landownership and sovereignty coincided, so that the Crown sovereignty over Scotland and its ultimate tenurial superiority were the same thing, identical concept." It is not correct to say that we are dealing with two clearly separate things—sovereign rights or regalia, and superior rights. We need to deal with the role of the Crown as ultimate superior. I do not see why the Executive has difficulty with our amendment. The Executive's amendment states the obvious rights of the Crown. I confess that I cannot come up with a concrete example, but I know that there is a public interest for the Crown, as represented not by the monarch but by the Parliament and, ultimately, by the Executive. Amendment 37 makes it plain that those superior rights that are feudal—to charge feuduty, to create a new feudal estate and to enforce a feudal burden—are abolished for the ultimate superior. However, it continues "nothing in this Act shall be taken to supersede or impair any other property rights or interests held by virtue of the ultimate superiority of the Crown". The key word is ultimate. The Crown was once like God over land, with all its rights rolled up into one power. When we abolish feudal superiority, we must ensure that we do not abolish the Crown's ability to intervene on behalf of the public interest. I cannot understand why the Executive finds it difficult to accept the amendments, which reserve to the Parliament a right to represent and enforce the public interest.

The best laid plans of mice and men, Deputy Presiding Officer—on a point of order. I wrote to Sir David Steel on this matter, which relates to amendments that are submitted but rejected as inadmissible. I accept the position under the standing orders, but seek your guidance on the procedures for changing the standing orders so that amendments that are put forward and rejected are published, with the reasons for the rejection, and on whether the Procedures Committee might consider a method whereby, if the member wants to press on with the amendment, it can be put to the chamber. I accept the ruling under the standing orders, but there is room for change.

Will Lyndsay McIntosh give way?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive has made any representations  to the BBC, ITV and the Scottish Media Group regarding the coverage of the Scottish Parliament. (S1F-274)

I assure the First Minister that I am quite happy with my bit part for the time being. My concern is poor coverage. I hasten to add that that is not the fault of political journalists—I know what side my bread is buttered on. I am concerned about restricted formats and schedules. The habits of Westminster die hard. A serious point, perhaps related, is the decrease in voter turnout. Given that the committees are the engine room of this Parliament and that the Parliament is committed to openness and accountability, I ask the First Minister to make appropriate representations to ensure that coverage reflects our committee work. I understand that technology and airtime is available on Scottish Television and Grampian Television. Can he advise us whether the Executive is pursuing the setting up of a public parliamentary channel so that the committees, which are developing robust and cheerful personalities, can be shown in the raw?

Suicide is not an individual matter, but a matter for society. Two disparate groups have high suicide rates: Scottish farmers and people on remand. The simple reason for the high suicide rate for Scottish farmers is financial pressures. I know that every member would want to help, so we must address the real crisis in farming. The very nature of farmers' work means that they are isolated, although they have come from generations of farmers who were used to being proud and isolated. The second group is prisoners on remand. We know from Clive Fairweather's report that the current system is dreadful and that remand prisoners are housed in the worst conditions. We know that just under 50 per cent of remand prisoners end up with no conviction, but the most vulnerable among that group of prisoners are the ones who take their own lives. Cornton Vale has made huge improvements under Kate Donegan, and I hope that Iain Gray and Jim Wallace will consider improving remand conditions so that we can remove those people from the suicide chain.

I shall. I know an elephant when I see one and I know a shambles when I see one. This is not an elephant—the Holyrood project is a shambles. Sir David Steel suggested named rooms—I know crisis management when I see it. For the first time—courtesy of the Spencely report—the Parliament has the mistakes, mismanagement and misleading laid bare before it. The table at paragraph 4.2.3 provides us with a rich mine of information. Nugget one is the figure of £49.53 million in the first column, above which there is nothing—no figure for Queensberry House, a catalogue of errors if ever there was one. Are Simpson and Brown at the other end of a writ? No. Can we see that survey? No. Does Spencely think that we should go ahead with Queensberry House? No. He couches it in very careful words, but in paragraph 6.7.1 he says: "In my opinion, the expenditure on Queensberry House, at an estimated £10-£11 million, is not value for money when compared with the benefit gained." He goes on to say that we would end up with a 21 st century building, which would be nothing like the listed building. In the table at paragraph 4.2.3, there is not even  a reference to an MSP block. We are not talking about changing sizes—we are talking about a whole area that did not exist. Where were we going to work from—tents on Arthur's seat? That is what I call misleading, to say the very least. I accept the First Minister's explanation that he was told about the extra costs on top of the £109 million figure of June last year, but I want to know why he did not ask whether the figures that he had been given represented the worst possible scenario and whether there was anything that he ought to know. Here is the second nugget. In the first column of the table at paragraph 4.2.3, there is something called "Design risk assessment". That is a funny thing to find—it means the client changing their mind all the time. So many millions have to be built in for that. That is the important issue in this debate, because we do not yet have an agreed scheme design. I refer members to paragraph 5.4 of the report, where Spencely makes a key point: "It is clearly imperative that the Brief is frozen now and that the Design Team proceeds immediately to produce a Scheme Design including a cost plan to a Brief and a budget approved by the Client, so that approval may be given to proceed with the Project by 8 June 2000". We do not have an agreed design, so we do not have a budget that can be approved. To me, those are basic contractual requirements. It is as obvious to me as the effects of the proverbial elephant in the proverbial china shop that to sign up to the motion that is before us today would be to sign a blank cheque for a building without an agreed design. That might be fine if that blank cheque were not being drawn from the block grant. As Tommy Sheridan said, it is additional and indeterminate money, from the pockets of such people—

That is rich from Des McNulty, who never gives way to anybody. We are talking about money from pockets of the auxiliary nurse on £140 per week take-home pay and from the resources that would allow the transfer of elderly patients who are stuck in hospitals because there are no funds in the social work budgets to pay for residential care. The First Minister may be prepared to do that, but I am not. At last, in the Spencely report, we have a glimpse of that famous transparency and accountability. Let us see the whole picture. Let us see the finalised costs of the Holyrood project and comparisons with alternatives. It is a simple plea. We need complete information. Duncan McNeil has left the chamber but, for his sake, let me make it plain that I am not whipped. I have no hidden agenda. If Holyrood comes up tops, I will go for it,  but let common sense—which has not featured so far—prevail. Let us stop saving face and save some millions.

Will the member give way?

I refer the minister to the Edinburgh Evening News of 27 March, which announced that a 50 ft by 50 ft hole has opened up in the proposed route for the A701. It is believed to be redundant mineworkings or an old landfill site. Will the minister explain what happened to the 447 objections lodged against the plans for the road, which drew attention to such problems in advance? Now that this hole has appeared, will she halt the development, pending a public inquiry, or will she merely be looking into it?

I will be very brief. This has been a learning curve, particularly in relation to the interaction between the committees and the Executive. I am delighted by how much the Executive took on board and the extent to which it accepted cross-party amendments in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. The incorporation of international law—the Hague convention—puts Scotland ahead of Westminster, which cannot be bad.

I will be brief, because I agree with almost everything that Pauline McNeill has said. I am not attributing this to Lyndsay McIntosh, but there has been mischief in the press portrayals of the bill as some kind of licence to kill. The bill is excellent in many ways. There are difficult sections, which have been dealt with at length. I thank Malcolm Chisholm for his comments at the recent council on aging, when he mentioned the endeavours of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee to deal with complex issues. I do not think that the amendment is necessary. The principles of the bill are to act to the benefit of the incapable adult. Section 44 states that "'medical treatment' includes any procedure or treatment designed to safeguard or promote physical or mental health." That is the test. There is also a duty of care on the medical practitioners to follow the Hippocratic oath and act in the best interest of their patients. We should emphasise that. The amendment would be a hostage to fortune and a sop to those who are misrepresenting the purpose of the bill.

I endorse everything Gordon Jackson and Dr Richard Simpson have said. We considered the matter long and hard. I know what the stage 1 report says, but subsequent evidence was taken. In the interests of the welfare attorney, I now support section 47 as it stands, supplemented by the Executive amendments, and I oppose amendments 138 and 139. It must be extremely difficult for a welfare attorney who has spent years looking after somebody to be put in a crisis in which they are asked to make life and death decisions. The bill assists the welfare attorney when there is a conflict of opinion. The person who loves somebody dearly may or may not be thinking clearly at the time, and they may need help. It is important that an independent arbiter from the Mental Welfare Commission should be made available to assist the welfare attorney in their decisions. The arbiter would not be in the same position as the capable adult. In her evidence, Sheila McLean said that capable adults can make daft decisions about their health—we make them all the time. However, when a person is a proxy, he or she is acting in good faith for the incapable adult, and that is a terrible weight on his or her shoulders. That is also why I think written reasons for not agreeing to treatment or otherwise are a very bad idea. What is the point in them? The presumption is that the person is acting in good faith. The reasons may be wrong, but they are good faith reasons. Section 47 strengthens the position of the welfare attorney. I have come to that decision after taking a long hard look at it and the evidence that we have received. I support what Gordon Jackson, Richard Simpson and Ben Wallace have said.

The last thing anyone in such circumstances wants to do is go to court to battle it out. That is why I think the solution is to have an independent arbiter, sent by the Mental Welfare Commission. That would provide a better, faster and kinder route to resolving conflicts.

Just to show that there is no whip, I want to speak in support of amendment 129 and against amendment 145. In the evidence that was given by Sheila McLean, it was apparent that an act could be a commission or an omission, in professional terms. Amendment 129 clarifies the situation, but amendment 145 is unnecessary. Section 1(2) states: "There shall be no intervention . . . unless . . . the intervention will benefit the adult". Section 44(2) relates to the definition of medical treatment, which the minister has referred to as including hydration and nutrition by artificial means. The definition of medical treatment is: "any procedure or treatment designed to safeguard or promote physical or mental health." The bill says what Michael Matheson is trying to add to it—that intervention, by definition, must be of benefit, and that benefit must be the promotion of the physical or mental health of an adult. Therefore, I do not think that amendment 145 is necessary.

I, too, will speak against the amendment. I see where Phil Gallie is coming from with regard to brain injury or stroke and varying capacity, but the bill makes it clear that capacity is not an all-or-nothing thing, but can have varying degrees. Section 1(3) states that the "intervention shall be the least restrictive option in relation to the freedom of the adult", and section 1(4)(a) refers to "the present and past wishes and feelings of the adult, so far as they can be ascertained by any means". Therefore, if the condition of the incapable adult—I use that term broadly—changes, the "present and past wishes" will be ascertained in a different manner. I think that that provides sufficient flexibility. Phil Gallie might like to take on board the fact that if there were a challenge to capacity at any time, that would be a matter for the courts. The question whether someone has capacity—and the degree of that capacity—is a legal matter. Further to my first point, the bill is structured to have the flexibility to deal with varying levels of capacity as best as can be ascertained. The amendment confuses the matter.

Labour did not win.

First, I wish to make it clear that I am for independence, but I say to Mr Henry that I want this Parliament to work, although I want it to be honest about itself. I want it to underline its financial inadequacies, which will become apparent to the Scottish people three years down the road. They have high expectations that the social infrastructure of Scotland will be improved three years down the line, but with the money that we have available it is being dishonest to say that the social infrastructure can in any meaningful way be improved. I am going to apply a test to that. Scottish pensioners post-war saw, from their tax payments and their national insurance contributions, the beginning of the welfare state. That was a wonderful innovation, which I and many other working-class people benefited from. The hope was that, as the decades went on, the welfare state would be enhanced, but it has not been enhanced. Not only did we have a Conservative Government dismantling the best of the welfare state, but we have watched new Labour continuing that process. For Miss Goldie to be congratulating Ms Alexander on the policies and the financing that the Government is undertaking must send a  shiver down the spine of many old Labour supporters.

Let me get on a little bit first. Let us look at the reality on the ground, because I sit through many speeches in here and I wonder what Scotland we are talking about when it is compared with the Scotland for pensioners that is outside. My mother waited two years for a hip replacement operation. She ended up being given an oxygen mask and being transferred to Edinburgh royal infirmary, where she was put in Dickensian conditions in a congested corridor, which was an insult to all the patients who were there and to the staff. I know that the minister will come back with a comment about the need for more hospitals, but the Executive is financing that in the wrong way. It is common sense that we need more hospitals—everybody knows that—but the problem is the way in which the Executive is going about it. My mother called that hospital a dump. It was. Good for her: 78 years old and still fighting. The most important concern of old people is that they stay in their own homes.

Mr McNeil would admit that I contribute to this Parliament and its committees in a constructive manner. I am simply speaking up for the people outside and about the reality out there. I want things to change for them as much as anyone else does, including those in other parties, but I am being honest about the inadequacies that exist.

Why should I not say what the truth is outside? I shall proceed. The fear of many older people is that they cannot stay in their own homes. There are simple measures to allow them to stay in their own homes. They are called aids and adaptations in the Sutherland report on long-term care for the elderly. However, they would require capital from local authorities. If older people apply to have a downstairs shower or a downstairs toilet or a ramp, there is no money for it. That small amount of money would allow people to stay in their homes before the predictable fall that leads them into hospital and physical and psychological decline. That is the truth. It is not  girning; it is holding this Parliament, and more important, the Labour-Liberal Democrat Executive, to account. The Executive is sitting on the Sutherland report. It has done nothing with it. I keep asking questions, as does Sir Stewart Sutherland. The report is from the royal commission that was set up by the Labour Government at Westminster. There are homeless elderly people. They are a hidden statistic, and it is convenient that that statistic remains hidden.

There are so many areas on which older people could put the Executive right, such as the reality on Scotland's streets and pavements—pavements that are a danger to walk on if you are older and streets that have potholes. How to avoid the potholes in the city streets should be part of the driving test. And what of Ayr? The town is not famous only for "Honest men and bonnie lasses", but for grey power—the Labour-Liberal Democrat defeat is writ large on the walls of Carrick Street halls. If, in three years' time, the Government has not started to deliver, it will suffer another defeat.

As the minister might be aware, I have lodged a bill on this very issue. I refer him to a letter from Sir Stewart Sutherland, in which he says on the subject of the bill: "You put the issue very well and have a very precise question to ask. Let's hope somebody can give a good answer to it!" Will the minister support my bill?

Like many members, I welcome the recognition of the status of manufacturing. However, I could do without another shiny brochure. Before I can settle down, I must get a few comments about the prose out of my system. Page 13 of the document states: "The internet and digital technologies are radically changing the ways in which we do business." On page 14 we find the statement: "For Scottish manufacturers to be successful they have to be competitive." Well, well—there is so much to learn, so much that I did not already know. From that we move on to the sort of managerial speak that appears to have import but is, in fact, weightless and obfuscating. On page 34 we find the heading, "What will a successful UK manufacturing industry look like in 2020?", but what does "in many instances, has entirety of value stream co-located in the UK" mean? I would like answers on a postcard. I can understand fairly intricate prose, pleadings and litigation—even B & Q assembly instructions—but I cannot understand that. Let us talk straight for a change—let us have deeds that match words. Let us apply some tests to the Borders economy to show that manufacturing matters. Page 26 of the document talks about ensuring a level playing field for Scottish manufacturers relative to their competitors elsewhere in the UK. I know what the minister said about the Continental Tyre Group, but roll up Via Systems. After buying up two Borders plants, it bought a plant in the north-east that already had access to regional selective assistance and applied to inherit the £12 million-plus grant. The company then closed down its Borders plants and transferred work to the north-east. Eighteen months later, it held the local authority and local enterprise company to ransom by refusing to sell a prime, but now derelict, Galashiels site. That is bare-faced robbery; it seems to be okay for people to get away with the loot. Has there been an inquiry at any time into the scandal and the role of the Department of Trade and Industry? Of course not. After an internal investigation—the results of which were not disclosed—the DTI said that everything was in order. It is good if people can get away with policing themselves. Never mind—the Executive sent down Lord Macdonald, a task force and, of course, promises. Enter the ubiquitous promised  saviour—the call centre. Scottish Borders Enterprise invested £500,000 to refurbish the premises in anticipation of one starting up. A further £70,000 was spent on retraining potential employees and on continual training, so that the prospective operators did not forget the valuable skills that they had been trained in—answering the phone. Are there now banks of telephones on the site? No—no call centre has been set up and there is none on the immediate horizon. In answer to my question S1W-4523, the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning said that Locate in Scotland had announced 60 jobs. That is true. They were announced, but they are not there—lost in the post. According to that answer, Locate in Scotland has announced another 140 jobs in the Borders for the period from 1996 to 1999. That speaks for itself. During the same period, 1,000 Via Systems jobs and 2,000 textiles jobs went. I think that that is called a debit balance—but I am no economist. Recently I asked the First Minister a supplementary question about whether he could guarantee that Pringle of Scotland will still be in production in the Borders three years hence, and whether there was a funded strategy to reinvigorate the textiles industry, but answer of substance came there none. What examples are there of plans to develop a high-quality and sustainable Borders knitwear industry? What initiatives have been taken to raise the level of average income in the Borders above the current rate, which is the lowest in Scotland—£50 per week below the average? The source for that figure is another big glossy brochure—"Scottish Economic Report: January 2000". Why was there a delay in awarding regional selective assistance? Page 28 of "Created in Scotland" states: "Once the new Assisted Areas map is settled, details of a new initiative for grants of up to £1,000 will be announced." Can the minister confirm that there has been a delay, because the maps that were submitted were based on the old ward boundaries and had to be resubmitted, with the result that electronic companies such as Signum Circuits in Selkirk are now delaying expansion? I call on the minister to translate this production and to tell me his way ahead for the Scottish Borders—a humble sheet of A4, one-sided, will do.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to ensure the physical protection of elderly people in society. (S1O-1262)

Does the minister agree that it is a great concern that police checks should not be mandatory for people who care for the elderly either in a paid or voluntary capacity and either in a residential or domestic setting? Will he give a commitment to remedy that frightening deficiency in the system and, at the same time, establish a national carers register?

On a point of order. I wrote to you to ask whether your remarks yesterday referred to comments that I made in debate. Did they?

It is not a problem. I think that I was following the second of your two examples, as the civil servant whom I named was attending a public meeting. As I named other people who attended that meeting, I thought it was appropriate to name him as well.

I am terribly glad that Kenny MacAskill spoke up for lawyers; I always feel less popular than a traffic warden. Furthermore, I should tell Lyndsay McIntosh that, as far as I can gather, my plumber also charges by the minute. I will begin with a general view of the ECHR. As Roseanna Cunningham rightly said, the SNP thoroughly welcomes its incorporation into Scots law. It makes the protection of human rights an international responsibility and, as such, sets Scotland in its historical place as an internationalist nation. There have been problems with certain aspects of the ECHR. For example, article 6, which concerns the right to a fair trial, has caused the difficulties with the appointment of sheriffs. We have also raised the problem of the age of criminal responsibility invading the children's panels, which Scott Barrie quite rightly highlighted as one of the credits to the Scottish judicial system. Article 8, which concerns respect for people's private and family life, home and correspondence, impacts on surveillance, whether by the police or by others. Furthermore, warrant sales might be in breach of article 1 of the first protocol of the convention, which concerns the right to peaceful enjoyment of possessions. Gordon Jackson asked us to step aside and not agree that Scotland had been used as a guinea pig in the application of the ECHR. Although I do not want to overwhelm my summing-up by pointing out the Executive's lack of preparation, it is disingenuous to say that every step had been taken to avoid any likely impact of the convention. Perhaps Gordon has read the legal advice that I have constantly called for.  On 17 February, in the debate on the appointment of Mr Boyd as Lord Advocate, the First Minister said: "Of course, there have been problems with the introduction of the European convention on human rights. In a sense—and I hope that this will not be misinterpreted—the point of introducing it was to bring about change." Fine, but he went on to say: "I say this quite genuinely: taking the children's panel issue as an example, I am not sure how challenges in the court can be guarded against. That cannot be done. Cases must be tested in the courts." The trouble is that we felt that everything was being tested in the courts and that advance steps were not taken on certain issues to protect against such a situation. It is all very well to say that most cases failed in the courts; the major cases did not. Temporary sheriffs became a major issue, as did the Ruddle case. It is the quality, not the quantity, of the problems that is important. I have asked ministers again and again to produce the legal advice that was given on these cases and, by doing so, to silence the chamber. As with the implications of the Cubie committee report south of the border, we are being asked to take these matters on trust. I have still not received answers to questions on whether European Community law prevents up-front payment of tuition fees for Scottish students south of the border, or on the effect of the ECHR on Scottish students who had to pay such fees. I am quite open to persuasion on those issues. In the debate on law officer appointments on 17 February, the First Minister also said: "I want to make clear the fact that examination of the problems of judicial appointments is something to which we are committed. We have made that clear; it is in the partnership document".— [ Official Report , 17 February 2000; Vol 4, c 1256-58.]  At a meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee in September attended by the Deputy First Minister, there was a commitment to consider an independent commission for the appointment of judges. It is now March and we are still only thinking about and considering the matter. We must also question the pace at which things are happening. Roseanna Cunningham raised difficulties with the age of criminal responsibility. We want the Executive's assurance that some advance investigation and research has been undertaken on this matter and that it will not happen in the face of a court case with all the human and judicial problems that that will involve. I will now consider some of Mr McLetchie's points. First, the replacement of temporary sheriffs in the criminal justice system does not have an  impact on only the accused; it affects victims and their families and civil cases. It also has a major impact on Scottish society and on the way Scots view their justice system. I have addressed the children's panel system, about which Professor Black has raised concerns. He is an eminent lawyer. Was his advice ever sought? What was his view—or the view of other academics for that matter—on the ECHR's impact on the various examples raised by Mr McLetchie? No doubt we will hear about that in the summing up. Pauline McNeill spoke about the quantity and quality of challenges, with which I have dealt. I want to mention sovereignty. Roseanna Cunningham said that the Parliament could be taken to court by individuals if it breaches the ECHR. That is quite right. The people are greater than any institution. The Deputy First Minister made a remark about the sovereignty of Westminster, but that is not the case. In 1953—I hope I have the right reference—in the case of MacCormick v the Lord Advocate, arbiter Lord President Cooper said that there was a distinction in Scotland in that sovereignty rests with the people not with the Parliament. Donald Dewar reaffirmed that point when he introduced the Scotland Bill to Westminster and the idea is continued historically in the claim of right. That leaves us with an interesting prospect. If this Parliament were to decide that it wanted Westminster to do something in the interests of the rights of the Scottish people—perhaps something to do with social security benefits, such as benefits for elderly people or to do with whether elderly people should pay for nursing care if they have dementia—and Westminster refused to do it, that would be a breach of rights and we could challenge Westminster for having breached the ECHR. That takes democracy to where it belongs. I suggest two cures for the problems faced by the Executive. First, a judicial appointments commission would separate the judiciary from the Executive at a stroke, which would remove many of the problems. The establishment of such a commission was in the manifestos of the Scottish National party and the Liberal Democrats. It is imminent and necessary. The establishment of a human rights commission would be another cure, as we state in our amendment. Hugh Henry is not here, but he wanted to know what such a commission would do. Other members have addressed that question, but some of the most relevant points are that it would be a statutory body with appropriate powers and resources, appointed by the Executive and—I stress this—the Scottish Parliament. Such a commission should work in close co- operation with a committee of the Parliament. We suggest that that committee should be the Equal Opportunities Committee, not because the Justice and Home Affairs Committee shirks its responsibilities—it certainly does not—but because the Equal Opportunities Committee seems the most appropriate destination. The commission would work closely or jointly with the Commission for Racial Equality, the Equal Opportunities Commission and the proposed disability rights commission. Above all, a human rights commission should be accessible and accountable. We envisage that such a commission could investigate the causes of abuses and injustice and create pressure for reform. It would be an independent commission, addressing human rights. It would also address international obligations, in particular—in connection with the age of criminal responsibility—the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. I am concerned, as always, about the public perception of and confidence in this Parliament, although I put blame for the difficulties that we have faced in the press firmly at the feet of the Executive. The Executive has tested the loyalty of the Scottish people considerably through the way in which it presented reform of section 28, through the Holyrood debacle and now through the running sore of the application of the ECHR. The approach seems to be to find fingers-in-the-dyke solutions. By accepting our amendment and establishing a commission that would function as I have explained, Scotland's pioneering approach—my goodness, I am happy that Scotland is pioneering—to international legislation would be properly addressed and structured in the interests of the Parliament, of justice and, most important of all, of the individuals whose rights are properly and powerfully identified in this powerful little booklet, the convention. I support the amendment.

I accept what Des McNulty is saying and he is right that the emphasis should be on openness and accountability. However, I would like to draw his attention to the confidentiality requirements for committees in section 9.4, and ask him to consider those in tandem with the rather more stringent requirements for cross-party groups. Perhaps we can build in some flexibility for specific matters.

I want to direct my remarks to section 8.3 of the code of conduct, on cross-party group rules. I endeavoured to intimate to Mike Rumbles and Des McNulty the points that I would raise, which I have come across in my role as convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on Borders rail. On page 63 of the code of conduct, rule 4 concerns intimation of announcements in the group bulletin. When I first saw that rule, I raised my concern with colleagues that the public and others who had shown an initial interest in cross-party groups would be unaware of the bulletin and might not have access to the internet. I am pleased to see a bullet point on page 65, under  rule 12, which contains an attempted remedy—a flexible and sensible provision for intimation to be given to other parties by other means, as the committee considers proper. I raise that issue as I am keen on openness in all matters in this Parliament. I now move on to the problems that I have encountered in respect of rule 9, which requires that cross-party meetings "must be held in public." I want to make a distinction between the expression "must be held in public" and—words that might be there—"open to members of the public." That is a neat but important distinction. In its mandatory nature, that rule might sometimes pose a great impediment to the activities of cross-party groups. Yesterday, we held a meeting of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on Borders rail. The first request to attend the meeting that I received, outside the membership, was from Colin Robb of Citygate, a public relations firm that was looking for business. The next request that I received was from Dave Spence of the Scottish Executive, asking about the meeting. I had concerns about that, and contacted group members and advised them, as the convener, that I would move for that meeting to be held in private. I also intimated my intention to the two gentlemen concerned. The meeting was attended by Colin Robb and Dave Spence, with his notebook in hand, and, inter alia, by Ian Jenkins MSP, Murray Tosh MSP, Ian Brown—the director of technical services at Scottish Borders Council and chair of the Borders rail working party, who was deputising for the convener of Scottish Borders Council—Councillor John Ross Scott, another representative, and two representatives of the Campaign for Borders Rail.

I accept that and will move on. A motion was put on the basis that the rules had not been ratified by the Parliament and that I was not debarred from moving the motion, which was carried unanimously. I make the point that that was a cross-party, cross-group motion, which was not taken by me independently. Why did I move it? There were sensitive issues surrounding the  feasibility study that was on the agenda—issues such as funding and reference to commercial interests. Tactics were to be discussed, of pursuing the campaign through parliamentary and Westminster channels.

I am focusing on it.

My point is that the group would have been inhibited in discussing certain matters if the public had been there—not members of the general public, but the two gentlemen concerned and others who might have come with specific interests. I quite agree that cross-party groups should meet in public, but there might be occasions when issues are addressed that require to be discussed in private. That is a matter for the committee to decide. It is a serious issue, which I raise for discussion in the Standards Committee. I suggest the following amendments. The first sentence of rule 9 should be deleted and substituted with, "Cross-party group meetings shall be held in public unless a motion is put to the meeting that the proceedings, or part thereof, should be held in private, and such a motion receives not less than a majority vote." I propose that for discussion.

I accept that.

I shall draw my remarks to a close.

I knew that I could not move an amendment today, but there are practical difficulties that might not have been foreseen—and that might not be foreseen—by other cross-party groups. The Standards Committee's response is that it considers such issues in what is an open and fluid situation—the committee should consider the points that I have come across in practice. Perhaps the committee could address such points as they arise.

I will focus on the system of judicial appointments and on openness and accountability, which the minister mentioned, and independence, which he did not. Those are fine democratic words but in judicial appointments, the application of law and the disclosure of advice there has in practice been secrecy, minimal accountability and dependence on the patronage of the Executive. That must change. For example, there was the failure to disclose legal advice during the Ruddle affair and the failure to disclose the advice on the application and impact of the European convention on human rights, despite the many questions that I and others lodged. A third example is the application of European Community law to deferred student fees. It is purported that EC law excludes the right of Scottish students to deferred fees at institutions other than Scottish universities. The Parliament has been asked to accept that on trust. If the Executive is on solid ground, it should, in the interests of openness, present its evidence either in a paper or in debate. I wish to speak about the accountability of the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General. To whom do they owe a duty? I know that recent leaks have made this issue history, but I want to make it plain that it looks bad if the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General owe their jobs to the Executive, even if they are the right men for the job. The nature of their positions gives rise to a conflict of interests. On 31 August, in evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, the former Lord  Advocate said: "Another important role for me as Lord Advocate is that, with effect from 1 July, I am professionally responsible for the office of the solicitor to the Scottish Executive. That office provides legal advice and a full range of legal services to the Scottish Executive." He stated: "The concept of collective responsibility applies to my role in the Cabinet as legal adviser". I can appreciate that. However, he also said that the Scotland Act 1998 "provides that the Lord Advocate continues as the head of the system of prosecution and deaths investigation in Scotland." —[ Official Report, Justice and Home Affairs Committee, 31 August 1999; c 39-40.] A conflict of interests is built into those roles, as was demonstrated in the Ruddle case, in which the Lord Advocate as adviser to the Cabinet gave advice on the application of ECHR, but in the courts acted as a prosecutor in the public interest. He could not be both things. It was unedifying to see the Lord Advocate sitting on the front bench defending the Executive in the debate on Ruddle. It did not do the Scottish justice system any favours. On the matter of independence, I appreciate the historical background but am obliged to Annabel Goldie for what she said at the meeting of the Parliament on 17 February. She said that the Parliament "had placed a magnifying glass over every sector of public activity in Scotland."—[ Official Report , 17 February 2000; Vol 4, c 1257.] Three cheers for that. What one sees through a magnifying glass is not always edifying, however. It was not good to see through a magnifying glass Lord Hardie leave unanswered questions—as well as an untidy desk and a swinging chair—to cross the short distance over the cobbles outside the chamber to the comfort, security and £100,000 of the judicial bench, having undergone a rigorous interview with himself. That not only brings the Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive into disrepute, it brings this Parliament and the system of government into disrepute, which to me is far more important. I am glad that the First Minister is not here because I know that he does not like newspaper cuttings—he has an allergy to them. Thanks to the media—God bless them—I sometimes find out what will happen in this Parliament. I read in The Herald today that the Deputy First Minister "gave a clear hint during a speech in Edinburgh that changes to the arrangement for appointing judges will be proposed". However, "no action has been taken so far and an executive  spokesman suggested last week"— another handy leak— "that future appointments would be made on the recommendation of the new Lord Advocate."

I am coming to that—I am even going to compliment the Liberal Democrats on this. At the meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee away back in August, the Minister for Justice said: "I can inform the committee that the consultation" on a judicial appointments committee "will get under way before the end of the calendar year and that we will consult widely."—[ Official Report, Justice and Home Affairs Committee, 31 August 1999; c 22.] That has not started yet. That brings me to my point about modernising government and the position of the parties. In their manifestos for the elections to the Scottish Parliament, the Liberal Democrats and the SNP made a firm, unequivocal commitment to an independent judicial appointments committee, which would be determined by this Parliament. We should also give the Conservatives their due: although their manifesto does not contain such a commitment, it has two pages on justice and crime. I do not know what happened to the new Labour manifesto, but its only reference to justice is buried under the heading "Rebuilding Communities" and reads "tough approach to crime". I am glad that the Labour party has converted to the commitment made by the SNP and the Liberal Democrats to an independent judicial review of the appointment of judges, which will bring the whole system into repute. However, I have to ask which edition of the national papers will inform me of the review's specifics. In other words, what is the timetable?

I said that I regretted that I felt that Mr Boyd was being tainted. I make it plain that I was criticising the quality of the professional judgment.

I refer the Minister for Justice to the Official Report of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee meeting on 31 August, at which Lord Hardie said:  "Colin Boyd and I are accountable to the Scottish Parliament for the manner in which we discharge our responsibilities; we hope that, where possible, we will be in a position to be as open as those responsibilities allow." So the first count is openness. Lord Hardie continued: "Colin Boyd and I work closely as a team, with Colin heading a number of specific projects. For example, he has oversight of the preparations for the Lockerbie trial and the working group on the European convention on human rights." Although these quotes have been selected from different parts of his speech, that does not distort what was said. Later, he stated: "I am pleased to report that my department was the first United Kingdom Government department to train all its lawyers and investigators on convention rights."—[ Official Report , Justice and Home Affairs Committee , 31 August 1999; c 41-42.] I have to say that on that count and on the count of openness, he has not been very successful. I regret that I have to include Mr Boyd in those  comments on the quality of legal advice. On September 3 1999, like my colleague Kenny MacAskill, I asked the Executive questions on the Ruddle affair. I asked five in all. It took until 17 January to get a response to this question: "To ask the Scottish Executive what was the nature of the legal advice, given on or around 19 March 1998, which led to the transfer of Noel Ruddle to Broadmoor not proceeding and who gave that advice." Five and a half months later, the response was: "The Scottish Executive cannot provide information about the actions of the previous administration."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 17 January 2000; Vol 4, p 109.]  Not being one to lie down, on 26 January I wrote to Mr Wallace. I asked: "Firstly, given the content of the answers or lack of same, can you advise why it took 5 months to reply? Secondly, what is the basis for the refusal given that the same Lord Advocate is in place as during the early days of the Ruddle affair? If a question arises as to the quality of legal advice then, and the personnel remains the same, there is a continuity of interest and responsibility." I regret to say that I think that that taints Mr Boyd as well because, according to Lord Hardie, he was part of the legal team that looked into the European convention on human rights and trained the lawyers. Answers are still pending to other questions on legal advice. One of those questions is about the operation of Community law and the European convention on human rights in the purported prohibition of non-payment of tuition fees for Scottish students in English universities, a matter that I raised during the recent Cubie debate. I have asked those questions and I have asked to see the legal advice that, if we are being asked to accept it, this Parliament should surely be entitled to see. I get no response. What is the problem? Why not produce that conclusive, persuasive legal advice and hit me over the head with it? That will stop me asking questions. We move on seamlessly from the Noel Ruddle case to temporary sheriffs to speed cameras to children's hearings to the Cubie committee to a resignation out of the blue. Were any of the ECHR challenges foreseen? If not, tell us; if they were, tell us. Furthermore, with what legal advice was Colin Boyd closely associated? Lord Hardie is not just leaving behind unanswered questions for me and an untidy desk in his hurry to make a stage exit right to the judicial benches; his still-swinging chair will now accommodate a new Lord Advocate who had "oversight of the preparations for . . . the working group on the European convention on human rights". To lose one Lord Advocate could be seen as unfortunate; to lose two would be carelessness.

The First Minister will be aware that 2,000 Borders textiles jobs have been lost since new Labour came to power. Will he tell us whether he believes that Pringle will still be in production in Hawick three years from now? What assurances has he received from Fang Knitwear Ltd of Hong Kong on that? Can he advise us whether he intends to set in place a funded strategy to prevent further haemorrhaging of that core Borders industry? Finally, there are 100—

What does he have to say to 140 redundant Hawick workers—

Come to the Borders.

I want to make two general observations. First, the deputy minister made a vision statement that tourism is at the heart of Scotland's economy. I would like him to view tourism in its diversity too. Tourism is complementary to other policy areas, such as investment in indigenous industries, high-quality crafts, education and transport. The deputy minister made another comment about raising the profile of tourism. Touching on what Maureen Macmillan said about that, I believe that he has also to raise the status of tourism. There is still a them-and-us syndrome: it is seen as somehow menial to work in providing services for tourists. That is reflected in and fostered by the low wages and poor working conditions in sectors of the industry. That raises the question of the derisory 10p increase to the minimum wage, which the deputy minister may want to address. Both perception and practice have to be changed, through education, skilling upwards, decent wages and proper investment across policy areas. I want to focus on integration, training and transport, as illustrated in the context of the Scottish Borders. The minister referred in particular to disadvantaged rural areas, and the Borders is a beautiful area, undersold and often displaced by the Highlands and Islands. First, on integration, I referred to indigenous industries. There is nothing more synonymous with the Borders than its textile and woollen mills. In the past three years of new Labour, however, 2,000 jobs have been lost there. Soon, there may only be working museums to show how the wool and textile production once dominated the contours of the Tweed. Investment in those core indigenous world-renowned industries is essential in itself, and would augment the potential for tourism. The same can be said for smaller production units, the best example of which is Selkirk Glass. It combines production of high-quality paperweights with a successful restaurant overlooking the glass production. Secondly, on training, we must raise the skills, status and quality, which George Lyon referred to. I refer members to the recently founded chefs school at Borders College, located at Galashiels and at the college's satellite units. The school will have an estimated 50 students by the financial year 2000-01. It is offering a whole range of courses at different levels, but its main focus will be to update skills. It offers a high-skill master class in all catering disciplines. That reflects the reputation and demand for Scottish chefs. It is not detached from tourism, but is integral to it. Other  courses that Borders College provides range from horse management to aromatherapy to gamekeeping—I will return to the gamekeepers later. All those have tourism potential. On page 35 of "A New Strategy for Scottish Tourism", the University of the Highlands and Islands is referred to in the context of developing centres of training and excellence. Here is my pitch: I know that the Borders College has in hand an initial proposal for a Scottish school of tourism studies, possibly in partnership with Napier University. Why not give that location consideration for a change? The Borders greatly requires such an economic boost. Thirdly, on transport, the A68 and A7 provide poor road access. Page 31 of the tourism strategy document says: "Many of those responding to our consultation mentioned accessibility". "Accessibility" is not the first word that leaps to mind when thinking of the Scottish Borders. However, pages 10 and 11 of the feasibility study for the Borders railway rather dismiss the impact of the reinstated railway on tourism, even for activity holidays. I do not accept that. What about a cycle track, to run adjacent to the line? What about bridle-paths in parallel? They have been investigated: they are feasible. What about railway holidays? It is time for lateral as well as linear thinking by the Executive. Borders people, despite enormous recent setbacks, are full of resolve. I will give two examples. Ogilvie Jackson, a hill farmer, facing catastrophic sheep prices, has, with his wife, diversified into letting two quality finished cottages, renovated by local tradesmen with local material with the aid of European grants and a website, which brings jaded southerners to the comfort and peace of the Borders hills. Secondly, there are the gamekeepers who populate the Borders College Italian course, an example of the multilingual approach. Why? So that they can say, "Ci sono dei pesci in quel laghetto," or, "There are fish in that pool." That is Borders enterprise for you. It is time that the Executive matched it.

rose—

rose—

Tell us now.

Far be it from me to be party political. I want to address the failure to abolish fees for Scottish students at English universities. I am sorry that none of the Executive's legal beagles is here, because with due respect—and the minister must know that he is in difficulties when I say that—the Executive's European position seems to me to be a bit muddled. The Executive seems not to know its European Community law from its European convention on human rights law, so I shall explain the difference.  European Community law binds the 15 member states and is supranational in nature. The prohibition of discrimination on the basis of nationality is covered by article 12 of the EC treaty; the internal arrangements of member states, such as Scotland and England, are irrelevant. That puts European Community law out the way; one cannot discriminate under that. The muddled thinking continues because the Executive may be prepared to make payments of bursaries to those same cross-border students—Scottish students going to England. Let us consider that. Having disposed of European Community law, let us consider the completely separate matter of the European convention on human rights, drawn up by the Council of Europe, which has 41 members. The convention is not yet incorporated into United Kingdom domestic law, although it will be. It is, as we know, incorporated into Scots law through the Scotland Act 1998. We are a testing ground, as the Ruddle case proved. I have a feeling that Ruddle has frightened the wits out of the Executive so that it is not looking properly at how the European convention on human rights operates. I wonder whether Executive lawyers are even considering it at all. Let us consider article 2 of the European convention on human rights, as amended by protocol 11: "No person shall be denied the right to education. In the exercise of any functions which it assumes in relation to education and to teaching, the State shall respect the right of parents to ensure such education and teaching in conformity with their own religious and philosophical convictions." That is the wording of the article. Can we just address those issues?

Can we clarify what is meant by member state? I am talking about independent members of the European Union, between which such measures are not permissible. However, within member states—such as Scotland, England, Northern Ireland and Wales—such a measure is permissible. I hope that that is a wee legal lesson for the minister. First, are not Scottish students at English further education universities—a situation which many Borders people find themselves in—being discriminated against in having to pay their tuition fees? Is not that in contravention of their rights under the European convention on human rights? Secondly, would not payment of bursaries, which the Executive is trailing, to Scottish students  at English universities also be a contravention of the ECHR? The Executive says that it cannot pay because that would contravene European law. It should make it clear when it is talking about the ECHR. It is essential that the Executive produces its legal opinion. That would not only be helpful; it is the right of this Parliament to have it. I lodged a number of questions on the legal advice in the Ruddle case, and it took the Executive five months to tell me that it could not answer the questions because the advice was given to the previous Administration, despite the fact that it was the same Lord Advocate. The Executive is in a panic about its legal advice. It is fearful that we will find something in it. There are many legal problems that the Executive has not addressed. Is the levy on foreign students a tax? How will it be levied? How will residence be defined? Foreign students can have dual nationality. How will the money be collected? We have not been given answers to those questions. Let us see the Executive's legal advice for ourselves, otherwise I will suspect that all is not well and that, as usual, the Executive is finding it easier to obfuscate and to blame Europe.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will fund a telephone debt helpline. (S1O-985)

Is the minister aware of the substantially increased debt problems in the Borders as a direct consequence of the Viasystems closure and the collapse of the textiles and farming industries? Does the minister agree that, given that litany, the least that the Labour-Lib Dem Government can do is provide proper funding for a Borders railway line to regenerate the economy of the area?

There is a link.

I am seeking an explanation. I am a simple person. If someone pays their tuition fees now, they will not have to pay the £2,000. If they have them paid for them under the new scheme, they have to pay back the £2,000 when their income reaches £10,000. Obviously, there is a link between not having to pay under the old scheme and having to pay back the money under the new scheme. When is a loan not a loan, or a tax not a tax? Mr Rumbles is dealing in sophistry.

Give way.

rose—

On the issue of sexual assault, I am sure that the minister will be aware that it can be much worse than rape, because an artificial object can be involved. When the minister talks about rape, does he include those kinds of sexual assault, which technically are not rape?

I do not mean to diminish the offence of rape. However, in criminal law, the technical definition of rape can be a small matter in terms of physical abuse, whereas sexual assault can be more violent. We should bear in mind the fact that sexual assault, not through penetration by the man, but by some artificial article, can sometimes be even worse than rape.

I draw the minister's attention to the two contrasting cases of Ciara Wigham of Cornhill-on-Tweed in England—it has a Scottish postcode— whose two main university choices are in Scotland and who will be liable for tuition fees, and her friend Catherine Robson of Coldstream, Scotland, whose principal choices are English universities and who is now under pressure to study here. Both are pupils at Berwick-upon-Tweed County High School. Does the minister think that the fudge concocted from the ingredients of Cubie is fair to either of those young women?

I want to broaden the debate and pick up on what Tommy Sheridan said. One of the biggest addictions in Scotland is, of course, alcohol, but the Deputy Minister for Justice did not even mention alcohol abuse. I hope that it will be covered in the summing-up. There are 200,000 people in Scotland who misuse alcohol. In the past 25 years, the recorded increase in deaths for which alcohol is recorded as cause of death is 552 per cent for males and 760 per cent for females. Those are gross understatements, as they refer only to cases in which the death certificate records the death as an alcohol death. There is also an increase, up to 64 per cent, in the number of children in the 12 to 15 age category who partake of alcohol. More important, the number of units that they are taking has doubled. Because of the time lag in the production of statistics, all those figures will be understated. We are well aware that, because of the social acceptability of taking alcohol, much of it goes on, hidden, at home. Like cocaine addiction, alcohol abuse and addiction takes place at all levels in society. Unlike cocaine addiction, it is socially acceptable. One third of general hospital beds contain patients who have an alcohol problem. All indicators—liver disease, suicides, accidental deaths, and so on—demonstrate that alcoholism in Scotland is 60 per cent to 40 per cent greater than in England, yet in the Scottish Parliament information centre document on drug misuse, only 15 lines out of 22 pages are devoted to alcohol abuse, and only 13 lines to tobacco. Alcohol and tobacco separately cause more deaths and more  misery to people in Scotland than all the other drugs that are commonly discussed. The document says that misuse of alcohol "has steadily increased . . . and is a major risk factor associated with disease, homelessness, unemployment, criminality, mental breakdown, domestic violence and child abuse." To that list we must add lost days at work and the cost to employers, drink-driving and so on. It is essential that alcohol and tobacco problems become part of the remit on drug abuse in Scotland and we ought to extend the definition of the word abuse. Mary Scanlon referred to the Castle Craig rehabilitation centre in West Linton. Two thirds of patients there are alcohol abusers and one third are drug addicts. There is an age divide, with drug addiction tending to be a youth problem and alcoholism a problem for older people. It is often impossible for the victims of such abuse—and I call them that rather than patients—to obtain a referral to the Castle Craig unit, even when there are no national health service facilities in their area. In some areas, general practitioners are resigned to the situation. As admissions to psychiatric hospitals for alcoholism have declined, admissions to general hospitals have increased. In general hospitals, however, patients will not get treatment for their underlying addiction to alcohol. Angus MacKay said that drugs create despair. He also said that drugs are extremely lucrative business, and indeed they are. Eighty-five per cent of excise duty on alcohol goes to Her Majesty's Government at Westminster. In 1995, that totalled £9,745.9 million. I have three questions for the minister. First, will he ensure that the Executive's approach to tackling drugs misuse does not become blinkered and that it addresses alcoholism? Secondly, will he undertake an audit of referrals from NHS areas and other statutory bodies to alcohol rehabilitation units? Thirdly, will the Executive make representations to Westminster to hypothecate a portion of those vast excise revenues to resource an educational programme for all age groups on alcohol and alcohol abuse, and to provide adequate rehabilitation facilities in Scotland? That would have a consequential impact on the availability of general hospital beds.

Will the minister agree that, given that the uptake of the flu vaccine by the over-75s was 25 per cent, the campaign was a failure? Will she agree that her advice to people not to go and bother their general practitioners was just the kind of advice that would be taken to heart by elderly people, thus compounding the failure of the campaign? Will she also agree that this year we require additional resources—to which she has not committed herself—for a proper information programme for the immunisation of the over-65s in Scotland?

As one who practised family law for 12 years, I broadly welcome the proposals. I also welcome the fact that the cooling-off period is not to be included in the proposal to speed up divorces, as there is an obligation on lawyers to establish whether there is a chance of reconciliation. The minister mentioned couples who cohabit by habit and repute. Will he say whether division of property between cohabiting couples will be examined? At the moment, that issue is covered only by normal property rules. Will he also examine the role of grandparents, who can often play a positive and healing role in cases of matrimonial breakdown?

It is a great pity that the minister is not here to hear constructive speeches such as those of John Farquhar Munro and others—including, I hope, my own. I will address homelessness in older people, because I think that we are tending towards stereotypes, albeit quite valid ones, of young rough sleepers, and the women and young families, referred to by Mike Watson, who are often homeless as a consequence of matrimonial breakdown. I will focus on the difficulties of obtaining data on older people who are homeless, an issue that has been raised by Age Concern. The points that I will raise form a call to the Executive to which I would like a response, in writing or otherwise. First, we need a national definition of an older person. We do not have such a definition and we could do with one; a person on the streets may often be extremely old, physically, at 50. We need proactive research, to include those in hospitals and homes and those who are sharing with relatives and friends. They are, in reality, homeless, although they may not be designated as such. We should distinguish between single people and couples who are homeless. We should examine the causes of homelessness in older people, which are disparate—just as they are for any other part of society—but which additionally include dementia and mental illness. That is call No 1. Will the Executive undertake such research so that remedies can be put in place for the elderly  homeless? Secondly, I have some data from Age Concern that is relevant to my next point. Thirty-two per cent of households in Scotland are headed by someone over 60, 11 per cent by someone over 75 and 5 per cent by someone over 80. As we know, all those figures are rising. The figures are split, almost equally, between home owners and people in public rented accommodation. Thirty-nine per cent of those homes have at least one problem that requires urgent repair. That is the background to two causes of homelessness among the elderly that are caused by either the inactivity or activity of the state. On the first of those causes, inactivity, there is a failure to provide the elderly with the information, and sometimes the means, to adapt their homes so that with the passage of years, they can remain in their home and their community as the vast majority want to do. Simple changes, such as kitchen cupboards that people can reach, downstairs WCs, accessible sit-down showers and accessible entrances to homes, with ramps when steps become a barrier, could prevent accidents that lead to a spiral of decline. The elderly lack accessible information about grants; there is no proactive campaign. There is also a great mixture of routes to information. I refer Ms Baillie—if she would listen for a moment—to the report of the Royal Commission on Long Term Care for the Elderly, chaired by Sir Stewart Sutherland. It is a wonderful tome that has almost become my bedtime reading. The report, on page 70, talks about aids and adaptations; it also provides an appendix that lists various items that could be charged to the state or to other charging structures. That is call No 2. Has the Executive taken any steps to implement the recommendations of Sir Stewart Sutherland for aids and adaptations, as referred to in appendix 1 of the Sutherland report? I also want to refer to the unjust and oppressive clawback from the elderly for their care costs, both general and nursing, by the sale of their homes. Often elderly people take avoidance by transferring title to the names of family and friends. That is not always successful, as clawback can go back for many years, but when it is successful, it makes older people vulnerable to the vagaries of their alleged friends and families and they can be on the edge of being evicted at any stage. Again, I refer the minister to the excellent Sutherland report, which proposes remedies for this on page 56. One simple first step, which I have asked for over and over again, would be to detach the nursing costs from other care costs for the elderly when they are in homes and allocate the nursing costs to the national health service budget. That is call No 3.  Will the minister, in writing or otherwise, respond to the three calls I have made today? They are honest, constructive contributions to the debate on homelessness, in particular with regard to the elderly.

My sources of observations on the review are the same as those that Murray Tosh has cited—the Scottish Borders justices committee, Berwickshire faculty of solicitors and the Law Society of Scotland. I have also appeared in Duns, Selkirk and Haddington sheriff courts—in a professional capacity, I hasten to add. The financial savings suggested in the review are putative. For the Peebles closure, the savings are de minimis, and for Duns, the closure involves hidden costs. It is agreed that Peebles sheriff court is underused at the moment, but the predicted population growth figures are already out of date. The Cardrona estate is already in growth and, if Drew Tully, the convener of the local authority, has anything to do with it, the population of the Borders will increase by 20,000 as quickly as he can manage it—but not personally. At worst, Peebles sheriff court should be mothballed. A possible resolution would be for it to get its clerking services from Selkirk, just as Duns is serviced from Jedburgh, although the court itself would remain open. Duns is a more difficult case. From any point of view, the closure is not appropriate, the savings are illusory and there are enormous hidden costs. One cost that Murray Tosh did not mention is the legal aid fund, which might incur knock-on costs as a result of having to employ solicitors both locally and in Haddington if the work were moved there. The human costs must also be considered. To suggest that people should travel from Duns to Haddington is not viable, especially if they are travelling not from Duns itself but from the surrounding area. I examined the costs involved in that bus journey. To get from Duns to Haddington, one would have to leave Duns at 7.30 am, change at Earlston or Galashiels, get another bus from Gala to Edinburgh, arriving at 10.30 am, and finally a bus to Haddington, leaving Edinburgh at 11 am. By the time the bus arrives in Haddington at 12.15, the court has adjourned for the morning, leaving only the afternoon and necessitating an overnight stay. The cheapest ticket—the Waverley day ticket—costs £11.50. That is ridiculous. The courts handle not just criminal proceedings, but civil proceedings involving ordinary people with ordinary problems and the stresses that those entail. The proposed closures would add the pressure of having to travel long distances for divorce hearings, residency hearings and access hearings. Intermediate hearings and the need to call witnesses would add to the travel burden, as  would contract disputes and small claims procedures, which allow ordinary people to call their own witnesses. The whole caboodle of the court process would place the responsibility for all those costs on the public at large. The closure of Duns and/or Peebles sheriff courts would remove at a stroke local access to justice. There would also be a knock-on effect, which Murray Tosh touched on, on local solicitors who would not be able to service clients at such distant courts. Local solicitors would perhaps take statements, but other solicitors would appear in court. That is not good representation—the immediate relationship between client and solicitor in court appearances would be lost. Local offices could close and other services would be removed from the local area: preparation of wills, administration of estates, house purchases by solicitors with local knowledge, partnership agreements—all the day-to-day business of the rural solicitor's practice. Finally, the proposal to close fails to recognise the homogenous nature of the Borders, which people guard fiercely. The closure would diminish Borders justice by dispensing with the strength of permanent Borders sheriffs, who know their patch, their people and, sometimes—unfortunately—the professionals who appear in front of them. Such sheriffs have the measure of the whole legal environment. I therefore oppose the suggestion that the Peebles and Duns sheriff courts should be closed. As for Haddington sheriff court, there is room to consider moving work that comes to it from Musselburgh to Edinburgh sheriff court. I found that for clients in Musselburgh it would have been more convenient to raise divorce actions in Edinburgh than in Haddington. That might be conceded.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

I do not want to make a party political point. I am sure that the minister is aware of the Age Concern publication, "Turning your back on us"—it is a joint Age Concern/Gallup poll—which contains case studies that show clearly that age discrimination is prevalent in the national health service. I do not expect the minister to answer this question now, but will she, at some time, write to me to tell me which of the eight recommendations contained in that document are being implemented?

I will deal with two areas: compensation and the issue of the Crown. I would like to address sections 7 to 12, particularly the issue of compensatory payment in instalments. Will the minister consider reducing the multiplier from 20 to 10? Representations have been made to us by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors and Dundas and Wilson, a major commercial firm in Edinburgh, which felt that 10 would be a more appropriate multiplier. The knock-on effect of that might be that the 10-year period for instalment payments—we have had evidence suggesting that that might be too long—may be reduced. I am pleased that the liability for payment falls on the vassal immediately before the appointed day and that the sum due is now not secured on the ground and that arrears will cease to be so secured. Feuduty is no longer an issue in examination of title for conveyancers. Compensation for the extension of burdens in sections 32 to 38 is justifiable where real burdens may have been used to reserve development value. As ministers will be aware, property could have been feu'd for a heavily discounted consideration—perhaps for no consideration at all—on the basis that there would be a financial term for the discharge of the burden were it to be varied in whole or in part. That is proper as it would be unjust to have a windfall benefit to a former vassal.  I have some legal experience—not much—as a conveyancer and, as a member of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, I felt my head fair birling again, just as it did in Professor Reid's constitutional law and conveyancing classes. The abolition of feudal tenure will affect the Crown just as it affects other superiors; land will cease to be held by the Crown. However, other Crown rights remain and it will continue to have residual title to property that is not otherwise owned, including heritable property. Along with other members, I heard submissions regarding the role of Crown as representative of the public interest—expressed by some as res publica—and, like Roseanna Cunningham, I have extreme sympathy for the sovereignty of the people, which is at the base of our independence. There are issues raised in Sir Crispin Agnew's submission that would have clarified the debate for the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. Sir Crispin refers to Professor McQueen, who wrote: "in feudalism, landownership and sovereignty coincided, so that the Crown's sovereignty over Scotland and dominium eminens , its ultimate tenurial superiority, were the same thing, identical concepts." He goes on to say that "the sovereignty and the paramount superiority are inter-linked, so that the theory regarding to which right they pertained did not need to be determined in a feudal society." As we are defeudalising, we must consider how we determine the role of the Crown. It is an important issue. Sir Crispin Agnew says: "The extent of the Crown's ultimate rights as owner of all the land for the benefit of the community is far from clear in law, with the leading text book writers differing as to the extent or even the source of those rights; eg whether they derive from the paramount superiority or from sovereignty." Those are issues that I and other members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee would like to explore slowly, over strong coffee. Sir Crispin goes on to say: "If absolute ownership to land is given by the proposed Act, then the legal basis on which that ownership can now be controlled may be lost." There is a serious, constitutional legal issue at the heart of this, on which some of us may become experts in due course. I am grateful to Professor Reid for his article—I say this to hearten Jim Wallace—in which he tells us that the bill repeals 45 acts, 246 sections and 57 schedules. As the minister said, it is goodbye to the kindly tenants of Lochmaben.

I will focus my comments, which I hope will be helpful, on proxy decision makers and the role of the courts. I welcome the opportunity to  rationalise the law in this area, with the appointment of welfare attorneys, continuing attorneys and guardians and with the role of the public guardian. I say to Dr Richard Simpson that, under section 18(2), the sheriff has the power to place the welfare attorney under the supervision of the local authority. In addition, section 3(4)(a) provides for the appointment of a person as a safeguard. However, as the Law Society of Scotland pointed out, the bill makes no provision to deal with powers of attorney that existed before the enactment of the bill. I draw members' attention to the Law Society's submission that such powers of attorney should be registered within a specific period, that they should not be used until they are registered and that they should fall if they are not registered. The bill omits such measures. I welcome the fact that the bill's definitions of capacity and incapacity are flexible. I say to Ben Wallace that this is not a matter of absolutes. Rightly, the sheriff has great discretion, not only in hearing evidence, but in the kind of orders that he makes on recalling people. If I have time, I will deal with sheriffs, but that measure is welcome. Eric Clive raised points about the role of European law. I know that Mr Wallace mentioned that, too, but I am not sure whether he was referring to the Council of Europe's recommendations on the principles on the legal protection of incapable adults. Professor Clive said that the Council of Europe principles are reassuringly similar to the ones that lie behind the bill. In an interesting paper, which I am happy to provide the minister with if he does not have a copy, Professor Clive refers to the Hague conference on international law and the convention that will be signed—it is in final draft—dealing with incapable adults, their carers and officials when the laws of more than one country are involved. The conflict between laws should be noted—it would be good for Parliament to take account of that international legislation. Eric Clive also mentions a problem under section 60(1), which relates to the appointment of guardians and their extensive powers. His view—I have read it carefully and concur with it—is that this measure could cause difficulties when an adult recovers some capacity but there has not been time to vary the guardianship order. We could end up with a capable adult with a guardian. An amendment could take care of that, but it is another issue that the Minister for Justice should address. The Mental Welfare Commission has voiced concern about the fact that there is no right to appeal automatically against renewal of a guardianship order. It is also concerned—I share that concern—that the three-year appointment  may be too onerous and put people off. I know that, in his response to the committee's report, the Minister for Justice addressed the fact that the sheriff could make an order for a shorter period, but I think that three years might become the norm. I have dealt with section 17 on continuing attorneys. I am glad that the minister mentioned the training of sheriffs. I would have liked him to go further and nominate sheriffs in this area. Perhaps that will come in due course. Will the Minister for Justice clarify where the Court of Session has exclusive jurisdiction? This morning, he mentioned areas where there is exclusive jurisdiction under section 45 and section 47. I want it made plain in the bill what is exclusive and where jurisdiction is not with the sheriff court. I would like a response from the Executive on legal aid. I want movement towards there being no means test for applications on behalf of an incapax under this bill, just as there are no means tests for some matters covered by the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984.

To ask the Scottish Executive what proposals it has to promote hill farming in the Scottish Borders. (S1O-818)

I thank the minister for his answer. Is he aware that Scottish Borders Enterprise and Scottish Borders Council are financing a feasibility study into establishing a meat processing plant in the Borders, with estimated capacity for 500 sheep a day? Does he agree that locating such a plant in the Borders would allow the Galashiels abattoir to be utilised fully, with the possibility of the Hawick abattoir  being reopened? Consequentially, that would allow the marketing of products as Borders lamb. Does the minister agree that such action would have major economic benefits to farmers and to the Borders, and will he confirm that the Executive will assist with the necessary capital funding if the report, which is due to be published in March, makes a positive recommendation?

Quite often it seems that Euan Robson, Ian Jenkins, Murray Tosh and I are healthy adversaries, but we all support Euan Robson's  motion. All four of us know the specific difficulties that face the Borders and Hawick. The population of Hawick is around 15,000. That represents a drop of 4,000 in 100 years, whereas the population of Peebles has increased correspondingly during that time. That reflects the fact that Peebles has reasonable transport links—in the context of the Borders, at least. The demographics also show that 38 per cent of the population of Hawick is aged over 50, which reflects the falling opportunities for employment. I shall deal first with the negative issues that have been mentioned. The economy of Hawick, like that of the rest of the Borders, remains vulnerable. A small number of employers employ a large number of people, and if one of those employers is hit, a lot of people lose their jobs. The industrial base is pretty much restricted to textiles, farming and electronics, and 2,000 jobs have been lost in electronics and textiles over the past year. Farming has specific and more hidden problems, which are just as bad. The provost of Hawick—John Ross Scott, who is known affectionately as J R—told me that he was upbeat but concerned. Jobs and transport are the key to the resurgence of Hawick and the Borders. Those factors are interlinked and cannot be detached. On the positive side, there are the jobs that Euan Robson has mentioned. Mainetti, which employs 35 to 40 people, predicts that its work force will rise to between 200 and 300 over the coming years. That is a good wee story. That company originally made plastic coat hangers—and still does—but now makes ducting for computers and phone links. That is a step forward. Allflex provides another extraordinary story. The seeds of that company were sown in the Borders. It makes electronic plastic tags for cattle—a positive by-product of the BSE fiasco/crisis—and is seeking to develop UK-wide. As Euan Robson rightly says, there is still a place in the Borders for the original indigenous industries, such as the cashmere industry. Aiming for the quality, high-priced end of the market is the way to go. The Borders will never compete with cheap, far eastern produce, but it does not want to. However, we must be alert, as the market is competitive. Money must be spent on design and marketing, but there is always the big plus that a product has been made in Scotland, in the Borders textile industry. That is something that money cannot buy. The abattoir at Hawick has not been mentioned. A Northern Irish company bought it four years ago, simply to close it down. There is an on-going feasibility study into meat processing in the Borders. If we can get that going, we can perhaps  build up lamb processing in the Borders and reopen the Hawick abattoir.

I beg your pardon, we can build up cattle processing and pig processing as well. Communications and transport are obviously the key to everything. The A7—as far as I know—has only two crawler lanes: one is at Middleton Moor, near Midlothian, and the other is near Langholm, in Dumfriesshire. Two sections have been under review—Auchinrivock at Langholm, and Glenmarie at Galashiels—to increase safety in those areas, but nothing has happened. That would be my B-plan. My A-plan is also the A-plan of the all-party Campaign for Borders Rail—the key is rail, which would give heart and spirit to the Borders people. As Ian Jenkins has said before, a connecting-up of the Borders is essential for freight, for passengers, for entrepreneurs who come with their families to live in the Borders, for young people who return and for tourists. It will also put the Borders on the map. Imagine if the Scottish Parliament could reopen the railway line through the Borders—perhaps in stages, although I am not prepared to concede that point just now. The reopening of that line would be international news and would create a direct route to Europe, providing a vital connection for the Borders. That is the key to solving the problems in Hawick and the Borders.

Jackie Baillie seemed to be enjoying herself during her speech, but she is on a different planet entirely from Scotland's pensioners. Last week, pensioners who want a decent state pension were demonstrating outside the Parliament, but I did not see a single new Labour face there. [MEMBERS: "Rubbish."] If Labour members were there, the pensioners did not seem very pleased to see them. I do not know what Jackie Baillie was doing during the debate, but if she had been listening she would have heard Alex Neil explain how the SNP would increase pensions and how Labour could do so with Westminster's various kitties.

Just give me a moment; after listening to the debate for three hours, I have only just got up. I am not prepared to admit my age, but I shall start with a general observation or two about the attitude to older people outside this chamber—and sometimes inside it. There must be a change in Scottish society's attitude to older people. They are not a problem to be solved by dealing out piecemeal financial and social packages. I can assure members that I will not stand here spouting the motherhood-and-apple-pie platitudes that seem to be the diet of this Parliament 99 per cent of the time. Older people are not passive recipients, nor are they a homogenous group of people; we are all individuals. Older people are certainly not incapacitated, befuddled or redundant, although that often appears to be the baseline from which assessments are made. As has been said, ours is an agist society, perhaps more so in respect of women, for whom not only beauty, but worth, is skin deep. Contempt for and fear of aging are rife, and plastic surgery rules okay. Even the language of politics in which Labour indulges seems to endorse those prejudices. Everything must always be new, young, modernising. Well, I have news for the Executive: the older people in society are as individualistic as the young, and just as diverse in their personalities, talents and requirements, as Donald Gorrie was right to point out. They have skills and aspirations and that most valuable of life's commodities: experience. They are an asset to their families and communities, not a liability. I have two of my assets here today; my parents are in the public gallery. Aged 84 and 77, they are feisty people who have no time for Labour's  platitudes. We need to educate the young and middle generations before the politics and the priorities can be righted. The Labour party wants to dole out packages, but it offers nothing that will give dignity, independence or choice to our pensioners. Let us consider the pension, which is at the root of the problem. The issue of pensions may not be devolved, but so what? We can talk about anything we like in this Parliament and that is what pensioners want us to do. If that upsets Johann Lamont, that is too bad.

I do not want to hear from Johann Lamont; I have heard enough from her already. Pensions in other countries have been mentioned. The pension represents 60 per cent of average earnings in Belgium, and 40 per cent in Denmark. Margaret Smith, who has now left the chamber, said that independence alone would not solve the problems of Scotland's pensioners. Why is it a fairy story for Scotland but not for other countries that offer a decent pension? Because of fuel poverty, 2,000 people die every year in Scotland who would not otherwise have died. Many die of hypothermia. That is a disgrace, when, as Tommy Sheridan said, we have oil and gas revenues. The Labour party claims to have set targets for solving fuel poverty by 2003, but I would like to know the source of that claim. Delaying until 2003 will mean another 6,000 deaths, but that seems to be okay by Labour. It is essential that we reinstate the link between pensions and average earnings. I repeat that that is what pensioners want. If Labour is the listening party, it should start listening. I do not know where Keith Harding was digressing to when he was going on about dividend tax credits. The number of pensioners affected by that would be in the minority. The vast majority of pensioners live, as my parents do, on the state pension and on very small and shrinking occupational pensions. Having paid taxes and national insurance, the pensioners out there thought that they were providing for their older years, but they were not. The kitty has been spent, or Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling are sitting on it. As for committees and task forces, I am falling over them. How do joint committees in Westminster compare with joint committees here? They are a different breed from the cross-party committees of this Parliament. The former are tame pets—and I know who the owner is who is in charge of taming them—and the latter are free-roaming animals which, fortunately, are beginning to display minds of their own.  How far would a Scottish minister get on the Great British state pension of £66.75 per week? They should put their answers on a postcard—a cheap one, please. What can they buy for 73p? Packets of crisps were mentioned. The Government could issue another shiny brochure. We have loads of them. Pensioners who are sitting close to their one-bar electric fires or who are wrapped up in bed early to keep warm could spend many an idle hour reading a Government brochure on how to spend their 73p. Would the Scottish people rather see money being spent on their pensioners than on that gross London executive toy the millennium dome? Why not get a focus group working on that question? How many pensioners will be travelling from Scotland to marvel at the millennium dome? Not many, because I have costed it. It would cost them £49 for the round trip and entry to the dome, leaving them with £18 from their weekly pension. The issue is one of priorities for Westminster, and Westminster's priorities are not Scotland's. On the matter of the Royal Commission on Long Term Care, I was pleased to see movement on Sir Stewart Sutherland's findings. That has been long awaited; the commission's report was published in March. It is important that a commission was set up and that small things are being done to help pensioners remain in their homes, but I am sceptical—I wonder why—about community care because the facts are not dinging right. I asked the Deputy Minister for Community Care, Iain Gray, about social work cuts in East Lothian Council, which caused a home to close down, people to be dispersed, meals on wheels to be stopped and pensioners to be given two week's supply of frozen food. I await an answer. I asked the Deputy Minister for Communities, Jackie Baillie, about the funding of day care centres, particularly Broomhill day centre at Penicuik, which provides elderly respite care and needs a little bit of money compared with what is being splashed out on shiny brochures, for example. I have still not received an answer. Those matters show what is happening on the ground. Kay Ullrich dealt with age discrimination in regard to breast cancer. That discrimination is a fact. Elderly women are not invited back for breast screening automatically, although the incidence is high. Other things are wrong. With regard to benefits, disability living allowance is not available if the applicant does not apply before they are 65 years old. If a carer does not apply for invalid care allowance before they are 65, they do not get it. As has been said, in our generation, people in their middle to late 60s are, thankfully, growing older with their parents. Those issues must be addressed, because although they are not big  issues, they are big issues for the people who are involved. Kenny MacAskill dealt with the matter of transport. The three important words in relation to transport and pensioners are: available, accessible and affordable. Of course it is right that we have a national concessionary fare scheme in Scotland—and it is my party's policy. Sylvia Jackson referred to such a scheme, but the issue is when it will be introduced. People who are old will not be around for ever, waiting for promises down the line. We need single ticketing initiatives so that people can buy a ticket and travel great distances without having to change their ticket. We need co-ordinated timetables, which would benefit all society, not just old people. We need integrated transport, for example buses that run to hospitals and libraries. The infrequency of public transport in rural areas does not make it an alternative form of transport for those who live there and have special concerns. Many houses are poorly insulated and in need of repair. Often, older housing is designed badly. The warm deal does not address damp homes. That requires to be addressed. I have already said that it would be appropriate—it is mentioned in Sir Stewart Sutherland's report—to introduce small initiatives to enable older people to stay in their own homes. Measures such as handrails and walk-in seated showers are small, practical improvements with substantial outcomes for individuals, but they are not being taken. On community care, we should have integrated services with one-stop access to information. I think that it was Margaret Smith who mentioned the GP not only writing a prescription for medicine but completing a form for housing insulation. That is essential to assist elderly people, because health difficulties are related to housing problems and other matters.

When will those initiatives be implemented? Does the minister have a target? I love that word. I would like to know when those initiatives will be implemented. There is enough jaw in this Parliament.

No, I will proceed.  The cusp of the new century is the time to act, as the Sutherland report states, "With Respect To Old Age". There are some items on the shopping list. We should have a respectable state pension; erode agism; have integrated services for transport, social and health purposes; have warm and secure homes; consult not insult; and educate ourselves and our children of the value of older people. We should demonstrate that value by our deeds, here in this Parliament and in that other, less worthy, place. I am pleased—it has already been announced—that I have been made my party's shadow deputy minister for older people. That is not a cheap political position. I did not know that the Executive had a deputy minister for older people; I thought that Mr Gray was the Deputy Minister for Community Care. I will deal specifically with issues relating to older people. I know that that is welcomed by Better Government for Older People, many representatives of which are here today. My job is to listen, to take account of what people say and to shadow Mr Gray. I will be watching you, Mr Gray.

I will not give way.

I do not want to listen to Mr McAveety.

The Scottish National party would link the increase in pensions back to average earnings, and we would introduce a national concessionary fare and other initiatives. I will give Jackie Baillie a copy of our manifesto to make it easy for her. She could also read the Official Report of this debate.

I took an intervention from the Deputy Minister for Communities, who was responding to the debate. I have only a couple of other sentences to say. Older people do not go away; we all become one. Scottish pensioners want a decent state pension so that they can exercise choice and be independent. Margaret Smith found that an offensive word. Independence is a fine word and, by the way, according to a recent survey we will be independent in 20 years' time.

Shame.

Is the minister aware that the case of Jim Sutherland—heroic hotelier of Lauder—is due to be heard in the criminal appeal court next Tuesday, to determine whether he has a case to answer? Does the minister agree that in the changed circumstances following today's announcement, notwithstanding the pending appeal, the Crown should now abandon the case against him simpliciter?

I will deal first with police and crime. Lots of statistics have been thrown about. Statistics are not sterile; they are important. There is no doubt that crime has increased. We have heard statistics from various areas. In 1998-99, the number of crimes in the Borders increased by 450, 25 per cent of which were crimes of vandalism. The Scottish national party supports the use of CCTV, but it has a limited role in ensuring protection in rural areas such as the Borders. The number of police has risen, but according to today's edition of The Herald, by only four in three years, which is hardly good. Police numbers fluctuate. The Scottish Police Federation has projected that, next year, there will be a shortfall of 1,000 police officers. Colleagues have raised concerns that police officers are suffering an increase in stress. I will come to stress among prison officers later. I refer to the Scottish Police Federation's letter of 4 October, which reveals that the work load for police officers "has increased by about one third . . . Half of all inspectors and chief inspectors, reported that more than 40% of their work used to be done by the rank above. . . . For officers who have supervisory responsibilities . . . the average increase in the total number of officers supervised is 11%." They are a force under siege. That is reflected in "a consequential decrease in the well-being of officers, as expressed by measures of stress and aspects of sickness, injury and dissatisfaction."  I will come to the other arm of enforcement—the Scottish Prison Service—in a moment, but the picture from the Scottish Police Federation is obviously not a happy one. Concern about the victims of crime was raised eloquently by Linda Fabiani and Michael Matheson. Linda gave a figure of 20,000. I can  see no problems for this Parliament going full steam ahead with a victims charter, which would provide a valuable framework and a national standard for victims throughout Scotland. From my own experience, I can give examples of witnesses—the victim is often the prime witness—coming across the accused wandering about the streets when out on bail. The victim does not know that he is out on bail. They can also come across the convicted criminal out on parole. They do not know about that either: they do not know what goes on in court when the heads get together at the table and the prosecution and defence are discussing plea bargaining, while, at the back of the court, the prime witness, who is also the prosecution witness, has no part in it. They will find that, after the court is adjourned, nothing has been said to them. That is a disgraceful way to treat people, and it must be dealt with as a matter of urgency. I cannot see why we are not getting on with that. I want to refer to prisons, because they are such an urgent concern—the Justice and Home Affairs Committee has just dealt with prison matters. Overcrowding is not a simple issue. Tony Cameron made that plain, as did Mr Clive Fairweather at a previous meeting. It is not just a case of having 6,000 prisoners and 6,000 places. It depends on the kind of prisoners and the kind of place. The problem is that cutting the number of prisons takes out slack. If there were any problems with the prison population or if there were any disturbances, I would have concerns, as would other members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, that there would be no place to which to decant the prisoners concerned. There would also be no places for certain kinds of prisoner. The chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service could not answer that point. He was not sure about it.

I am happy to take that intervention on the open prisons, which I will come to, with particular reference to the reasons for the closure of Penninghame prison. There are many possible reasons for all kinds of reorganisation of the Prison Service, but simply to save money is not one of them. I have problems  with the way in which it is being done and with the way in which the selection has been made. The reasons for overcrowding are complex and varied. We have had different figures: the projected figures given for two months ago and the figures now. Even the chief executive of the Prison Service said that he was relying on statisticians, and that things might change. On slopping out, I am trying to make the distinction in my head between a target and an aim. We were told that the aim—not target—on ending slopping out is now deferred. It is a Victorian practice, which ought to be high on the list of matters to be dealt with. It has been deferred because of the £13 million in cuts. On staff morale, I quote from the Official Report of that committee meeting. When Lyndsay McIntosh asked Derek Turner of the Scottish Prison Officers Association about staff morale, he said: "The staff are devastated. They feel that they have worked very hard over the past four years to achieve the restructuring that has taken place in the Prison Service. That was a tremendously painful process at the start. The staff did not like it, but they were confronted with the choice of going through the staffing structure review or potentially facing market testing. It was Hobson's choice."—[ Official Report, Justice and Home Affairs Committee , 23 November 1999; c 467.] The other essential arm of crime prevention is in a state of gravely low morale. There was an example of a prison officer who had recently moved with his family to Dungavel. He uprooted everyone—what will his position be? Prison officers have to work with good will in the Prison Service. The Executive is in grave difficulties with the Prison Service, and I have great concerns about that. I also wish to address the fact that there was an increase in the purchase of bunk beds, which heralds the possibility of prisoners having to double up. How will prisoners who are now in single cells react when they find two or three others pushed into their cells? That is a real problem for the Executive. I will try to rattle on and address the issue of prison closures. As Alex Fergusson said, Penninghame is a highly successful prison. Why it is not fully occupied has been addressed—open prisons are not an easy option for prisoners. They find them quite hard, as they have to learn to rely on their own resources. The prison is also essential to the community—I know, as I lived in Newton Stewart for 15 years—and to the economy of the area. Penninghame is not an expensive prison. The figures have been mentioned—the costs are about £17,000 per prisoner, as opposed to £26,000,  which is the Scottish Prison Service's cost per prisoner. I do not know what criteria were used in the decision to close Penninghame. I have dealt with Dungavel—why a prison that dealt so well with drugs reduction and rehabilitation was dealt the blow of closure requires explanation. The Scottish National party welcomes the drugs enforcement agency, but not at a cost to the Prison Service. I wish to give an example of the reality of drug rehabilitation. I visited Low Moss as a member of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. The prison governor told me that he and two of his officers spent two days just picking up drug packets that had been thrown over the fence. As it is a low-security prison, it does not have a high fence and is surrounded by wasteland. The prison has a successful unit, Alba House. It is also a tough unit, as it is based on self-referral. However, it can take only 10 people, whereas there are hundreds of prisoners at Low Moss who are not in the unit and who are in a cycle of returning to prison. Even worse, what kind of secure accommodation is given to prisoners who have gone through the tough regime at Alba House upon their release? Often, they return to the environment that they were in before prison. I will finish by dealing with alternatives to custody. A long time ago, a senior member of the prosecution service said on television that prisoners could be divided into the bad, the mad and the sad. I have concerns that the mad and the sad are put in prison as if it were a waste bin—that is a way of dealing with them. Without making a direct link to Cornton Vale, I am terribly glad that Dr Simpson raised the issue. While we may want to move away from custody, more women who come from very sad backgrounds are being put into Cornton Vale, and the figures are increasing. The Executive must start to deal with that issue now. Many fine words have been spoken today. Everyone wants improvements in society, but we want action—and action needs funding. I ask the Executive to address that point.

In evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, in discussing Dungavel with Mr Tony Cameron, I quoted from the chief inspector's report, which said that "there has been a remarkable transformation at Dungavel, partly due to changes in management, efforts by staff and finally, some much needed clarity about the establishment's future. Whilst a drug sub-culture had previously flourished in an environment recognised to be boring, we sense that it should now be possible to create a drug-free establishment. Drugs and other key issues are now being addressed in a structured, cohesive and realistic way, by a closely knit and enthusiastic management team." I hardly think that the prison's reward for that should be to find that it is subject to closure. Mr Cameron made it clear that the decisions are the Executive's, so why did the Executive choose that prison for closure?

Does the member agree that under the proposed legislation, the registration of community interests and the community right to buy apply only to landowners? Would it be appropriate for consideration to be given to Scotland's 10,000 tenant farmers, so that they—as well as farm owners—are entitled to take part in the consultation process?

The minister will recall that, during the emergency debate on the legislation amending the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984, the SNP raised questions about the impact of the European Court of Human Rights. In light of the High Court's decision, is the minister content that he is being given safe legal advice on the impact of ECHR on Scottish legislation?

I thank the minister, but that reply is not satisfactory. Each of the High Court judges agreed—there was not one dissenting voice. I cannot understand how the  position could not have been foreseen by examining the legislation. I repeat my question: is the minister content that the advice that he received with regard to the impact of the ECHR on the amended legislation that was put through the Parliament is safe?

I ask the Presiding Officer whether the debate can be extended, to allow as many members as possible to speak.

In that case, at what time did this debate begin?

Thank you.

I think it is excellent that you are here, Sir David. On 3 February 1962, on the closure of the Peebles through line, that great patriot, Wendy Wood, stood alone on the platform with an impromptu declaration, chalked on a blackboard. The legend read: "Home rule will reopen the stations again". I know that because someone who saw it at the time, as a boy, told me. He is Allan Maclean from Virgin Trains which, with Railtrack, has put in £10,000 for the current feasibility study. In 1968, 600 tickets were sold each weekday on the Borders to Edinburgh stretch of the Waverley line. On 6 January 1969, the last passenger trains ran from Waverley station in Edinburgh along the 98 miles of track, stopping at, among other places, Eskbank, Newtongrange, Gorebridge, Heriot, Stow, Galashiels, Melrose, Newton St Boswells, Hawick, Newcastleton, Longtown and Carlisle. The journey came after a long campaign to keep rail in the Borders, which we represent in part today. Other parties are named in the motion. Some of those who campaigned are sitting on official chairs in the chamber. Some of us are members of the all-party campaign for Borders  rail. The campaign will not end until the last bit of track connects Waverley, through Gala and Hawick, to Carlisle. That is the position whatever the feasibility study delivers. Feasibility studies, I say to Ms Boyack, are constrained within their terms of reference, which I and other members do not know. The real terms of reference are whether the Borders will prosper with or without the railway line. I need no feasibility study to direct me on that one. Should the feasibility study indicate a link only as far as Gorebridge, it is not a Borders railway line by definition, because it does not touch the Borders—it would be a suburban link to Edinburgh. The decision to close the line was taken for the wrong reasons at another time, when rail was seen as a burden on the nation's purse and road and the motor car were seen as the great liberators. There were promises about public transport, even of buses that would run on the old line. There are some interesting contemporary quotations: "I cannot understand why any government setting out on development in the Borders should take away travel facilities." That was said by a Mr Campbell, a Melrose minister. True then, true now. Another reads: "The government have ignored the advice of their own Borders Economic Consultative Group and have cut off the remaining railway arteries through an area they are pledged to develop". That person also called the closing of the line a "catastrophic" decision—a very young David Steel. Last night, the Moderator of the Church of Scotland, sporting a campaign sticky, told me of the Reverend Brydon Mabon, minister at Newcastleton, who lay across the line and was jailed for his protest. Some of us got an e-mail from the presbytery of Jedburgh acknowledging that and supporting the campaign. Today, 108,000 people are still without a railway station, compared with 250,000 with 57 stations in the Highlands. Borderers and highlanders have much in common, but there is one glaring difference. I suggest that that difference has had social, environmental and economic impacts at the very root of Borders society. On the social impact, a pertinent question in the Borders might be, "Where have all the young people gone?" Scottish Borders has the highest proportion of people over pensionable age; almost 40 per cent are over 50. That has implications for  the development of a balanced society and an obvious impact on various support services. The young people have left to find work, in the main, and to have access to the perceived attractions of the cities. On the environmental impact, as the A68 and A7 are the main arteries to the rest of Scotland, we are all too aware of how inadequate the road links are—even on the bonniest, driest autumn day—for commuters in either direction and certainly for freight. The topography of the Borders, which makes the area suitable for the mills and the sheep, does not lend itself to the relentless and continual expansion of tarmac. I now turn to the economic impact. One woman's crisis is another man's problem. On the economic Richter scale, from electronics through textiles to the beleaguered farmers and the fragile tourism trade, the Borders remains very vulnerable, however we look at it, yet the area has a keen and stable work force, its natural amenity is unsurpassed and it forms the natural corridor from Scotland to the south. The area's vulnerability and decline will continue until one radical, simple step—the railway line—is taken by the Executive. That step would meet the needs not only of the Borders, but of Scotland and beyond. From it would flow prosperity in economic growth and quality of life. In the new millennium, that step would signal mature thought on transport for the next century, benefiting country and town. We choke on the fumes of cars that move through our congested cities more slowly than a pedestrian would and the great and expensive motorways conduct traffic nose to tail. Villages are shaken by the thunder of articulated lorries hauling felled forests on winding country roads. People in the cities contract road rage and people in the country are isolated by the cost of car and fuel. The time for rail is now. The vision of a Borders railway that fuses with an urban network in Edinburgh, as proposed by CRAG—the Capital Rail Action Group—is the way forward. That would give Borderers and freight access to and from the city and encourage the flow of entrepreneurs to set up homes and businesses in the Borders, thus redressing the current demographic imbalance. Railtrack is keen, Virgin Trains is keen, ScotRail is keen, we are keen—but what of the Executive? The heart may be willing but I suspect that the head is not. The cost of reinstating the line will be £100 million—possibly more. The cost of the line to Gala would be £25 million. Where is that money in the transport budget? Gordon Brown has gathered stealth taxes from the motorists of Britain, let alone Scotland, with his fuel escalator. He has built up a war chest for the next election. He has his  priorities and I suspect that they are not those of the Borders people. Westminster will pay out billions for the Thames barrier, for the Jubilee line to the London docklands and for Trident, but—unless we keep beating at the Treasury's door—not the comparative pocket money that a Borders rail line would cost. Compared with the Goliath that is greater London, the Borders is David—but we know who won that combat against the odds. Fine words are no use if action does not follow. A political commentator recently bemoaned the Opposition's lack of ideas. I give him Borders rail as an idea whose time has come. Let that be a test of the Scottish Parliament. The Borders people want their rail line, which a Labour Government wrongly took away from them 30 years ago. I call on the coalition to put that right now. Many people believe that this Parliament will not act; they have come to expect so little from their politicians. I have a petition with thousands of signatures from Borderers and more signatures are being gathered every day. All it takes is political will. Let this Parliament prove that Wendy Wood was right. Let home rule open the stations again.

rose—

I quote from The Herald's  "in brief" column today, headed "Finnie urges rural rethink". "New ways of thinking and approaches to social, environmental and economic issues are needed to create a  sustainable future for rural Scotland." I am right with Mr Finnie on that, so I have three things I ask him to think about with reference to the Scottish Borders: trains, abattoirs and meat processing. The Borders has a population of 106,000 and there are no railway stations. There are 208,000 people in the Highlands and there are 57 railway stations. That says it all. That has a big economic and social impact on communities. At the recent rail seminar it was clear that Railtrack is keen to get into the Borders. I want to know whether the Executive will let us have money for that. A rail link is needed to transport freight, which now travels by inadequate roads, and the topography of the Borders is not suitable for road expansion. We need the reinstatement of a rail link between Edinburgh, Galashiels and Hawick, to carry electronics, farm produce, forestry and people. The Executive talks about social inclusion. Nearly 30 per cent of families in the Borders do not have motor vehicles and those that do face the rural petrol price hikes that Fergus Ewing referred to. The bus service is expensive and slow. It is essential that rail links are reinstated—Mr Finnie, I wish you were listening—

—to allow social and economic contact between the Borders and the rest of Scotland, the UK and Europe. That would lead to a flow of entrepreneurs into the Borders. It is a beautiful location with committed people but at the moment it is commercially unattractive. It would also lead to an increase in tourism, an issue raised by Alasdair Morgan and others this morning. I agree with what Euan Robson said earlier on the need for abattoirs and meat processing to add value to the farmers' produce. There is an abattoir in Galashiels that with only a little upgrading would comply with even the tightest European regulations. Meat processing in the Borders would add value to farmers' produce and increase local employment. That would assist the recovery in other ways because, when people are in jobs, they use local painters and decorators and plumbers and so on. It is also the best way to handle the beasts. The welfare of animals is improved by killing and processing them near to the point of production. Importantly, it would permit the labelling "Scottish lamb" or, better still, "Borders lamb", because it would be produced and—this is the key issue—processed in the Borders. That would impact on the marketing and recognised quality of Scottish food. The minister has used fine words. He has talked the good talk; let him walk the good walk. I will check his report card in a year's time.

Does the member agree that Scottish farmers are the only farmers in Europe who pay for veterinary inspection certificates, which in other European countries are paid for by the state? Would he like the same to apply here?

I want to pick up on what Brian Monteith said about SUFI—as we now seem to be calling it—attracting the derision of academics. That was not the impression that I got when I spoke to Borders College today. It has a student roll, including part-time and evening students, of some 10,000, and has doubled its roll in the past two years. It has welcomed the university for industry and—being a competitive and successful college itself—the opportunities the university gives it. I have two caveats, aspects of which have been addressed. First, the necessary technology is not available and rural areas have particular telecommunications problems. The minister stressed the importance of deprived and rural areas; sometimes they are deprived rural areas. For instance, although Galashiels has ISDN lines, there are none in Newcastleton and other smaller Borders towns and villages, which means that there is no on-line remote video access for students in the area. If this is truly to be a university for all, rural students should have the same facilities as urban students. I am sure that the minister recognises that that would reduce the necessity for rural students to travel to study. Are there any plans to deal with that problem? Are there funds to install the necessary cabling to those areas? Secondly, SUFI should make courses subject to minimum quality standards. The education provider should be monitored to ensure that we do not have charlatans posing as educators and awarding Mickey Mouse awards, which is what happens in the US degree culture. The clients—the students—should also be monitored to find out their satisfaction with the facility. The costs of the operation should also be monitored. Karen Whitefield has put forward plan C and Mike Russell has suggested plan B. I have plan A, which is to locate the university in the Borders—and not just because the Borders has no domestic university. I am told by my technological colleagues that the joint academic network—JANET—lines, which are essential for digital connections, run through the Borders near Galashiels. Locating the university in the Borders would emphasise that access to the university is open to all, whether they are in a conurbation or in the country, and it would boost the economy of an area that deserves better than it has had. The letter to Mr Pignatelli is in the post tonight. By the way, it would be handy if the university was located next to the restored rail link.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the impact is of the reduction by £1 million in its social work budget made by East Lothian Council as a consequence of reductions in local government funding. (S1O-488)

Is the minister aware that in the East Lothian News and in the East Lothian Courier  on 25 June 1999, reference was made to savings—a nice way of putting it—of £920,000 in the social work budget? Is the minister aware that, as a consequence of  those savings, the Waverley home in Gullane was closed earlier this year and 27 elderly residents were scattered throughout the county to other homes, that the meals on wheels service was discontinued and that a fortnight's supply of frozen food was substituted? That would have had a disastrous effect on the elderly and would have denied them vital human contact. Does the minister agree that that is appalling and affects the most vulnerable? Does he further agree that as 85 per cent of the Labour-administered East Lothian Council's budget comes from the Scottish consolidated fund, for which the Executive is responsible, he bears the responsibility for those cuts to services?

I come to this debate as a lawyer with 12 years' experience, predominantly as a family lawyer, who has obtained interdicts—sometimes with powers of arrest, sometimes without—for spouses, all of whom were women, and who has also defended, sometimes successfully, male clients against them. Unfortunately, I am therefore well experienced in all the unhappiness that the breakdown of a relationship entails. From the work plan of the Scottish Partnership on Domestic Abuse, under the heading of "Definition" on page  5, I recognise a range of clients who have crossed my path and who have suffered the physical abuse of battering through to the psychological abuse of threats, which is equally bad. I know that children of all ages can be witnesses to abuse in most domestic situations, though a cunning partner can perpetrate abuse out of sight of not only neighbours but family. It occurs in all social groups. The worst case of physical abuse I came across was that of a quiet and refined professional woman who had been beaten up by her highly paid executive husband and had hidden the bruises and his hand marks round her throat under a copious sweater. She did not cry in my office, as most women did, and that made her plight all the more awful and compelling, because she was beyond tears. Women therefore come with low morale and no self-esteem, and are fearful. Many cannot cope with detaching themselves from their relationship, especially when faced with the financial and housing implications of separation. Against what I hope is therefore an informed professional background, and from the evidence obtained by the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, of which I am a member, I would like to make the following comments. The first concerns the support services. Some women in these circumstances have a good lawyer, a good general practitioner, a good health visitor, and perhaps personnel assistance at work. If a woman is working, abuse can lead to the loss of her employment. I therefore welcome the intention to ensure that there will be more equitable and less random access to various agencies. I draw the attention of Parliament to the role of the Scottish Legal Aid Board, which is not mentioned as a support service, but which has everything to do with access to justice. It has failings that often let women down when they most need immediate help. The rules by which solicitors have access to legal aid for a client are by no means simple, and the access is by no means swift. While emergency legal aid is available to obtain interdicts and powers of arrest, once those applications are made, a rigorous timetable to complete a full legal aid application form kicks in. Obtaining interdicts is a time-consuming business. The solicitor might have to drop everything else to obtain documents such as medical reports, corroborative statements that will form the basis of affidavits and police precognitions. All that work is quite apart from appearing in court to make representations. Furthermore, the solicitor must often provide emotional support to a very distressed client. I have given out my home phone number only to clients in interdict proceedings. In the middle of such a traumatic situation, the distressed client  must complete lengthy forms, including financial forms, for submission to the board. Clients' finances are often in flux, which makes things difficult; or because of their income—which need not be very high—they are denied legal aid from the outset and so cannot fund court proceedings. In addition, the remuneration for civil legal aid work is disgracefully low and many solicitors cannot take on this time-consuming work—though they would wish to do so—because the rest of the firm will not subsidise it. It is plain that the Legal Aid Board rules on domestic violence require review. However, I note that the work plan does not mention the Scottish Legal Aid Board among the organisations involved in domestic abuse issues. The organisation is at the core of access to justice for many abused women and provides the structure by which such women can restructure their lives. I ask the minister to address that particular omission in the work plan.

As the minister is aware, there are no railways in the Borders. Will she join me in giving support for the Campaign for Borders Rail, which is campaigning for the Waverley line, as it is commonly known? That line is considered a necessity by Scottish Borders Enterprise for the economic recovery of the Borders. Will she tell me where, in her statement, I am told how it will be constructed and—crucially—how she will fund it?

Fergus took the words out of my mouth. I am half English and I have never ranted against my mother or any members of my family and the SNP has never ranted against the English people. I look forward to an apology from Hugh Henry. I want to comment on what Murray Tosh said. I did not vote for devolution—I make no secret of that—but I am not here to destroy the Parliament; I am here to see it succeed and grow. The concordats constrain the Parliament. We had no opportunity to discuss them before they were presented to us and, as Miss Goldie said, the document was presented first to the press—another insult to the democratic process of the Parliament. Donald Dewar described the drafting of the document as a team effort. From what we have heard, though, team A handed it down to team B. John McAllion said that this was not an agreement between Parliaments. That is right: the agreement is between the Labour party in the south and the Labour party in Scotland. It has bypassed the parliamentary process. I want to go to the heart of the document. Earlier, I raised a point about the joint ministerial committee. There are great difficulties for us on that matter. We will not know what it discusses, when it discuss it, how it discusses it or what the  results of those discussions are. How can we hold the committee to account? We might read leaks in the press, but we will not know whether the leaks come from the Executive or are soft leaks. That is very wrong in a country where transparency is the order of the day. I accept Mr Tosh's point about the Parliament's committees having the ability to scrutinise what the joint ministerial committee does, but we cannot do that without access to minutes or other information. Page 7 of the memorandum outlines the joint ministerial committee's terms of reference, one of which is "to consider non-devolved matters which impinge on devolved responsibilities, and devolved matters which impinge on non-devolved responsibilities". We know that law is always hard where it is grey. Who makes the distinction to which the terms of reference refer? How will we ever know what distinctions have been made? If we do not have the information, we cannot know who has decided what was devolved and what was not. Another matter that concerns me is the giving of information. Page 3 tells us that it is for the Administration that is providing information to state what restrictions, if any, should be placed on that information's use. That means that if this Administration asks Westminster for information, Westminster can put restrictions on its use. For example, I might be bold enough to ask the Scottish Executive what inquiries it has made of Westminster about policy guidelines for regional selective assistance for, say, an electronics company in north Tyneside whose activities have impacted on employment in the Borders. If the principle that is outlined in the document is applied, the Executive might be gagged. I might not have access to information that would impinge on devolved matters.

Donald Dewar has not taken my point. I have found it extremely difficult to get the information I referred to. The problem is that if I sought information from Westminster, restrictions could be placed on its use. That would be done at the joint ministerial committee. I am concerned about the witch hunt that the press is conducting against the Parliament. I read a nonsense of a headline in The Scotsman today:  "Secrecy for the sake of secrecy". The editorial comment tries to tell committees whether they can hold meetings in private. There is a lot of nonsense in that paper today but what concerns me about the joint ministerial committee is that the Parliament does not even have access to what is being discussed. I hope that Andrew Neil—that great advocate of the union—will chase up the joint ministerial committee when it gets up and running. Mr Dewar said that the agreement was honourable. It is not honourable because we have not had the opportunity to discuss it until it is presented to us. We know that the Parliaments must operate together. It is not in the interests of Scotland or England to be disharmonious; it is in the interest of this Parliament to be democratic. The document was not presented to us democratically and the process has not been transparent. The operation of the concordats will not be transparent either. I think that the document is designed to lock doors in the Parliament. I have news for the Executive: I am a bit of a lock picker.

I hear what Mr McNulty says about transparency. He says that there should be accountability and that Parliament should be able to scrutinise the operation of the concordats. How on earth are we to do that? On page 8 of the memorandum of understanding, under the heading "Confidentiality and Public Statements", paragraph A1.11 states: "The proceedings of each meeting of the JMC will be regarded as confidential by the participants, in order to permit free and candid discussion. However, the holding of the JMC meetings may be made known publicly, and there may be occasions on which the Committee will wish to issue a public statement on the outcome of its discussions." If only the holding of meetings may be made known publicly, how on earth can such arrangements allow us to scrutinise anything?

rose—

I did not intend to speak in this debate, but as we went along, I realised that I am one of those women who are over 50, who get the recall and who defer going for screening. I am ashamed to say that I have deferred going for the test often, when I am one of the people who should not. What made me eventually go for the check-up was the fact that another woman in the office where I work was diagnosed with breast cancer. There needs to be a major education programme for people, including professionals, who, like myself, are as guilty as anybody of deferring going for a check-up against all the odds. When women who have been for a check-up get a recall, I understand that it is quite often the case that a faulty plate has been taken. I had a friend who had to wait a week after being told that she had a recall to find out that it was only another check-up. For the whole week, she did not eat and was worried sick—she imagined herself in a coffin. We must do something about the procedures for recalls, so that further scans are taken as quickly as possible and women's minds are put at ease. I thank Pauline McNeill for securing this debate which allows the Parliament to highlight the problem.

Mr McLeish's motion contains fine words, but I want to put them to a factual test. I will resist his invitation not to refer to a geographical area and take him back to that most fragile economy, the Borders. The cashmere industry and electronics are two key areas in which the test of those fine words will be applied. As Mr McLeish knows—he has visited often enough—there are very high levels of employment, and therefore a high proportion of skills, in textiles, which is a declining industry. He is also familiar with the background to the electronics industry. A very good company, Exacta, was bought over by Viasystems, which was a predatory investment company. Viasystems closed the plant down when it was profitable, moved on and left a thousand people out of work. However, there is a very good indigenous company in the Borders that requires to expand. I will ask Mr McLeish about those areas to establish whether his report card will pass at the end of the year. The Borders has the lowest level of industrial investment per employee in Scotland—that is a fact. I hope that the Borders press will also note the fact that neither of the MSPs for the Borders, nor any other Liberal Democrat MSP, is present. A haulier told me that 4 to 5 per cent is added to his costs because of the fuel escalator and that he cannot recover it from the suppliers he transports for. That is another burden that the Borders does not need—people there do not need green measures, they need work. There is a need for information technologies to be modernised in the Borders. Until I spoke to Scottish Borders Enterprise, I had not appreciated that it is because there is no competition for Scottish Telecom from other suppliers that there is great difficulty upgrading the networks. Young people leaving the Borders influences the Borders economy. I wonder why they are leaving. The area has the highest proportions of people over 65 and over 75 in Scotland. Specific examples that I would like Mr McLeish to take note of are Viasystems and Signum Circuits. Mr McLeish sighs when I come back to that.

I am glad he does not. I understand that negotiations for the lease of the Dunsdale site in Selkirk are still under way. I thought that they had been concluded. They must be, and regional selective assistance must be given to Signum Circuits to take on additional Viasystems workers. Thirty have already been  taken on; Signum Circuits has 210 employees and could double that. That would be investing in manufacturing. I understand that Viasystems is holding up the sale of the Gala site, which Scottish Borders Enterprise wants to purchase. I am told that the price is quite inflated. I do not know what is behind that and I hope Mr McLeish can do something about it and that Viasystems will be realistic and not hold recovery in the Borders to ransom. It has already done enough damage to the area. As to textiles, there is a cashmere promotion in London at the moment, at Harrods. The industry is facing great problems. It wants to change from quantity to quality. That would involve a campus of Heriot-Watt University to develop research not just into design but in fibres and materials, creating a centre of excellence for textile development in Scotland. Those are some of the things I want Mr McLeish to address: in summary, a cashmere task force; assistance to Signum Circuits; and a national transport strategy that includes a railway line to the Borders. SBE says that that is not an option but a necessity. In the meantime, at the very least an upgrading of the A68 and the A7, with more crawler lanes, is needed. Finally, just tell the people of the Borders that interest rates are overheating—it is gey cauld down there.

Will Mr Harper take an intervention?

Does Mr Harper think that the reason for Denmark's success might be because it is an independent country?

I want to focus on the phrase "promoting social inclusion and encouraging active citizenship" in Jackie Baillie's motion and on the increasing number of elderly people in society, of which the minister will be well aware. A few statistics, produced by Age Concern, might be useful. In 1997, the population of Scotland was some 5 million plus; that is a falling population. Of that number, more than 1 million were aged over 60; nearly 400,000 of them were in the 75-plus age group and 80,000 were in the 85-plus age group. Those figures are set to rise—by 2016 21 per cent of our population will be over 75. In Scotland now, we have more people of pensionable age than we have schoolchildren, yet we do not have facilities for many of our older people, who live in poverty, in poor housing, with poor pensions, poor access to transport, health problems and so on. Like Keith Raffan, I have a shopping list. I want to draw the minister's attention to Broomhill day centre at Penicuik. I hope that the deputy minister will listen to this example, as the establishment does not cost much. The centre was set up 16 years ago, at which time it operated one day a week as a day centre for the frail and elderly. Now, the centre operates five days a week and has places for 85 individuals in Penicuik and its environs, 25 per cent of whom suffer from varying  degrees of dementia, and 75 per cent of whom are simply physically frail. In 1997-98, the centre got £47,950 from the social work department and £10,250 from a one-off health grant. It had to grub around to get another £12,000 from trusts. The centre managed to raise £70,150 in total and expended only £72,000 in running costs, which is peanuts. It works out at a cost per individual for day respite care of £85—that is all. However, it is money well spent, not just for the taxpayer, but in terms of the human happiness brought by keeping people in their community. The centre also provides day relief for the carers who are behind every one of the people who use the centre and who might have fallen into ill health themselves were it not for the simple respite care that the centre provides, along with counselling and the opportunity to meet other carers. However, the centre has to grub around for money again this year and does not even have a health grant available to it. I therefore welcome the three-year programme of funding, but I want something more.

I have two short questions for the minister. Will she address the funding problems of that day centre, which has such low demands? Furthermore, will she consider the wider matter of statutory rights to funding for day care centres?

I shall refer to the document "Safer communities in Scotland", although I found the managerial jargon that it contains a bit of a headache. I hope that it is easier for the public at large to understand—maybe it is an age thing, but I used to speak English. I do not know to which language such jargon belongs. I refer to page 9 of that document. Under the heading "Developing a successful partnership", the document describes the findings of an audit, entitled "Safety in Numbers", that was carried out in England and Wales. One or two concerns are highlighted. The review "found that many strategies do not reflect   local people's priorities;   are weak on the causes of crime;   fail to invest sufficiently in prevention".    I stop at those three concerns, as I want to focus on crime prevention—in particular, the prevention of youth crime. The minister said that the level of crime is falling, but he was referring to the level of reported crimes. I suspect that many people nowadays, for a variety of reasons, do not report criminal offences on the lower scale. They do not call the police, because the police do not have a swift response time. Youth crime affects all manner of communities,  both urban and rural. I welcome the fact that this document recognises the differences between rural and urban communities in regard to the criminal activities that take place within them and the policing that is required. We have all seen examples of petty vandalism, from a wheelie bin being taken halfway down the street to the acts of major vandalism by young people that usually take place at dusk during the school holidays. The key to tackling youth crime, which has been identified by members today, is intervention at the earliest possible stage—and early means really early. Before I was a lawyer I was a schoolteacher. I remember seeing a five-year-old in the playground who was well on the way to a professional criminal career, and that is what happened. For some people, criminal behaviour starts pre-school, and we should identify the factors that make youngsters commit crimes. I am glad that you are back, Phil. We cannot look for the illusionary quick fix. Phil Gallie is a great tabloid man, looking for short, sharp shocks, shots across bows and all that stuff. Those would have some merit if they worked. They do not work, and they do not pretend to address the causes of juvenile crime.

I shall give way in a moment. Let me get going a wee bit. I have sat through an awful lot of your speech, Phil. We recognise that it is human, when we see someone vandalising property—particularly our own car tyres or something—to want to go out and kill that person. That is an animal reaction; it is not the reaction of a civilised society in dealing with the offender, nor does it serve the interests of the community. I am pleased that the report addresses social inclusion—I am getting used to using such buzz expressions now—because a great deal of youth crime depends on family background, what happens at school, friends, one's self-evaluation, peer and community influence, and whether the offender lives in a neighbourhood in which taking drugs is standard. I am not excusing youth crime; I am explaining it, Phil. Those factors must be at the core of crime prevention requirements of the young offender.

Yes. I shall now.

Phil Gallie took the words right out of my mouth. We will not have done such people any favours because we are not attacking youth crime in the right manner. Incarcerating people is not the right thing to do; prisons tend to become universities of crime, from which people graduate with better information and tricks than they went in with, and probably with worse drug problems too. I commend the children's panel system. It may be creaking at the seams now, but it was a great innovation in Scotland in 1971. It endeavoured to take children out of the penal system and to deal holistically—to use another buzz expression—with crime. Families attended and people all around tried to get to the bottom of what was wrong with the children to make them act as they did. In recent years, however, and particularly under the Conservatives, there has been a shift towards a more punitive disposal of young offenders, which does not work. After the dreadful murder of Jamie Bulger, John Major said that we should condemn more and understand less. How misguided. We can do both; we can condemn more and understand more, and that is the key to the solution. Phil Gallie should beware making judgments on cases based on what he reads in the papers. He should read the evidence; our sheriffs are not all bampots. We need an informed understanding of juvenile crime so that our disposal can be informed. That is not to say that we should go soft on crime, just as an informed debate on increasing drug problems should not be described as being soft on drugs. We should not back off from those important and complex issues. This Parliament should address them and come up with adult responses to them. I welcome the involvement of voluntary sector organisations such as Victim Support, Safeguarding Communities Reducing Offending and Barnardo's. Barnardo's has been running a programme for young offenders that has delivered a success rate of 60 per cent non-offending after four years. That is a good hit rate, and I hope that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee will consider that work in its discussions on youth offending. That leads me to "Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Prisons for Scotland Report for 1998-1999", which does not contain such good news for the Executive. On page 21, there is a report of an inspection conducted in May 1998 at Polmont young offenders institution. The facility was 12 per cent overpopulated, and the report states: "Of more immediate concern, some 25% of the population were lying idle on a daily basis, either because  there was not enough work or because there were insufficient places for them on offending behaviour and other programmes. This is a situation which is unacceptable, both in terms of each offender's needs and of the potential long term impact that this is likely to have on communities throughout Scotland when they are released." We should not just be preventing youth crime, we should do something once young offenders are in prison, but we are not doing it. Page 20 of the prison report says of Glenochil: "The facilities in the YOI reflected the lack of investment and the low priority which has been given to YOs generally." On pages 15 and 16, on Longriggend, it says of the chief inspector's concerns: "Paramount amongst these was the lack of a national strategy for young offenders and young remands". Further on, in relation to drugs, it says: "On the other hand, we felt that the treatment of drug withdrawal problems was still relatively perfunctory." I have lifted those quotations out of the report, but I am sure that members are familiar with it. We must address those issues. We must not concentrate only on keeping people out of prison before they get established on the road to crime; if we put young people into custody, we cannot leave them to rot and learn bad tricks. I ask the Executive to take account of that.

I am delighted to support Alasdair's motion. I speak in this debate not just in the guise of a former English teacher, but as a former English teacher in Galloway. I taught at Whithorn and at the Douglas Ewart school in Newton Stewart, where Alasdair also taught at one point. I know about the decline of Galloway. While I was there, the pulp mill in Minnigaff closed, Bladnoch distillery closed, Sorbie creamery closed and the granite works at Creetown closed. Those closures caused dreadful devastation in the area. People were locked into communities in poverty, with nothing happening for them. As Alasdair said, at one time Wigtown looked like something out of a western, with tumbleweed blowing down the street. I am not being light-hearted about it; it had reached that stage. The buildings were literally falling down. As a candidate in the European elections in 1994, I went round Wigtown and saw how far it had declined in the short time since I had left Galloway to become that horrible thing, a lawyer in Edinburgh. I am delighted that Wigtown is the national book town. I endorse what Alasdair said about the area being a forgotten corner. When I lived there, time after time people would say to me, "Galloway. You are in Newton Stewart. That will be near Dumfries." Dumfries is 60 miles away. The greatest lack of knowledge about Galloway  is among the Scottish people, yet it is rich in Scottish history. Wallace and Bruce won victories over the English at Glen Trool. Glen Trool is a marvellous place. We should get people to come back to Wigtown, to help this town that was once the county town. People should come and imbibe Scottish history there. I wish Wigtown the book town success, and I wish the tourist board success in promoting Galloway.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has taken place in relation to the Borders printed circuit board manufacturer Signum Circuits'  request for regional selective assistance which would allow it to expand its operations in Selkirk. (S1O-254)

I thank the minister for his answer. Is the minister aware that Signum Circuits has a full order book and has set up a European development to bring in business? He may not be aware that the company is in a position to take on 40 or 50 workers formerly employed by Viasystems. Will he assure me that progress towards allowing Signum Circuits, an indigenous Borders firm, to expand into the former Viasystems site will take place as soon as possible, if not immediately?

Is the minister aware that that article was prompted by the fact that the company itself is most concerned that the commercial urgency of expansion does not appear to be given enough weight by the Executive?

In the legislation that is proposed by Mr Wallace, the point is that the patient will continue to be detained in hospital, whether or not for medical treatment. That sounds as if a hospital will become a mental dustbin for people and, as such, takes away society's obligations to treat people who are so detained while at the same time taking away their liberty. It has been said time and again that Mr Ruddle was treatable; he simply did not receive the treatment.  Amendment 7 strikes a balance between the rights of society-

I have read the sheriff's report carefully. Treatment for Mr Ruddle's personality disorder was available at Broadmoor hospital and he was on the verge of being sent there when he realised that, because he was not receiving any treatment, there was a loophole in the law.  Our amendment makes the point that society's  right to be protected needs to be balanced against the detainee's right to treatment. Mr McLetchie knows that the point about our amendment is that it will be mandatory for the sheriff to "take account of the suitability for the patient of the facilities in which continued detention would take place"- that is, his historic treatment-  "and may, if he considers it appropriate, make an order in connection with the delivery of treatment to the patient."  The treatment does not have to take place at the patient's unit. For instance, Carstairs might not have the appropriate facilities and the sheriff would be able to take a different course of action.  The state is thus obliged to provide the sheriff with sufficient evidence about the patient's historic treatment and about treatment prevailing generally when he considers an appeal. Such evidence was not available to the sheriff in the Ruddle case. He says in his report that the treatments "have not been made available and the evidence is unsatisfactory as to whether they would now be likely to alleviate or prevent a deterioration in the applicant's condition."  The sheriff does not say that the treatment was not there, but says that the quality of the Crown's evidence in the case was not good. The state is obliged to provide evidence for the sheriff, to make sure that the right action is being taken for an individual. I think that that raises the issue of the European convention on human rights, which Mr Canavan mentioned. We need to strike a balance between the state's duty to the public and its duty to the individual.  If the state takes away an individual's liberty by detaining him or her in a mental hospital, that should place a duty on the state to exhibit on appeal the availability of treatment for that individual. That information should not come out in later evidence, but should be one of the first considerations in a case. It also means that, if such evidence is not exhibited during the first appeal, there should be a further appeal should the sheriff find that such evidence has not been brought.  In those circumstances, I suggest that our sensible amendment strengthens the bill and will provide a fair balance between the rights of society and the rights of the detainee.

I asked two questions of the Lord Advocate: if they are not answered now, will they be answered in writing?

I want to pick up on Robert Brown's point about what he regards as the antagonistic approach taken by the Opposition in the first part of this debate. It is the duty of the Opposition to scrutinise the Executive on its behaviour, past and present, and that is what we are doing. It is also  the duty of the Opposition to be constructive when legislation is put before this chamber, particularly in this instance.  I am not convinced that this legislation is not driven by incompetence in the handling of the Ruddle case. Section 1 of the bill refers to medical treatment. I hope that, as a result of this legislation, which is subject to amendment, people who are placed in Carstairs are not denied medical treatment. Let us make this clear: Ruddle was treatable, he simply did not get treatment. I hope that the minister will listen to that.  I would like an answer from the Lord Advocate on Dr White's role in the case, which has been mentioned. In April 1998, Dr White came back to Carstairs to find that the medical sub-committee had informed Ruddle of its decision that he should be discharged. Dr White was at first opposed to that, because he had been trying-unsuccessfully-to get the man treated for five years, in the face of resistance from the regime at Carstairs. He then changed his mind. It is my understanding that he did so on the legal advice of the office of the Secretary of State for Scotland. I would like to know whether that was the case. Ruddle was able to exploit what is euphemistically called a loophole in the legislation. He would not have been able to do anything if he had been receiving treatment.  I would have raised a second point if I had been allowed to intervene earlier. Although I welcome the retention of the conditional discharge-a halfway house-I would like to know whether, during the hearing on the Ruddle case, Mr Ruddle's legal team made any offer of a conditional discharge to settle the matter, and whether that offer was rejected out of hand by the Crown.  I welcome the right of appeal both ways-that is essential to create a balance. I also welcome what has been said about the rights of an individual who is placed in an institution such as Carstairs; either people need treatment and should be in an institution, or they should be in prison. In too many cases, the reverse is true: we have people with mental health problems in prison, and people who appear not to have mental health problems-because they obtain discharge-in Carstairs.  Generally, the legislation is to be welcomed. I know that the SNP is considering amendments to the bill to protect rights all round. No doubt that will be addressed later.

rose-

rose-

rose-

It is difficult to bring anything fresh to this stage of a debate, so I am speaking on behalf of my left foot, which has had immediate contact with the Edinburgh royal infirmary. I have been privileged not only to assess disability access in this building, which is very poor, but to gather information at first hand about the need for a new royal infirmary.  I was wheeled into accident and emergency only a month ago with my throbbing foot raised in front of me. I was parked next to a youthful tae kwon do enthusiast-in parallel pose-while we waited an interminable time, as in a Monty Python sketch, to be taken for examination. Much, much later that night, I progressed-or so I thought-to a cubicle and was left, shrouded in a green curtain, in solitary confinement. Time passed slowly and I was wondering whether I had been forgotten about when a cheery male nurse did the necessary and went off to hunt for what he called "a decent crutch". He did not find one. While he fondled my foot in the line of duty, we had a deep discourse about the level of nursing pay. It was a useful discussion, and I thoroughly sympathise with nurses over their remuneration. I hope that we can do something about it.  Subsequent visits to the fracture unit have  continued my health service education. Access to the fracture unit, for one who is hirpling around the city, offers a challenge of gladiatorial proportions. Transport can get no further than a portcullis entrance. My left foot and I, and the not-so-decent crutches, had a 30 yd trek to the main entrance. That was stage 1. After a prolonged and enforced break at reception-people should take their own entertainment and provisions as the 2 pm appointment should have read 3 pm; I took a stereo, a magazine and a banana-I progressed to stage 2. I was then shown a lengthy corridor where I was lead to believe that I would find, like Jabba the Hutt, the residence of the consultant. He appeared after a considerable length of time from the only door I was not watching. In the meantime, I had the privilege of reading my own medical notes, as many of us do.

I will do. I am coming to that, if Mary Scanlon will oblige me.  I had not been in a hospital for 40 years and realised what the royal infirmary's difficulties are. I fully accept and am sympathetic to the bill. The difficulty is that the new infirmary should not be built at any cost to the Scottish public.  We have thoroughly examined the matter of PFI. It is a disgraceful way to finance public services and buildings, and I am astonished at some of the contributions from the likes of John McAllion. I will not requote the quote that has come back to haunt him, but will mention my Labour opponent in the Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale constituency, George McGregor. Speaking as a Unison representative, he said:  "The Edinburgh Royal Infirmary will cost the taxpayer 1.5 billion pounds to fund a hospital which in cost is 190 million pounds. For us, we say that PFI is about getting a mortgage with a loan shark."  Poor George. How that hung like an albatross round his neck during the debates in Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale. He did not support PFI, and I know that many on the Labour benches are very unhappy about it. When I sit in this chamber and hear Conservatives congratulating Labour congratulating the Liberal Democrats, I feel that I am in a surreal stage setting.  It is time that the matter was revisited. The SNP proposal is a very good one, the financial aspects of which-like Margaret Smith, I am not an economist-will be developed by Andrew Wilson. I commend the motion.

I am very interested in what Mr Robson has to say. He is now a Borders MSP, as is Mr Jenkins. Does Mr Robson think that the Liberal Democrats have a mandate to go into a coalition with the Labour party when in Roxburghshire the Labour party came fourth, and in Tweeddale it came third? I do not think that the Liberal Democrats have the authority of the people in the Borders for such a coalition.