I advise that I am quite happy to be called at this stage, Presiding Officer. I congratulate Stuart McMillan on securing this debate on what is a very important issue. Like him, I regret the need to have the debate, because a society as wealthy as ours should not need food banks. However, it is important that the Parliament debates the issue, and on that basis I thank Stuart McMillan. The use of food banks is an important issue both in the West Scotland region, which Stuart McMillan represents, and across Scotland. In my area, we have food banks in both Cumbernauld and Kilsyth—they are small, independent, local initiatives—and other organisations, such as the Salvation Army, that provide resilience for people. I put on the record my thanks to those organisations for their efforts. Through the work of the Welfare Reform Committee, we know that even in the smallest and most remote communities in Scotland there is a tendency for food banks to play an ever more important role in providing assistance to our fellow citizens.

I will try to shout as well, Presiding Officer. Let us see if that helps. The Welfare Reform Committee will engage with the issue and look at the role of food banks in due course. The Trussell Trust advises that it launched its first food bank in 2000. That reminds us that food banks have been required for a longer time than the welfare reform period, but there can be no doubt that that process has been the major driver of the increased reliance on food banks. The Trussell Trust states that, between April 2013 and the beginning of February 2014, the reasons given most often for food bank referrals to it included benefit delay at 30 per cent and benefit change at 20 per cent. Oxfam states: “Most people ... who turn to emergency food banks are experiencing some sort of benefit delay.” Barnardo’s Scotland mentions “cuts to the levels of welfare support ... delays in getting benefits” and the “stricter sanction regime” as being important drivers of the increased reliance on food banks. As Stuart McMillan said, there has been a large growth in the number of food banks that the Trussell Trust supports, from one food bank to 43 in the period 2011 to 2014. That is the period over which the welfare reforms have been put in place. In the face of that reality, we do well to remind ourselves that the UK Government wrote a letter to Glasgow City Council in which it claimed that its welfare reform process is not the driver of the increased number of food banks. Incredibly, it claimed that the increase was due to supermarkets reducing their food waste—so it is supermarket efficiency that is the driver and not the UK Government’s welfare reform process. Frankly, UK Government ministers are divorced from reality. I regret that there are no members of the UK Government parties in the chamber to defend that position. It would have been interesting to hear whether they concur with it. However, I believe that supermarkets have a role to play, and I will give an example from my constituency. Kilsyth community food bank recently entered a partnership with the local branch of Lidl, which will now provide it with food that it can no longer sell but which is still edible. That is a sensible approach on which both organisations should be congratulated. In this day and age, it is frankly criminal for supermarkets to dispose of edible food by putting it in the bin and sending it to landfill. To my mind, that is a greater crime than a desperate person feeding themselves by retrieving such foodstuffs that have been binned. Supermarkets should be supporting food banks. I thank Stuart McMillan once more and hope that, if we ever debate the issue of food banks again, we will be talking about an historical aberration rather than an on-going reality.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what benefits Creative Scotland’s youth music initiative could bring to groups in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. (S4O-02877)

My constituency is fortunate to have much musical talent among its young people, epitomised by initiatives such as the fantastic Whitelees primary school of rock. Will the cabinet secretary set out how areas and groups that may be eligible for funding but are not aware of it can be identified? What steps can be taken to raise awareness of such opportunities?

Just last week, the Welfare Reform Committee, of which I am the deputy convener, published its interim report on the bedroom tax. The committee found that the bedroom tax is “iniquitous and inhumane and may well breach tenants’ human rights” and is “having a real and harmful impact on people’s lives, and often the most vulnerable in society—those with disabilities, children in separated families etc.” The report continued: “Many people are ‘trapped’ into paying the ‘bedroom tax’ in that there are not enough one bedroom properties available to down-size to.” The committee feels that the solution is for the UK Government to immediately abolish the tax but that, if it does not do so, the Scottish Parliament “should be given the powers and resources to abolish it.” All members of the committee, except Alex Johnstone, supported that view. I believe in that position: it would allow us to get rid of the iniquitous bedroom tax. Short of that, it is incumbent on all of us to do what we can to help those who are on the sharp end of the bedroom tax. Of course, the Scottish Government topped up discretionary housing payments to the full amount last year and it is committed to doing so in the coming year. The Finance Committee and the Welfare Reform Committee in their budget scrutiny welcomed that funding, which was also welcomed by others outside of this place.

Indeed.

I agree that that is an area of concern, which runs into the issue of the limitations of the Scottish Government and this Parliament to act more generally. There are issues for housing associations as well. I welcome the £15 million, on top of the money that was announced previously, that has been identified as a mechanism to mitigate the bedroom tax. It is right to direct that to discretionary housing payments, because how we direct resources to mitigate the bedroom tax comes up against the limitations of the powers of this Parliament: the reservations of the Scotland Act 1998 in relation to social security payments. DHPs are the clear, obvious way to direct resources for this effort. Discretionary housing payments are a way to get money into the pockets of those who need it. It is preferable to do that, rather than write off debt, because that would prevent people from getting into debt in the first place. We have seen great demand for DHPs in many parts of Scotland. In North Lanarkshire, where my constituency is located—as, indeed, is yours, Presiding Officer—there was an increase of 881.52 per cent in DHPs awarded in April to November last year compared to the equivalent period in the previous year. That is a staggering increase. It is right that we direct additional resources to discretionary housing payments, but that runs up against another limitation that we have: local authorities can top up discretionary housing benefits only to no more than 2.5 times the DWP allocation that they have received. That cap comes from a statutory instrument made under section 70 of the Child Support, Pensions and Social Security Act 2000. We need the DWP to agree to lift that cap. I believe that the DWP should have committed more to DHPs in the first place. We know that despite the fact that Scotland has 20,000 more households that are affected by the bedroom tax than London has, the DHP allocation for Scotland for this coming year is £35 million less than the allocation for London. The Scottish Government has identified additional funding. UK ministers have said—Gavin Brown referred to this obliquely—that the Scottish Government can spend its resources as it sees fit. An increase in DHP funding is what the Scottish Government has identified as the best way to spend its resources, and it will not cost the UK Government an additional brass farthing. Any opposition to that could only be born of spite. When we vote on the budget this evening, this Parliament should send a clear and unambiguous message to Iain Duncan Smith—who continues to be too afraid to appear in public session at our Parliament’s Welfare Reform Committee—that we support the method that the Scottish Government identified to further mitigate his bedroom tax. Scotland suffers in the welfare reform process in ways other than the bedroom tax, as the cabinet secretary said. Some £4.5 billion is being removed over five years, and after welfare reform is fully in place £2 billion will be removed per annum. That is why I welcome the range of measures that the Scottish Government has taken. Some £244 million has been committed over a three-year period and there is now an additional £15 million. That is a fantastic commitment by a devolved Administration to do what it can to mitigate the effects of an iniquitous welfare reform process. That is why I supported previous Scottish Government budgets and why I will support this Scottish Government budget. I look forward to the day when we see Scottish Government budgets that do not just mitigate the welfare reform process but put in place a decent and fair social security system for people here in Scotland.

There is merit in reviewing the position of civil partnerships, so I thank Patrick Harvie for lodging amendments 28 and 29. Most people would accept that the Parliament created the institution of civil partnership because, at that stage, it was not quite prepared to do what we are likely to do today and legislate for those in same-sex relationships to be able to get married. However, I approach the matter from a slightly different perspective from that of Patrick Harvie. If we legislate for same-sex couples to be able to get married, we call into question the position of the institution of civil partnership. Frankly, I doubt that those who are in civil partnerships today aspired to enter the institution of civil partnership; they chose to enter that institution because it was the one that was available to them. I suspect that most people in that institution already regard themselves as married, and that is why it is important that we are taking the step that we are taking today. That step calls into question the on-going position of civil partnerships. I know that the Scottish Government is to review the position, as Patrick Harvie has called for. Equally, I accept his point about choice, and that is why it is important that we have a review that can inform the position. If the cabinet secretary can set out how the review will go forward and what options it will consider, we may be able to conclude that amendment 28, with which I sympathise, is unnecessary.

I thank the committee for its work and Barnardo’s for its petition. David Stewart was right to talk about “the dark corners of Scotland”. None of us doubts how difficult and harrowing the subject must have been for the committee to deal with, but it could have considered no more important a subject. It would have been wrong to duck the issue just because it is difficult. The committee is to be commended for taking the issue forward and for bringing the debate to the chamber. As a father and a human being, I find incredible the physical and mental damage that some people inflict on children and young people. Jackson Carlaw referred to the “dark side of human behaviour”, which is the least that we could describe the activities as. The young people who are affected deserve our protection and they deserve to live happy childhoods. It is always depressing beyond expression when we hear of those who have been exploited. Recent revelations in the media have probably brought the issue to the fore, but it has—sadly—long been with us. David Stewart mentioned the depressing case studies that are set out in the report. They represent different stories and experiences, but all of them provide a litany of testimony to the fact that child sexual exploitation is a real and present danger in Scotland. The questions for us, as a Parliament, are how we support those who have been affected, and how we will tackle the incidence of child exploitation in the future. The report is an important part of that consideration and I welcome it in that context. The committee made a number of recommendations, each of which is commendable in its own way. I might touch on some of them. I do not think that the Scottish Government has responded to the report yet, so I look forward to seeing its response. However, it is clear that the Government has taken action to tackle child exploitation—for example, the minister referred to the ministerial short-life working group. That brings me to one of the committee’s recommendations, which was to review the national strategy. I know that the working group has essentially undertaken work that has laid out a series of actions that will have to be taken to strengthen how we address child sexual exploitation. That seems to be similar to work that the committee has requested, and the point has been well made about action being taken rather than having another review. Indeed the Scottish Government has taken other action, including the summit on internet safety, funding for respectme and ChildLine, and issuing advice to schools to encourage safe and responsible use of mobile phone technology in schools. We can see that the Scottish Government has undertaken a range of measures to tackle what is a pernicious social ill. I note that one of the things that the petition called for was research into the nature and scope of child sexual exploitation. Of course, we have heard that the Government has commissioned the University of Bedfordshire to look at that work and the work that is being done in the Forth valley pilot to which the minister referred. Again, we can see the Government responding to the petition. In saying that, we should recognise the difficulties that will always exist for us in establishing the prevalence of child sexual exploitation. The victims are understandably reluctant to come forward because they are concerned about not being believed, or they face intimidation, and there is often misplaced shame. The victims are not the people who should feel ashamed, but shame is often an issue, as was reflected in the case studies. There are difficulties in establishing the exact scale of the problem, but I agree that we should try to quantify it and I would welcome any efforts to do so. However, I consider that it is rather more important to tackle the problem than it is to quantify it. After all, if one child is being exploited, that is too high a prevalence for our society to bear. How we tackle the problem must be informed by involvement in the area. I agreed with Jackson Carlaw’s point, although I might paraphrase it slightly differently: we need to caution against the political class being seen to do something just because something needs to be done. We need to ensure the efficacy of any measures that we take. In that regard, I will highlight a few concerns that have been raised by outside groups in briefings that have been provided ahead of today’s debate. The first is in education, which was picked up on by the committee. Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People and Liam McArthur made the point about placing the work within the context of children’s rights, as set out in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. Article 29 is the right to education; the commissioner pointed out that “Recent research with young people in Scotland revealed worrying attitudes to sexual health and consent ... and the sexual objectification of girls and young women highlight the need to tackle such attitudes.” The commissioner suggests that: “The Scottish Government’s forthcoming update of its guidance on Relationships, Sexual Health and Parenthood Education (RSHPE) provides one important opportunity” to deal with education around these issues. Barnardo’s Scotland made the same point, as did Aberlour Child Care Trust. It would be interesting to hear the Scottish Government’s perspective on those views and how we can better educate our young people to be safe. We also need to reflect the fact that the problem manifests itself in different ways in different places, and the role of child protection committees must also be viewed as important. In its briefing, Barnardo’s talks about how data can be shared better between child protection committees. That strikes me as an important point to make, so it would be useful to know how the Scottish Government is facilitating such information sharing. I will close by talking about the role of parents in responding to concerns about child sexual exploitation. As a father, I consider that it is my responsibility to ensure, along with my wife, that my two children are aware of the dangers that exist. I do not want them to be overawed or weighed down by them, but to be aware. As parents, we aim to ensure that our young children grow up to have respect for themselves and respect for others. We do our best to bring them up in an environment that nourishes and cherishes. The role of the parent is an important part of the challenge in tackling child sexual exploitation. We know that, despite the best efforts of parents, young people sometimes get drawn into circumstances that we do not want them to get into. We know that there are parents who are neglectful. Even further beyond my comprehension is that sometimes parents themselves are the perpetrators of that exploitation. It is right, therefore, that we have a strategy to try to deal with child sexual exploitation. I commend the Public Petitions Committee in that regard. I hope that when we return to this subject, we will see further progress on tackling the exploitation of Scotland’s young people.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the chance to speak in the debate, and I welcome the range of measures that are set out in the Scottish Government’s budget. I want to focus on just a few areas, primarily how the budget relates to Scotland’s youngest citizens. The Finance Committee, of which I am a member, looked at the preventative spend agenda, as it has done in previous years. One of the areas that we examined in that regard was the early years change fund. The committee recently had an extremely useful evidence session with the Minister for Children and Young People and the chief medical officer, in which we received some compelling evidence on what is happening in that area and the work of the early years collaborative. The committee was interested to learn how the change funds have leveraged in additional funding. In its response to the committee’s report on the draft budget, the Scottish Government set out that the community planning partnerships had provided returns that indicate that “significantly more is spent on the early years by Health Boards and local government than is captured by the Change Fund. The additional spend is estimated to be around 10 times the £272.5 million minimum agreed contributions invested in the Early Years Change Fund. From the 29 CPPs that provided a breakdown in figures, 12 reported local authority spending above the Change Fund guidance levels.” That is very welcome news indeed but, of course, the policy’s true effectiveness will be judged not by the money that is invested and the funds that are leveraged in but by the outcomes for Scotland’s young people. The minister and the chief medical officer set out very vividly in their evidence the scale of the challenge and the ambition. Indeed, the chief medical officer mentioned his ambition for one of the outcomes of these efforts to be the closure of Polmont young offenders institution, such would be the positive impact on Scotland’s young people. Such an idea might seem grandiose, but surely we can all agree that it would be a positive outcome. The work of the early years collaborative and the funding that has been allocated in recent budgets to this activity might well take many years to manifest themselves, but they stand as a positive example of the Scottish Government’s budgetary and policy interventions. As we know, many children across Scotland need assistance and there are set to be many more. More than 50,000 children in Scotland are at risk of being pushed into poverty by 2020 as a consequence of the UK Government’s welfare reform and austerity agenda, which is why the Scottish Government’s efforts to mitigate such reforms are so important. The Finance Committee has welcomed the money that has been invested in that regard; I will not rehearse all the figures that have been mentioned but will say that the cabinet secretary certainly demonstrated the Government’s commitment when he mentioned the £244 million that would be allocated over a three-year period to try to limit in Scotland the damage of the UK Government’s welfare policies. However, we have to place that in some context. We know that the UK Government’s welfare reforms will remove £4.5 billion from the Scottish economy by 2015 and, according to the Scottish Government’s estimates, £2 billion thereafter. Those estimates tally with the findings of the Sheffield Hallam University research that was commissioned by the Welfare Reform Committee, of which I am a member, and we must be clear that no devolved Administration would be able to undo or mitigate that scale of reform. Nevertheless, what the Scottish Government is doing is making a difference and, in that respect, I want to focus on an issue that has already been touched on: the money that has been invested in discretionary housing payments. I very much welcome the £20 million that was invested this year and the further £20 million that has been set aside in this budget for the next financial year. As has been pointed out and as we all seem to agree, the legal maximum by which local authorities can top up their DHP fund is only 150 per cent of their allocation from the DWP, up to a maximum of two and a half times that allocation. That said, it is important to point out in this debate where that stipulation comes from. The legal maximum was set out in an order made under section 70 of the Child Support, Pensions and Social Security Act 2000, which was introduced when Alistair Darling was Secretary of State for Work and Pensions. It was interesting, therefore, to hear the litany from Labour members, demanding more funding to combat the bedroom tax. They would be a lot more credible if they themselves had not imposed the legal maximum for DHPs in the first place, or indeed if they could bring themselves to welcome the funding that has matched their own imposed legal maximum. In fact, far from welcoming it, they voted against the allocation of that funding during the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s consideration of the budget. In the limited time that I have left, I want to focus on two other areas in the budget that have already been mentioned and which will further support Scotland’s young people and their families. First, the extension of the 600 hours of free nursery education to two-year-olds from the hardest-pressed families will benefit 15,400 children and, secondly, free school meals will be extended to all schoolchildren from P1 to P3. I should declare an interest in that my young daughter will be one of those children. The move has been welcomed by many folk and other organisations outwith the chamber; indeed, Save the Children welcomes it in its great briefing for this debate. I just wish that it could be welcomed to the same degree across the chamber. I very much welcome it, which is why I will be voting for this budget this evening.

Like Elaine Murray, I will talk about the town centre action plan in the context of the local experience of my constituents. Like all members, I hope, I am proud to represent the area that I represent. I am proud to represent the towns of Cumbernauld and Kilsyth, which are two great towns with a lot going for them. They have a strong civic identity and community spirit. They have lots of green space in and around them for people to enjoy, they are well located and well connected to the rest of the country, they have great schools and they provide a great standard of living. One area of concern has been, and continues to be, the condition of the town centres in those towns, although that is perhaps less of a concern in Kilsyth, where efforts have been made to renovate that have been supported by the town centre regeneration fund that the Government established in the previous parliamentary session. The situation of Cumbernauld town centre is probably well known to most members and across the country. We have a town centre that holds the town back a little and reflects unfairly on the whole town; we certainly do not have a town centre that matches the civic pride that people in Cumbernauld have in their town. One of the big problems with Cumbernauld town centre is that, unlike most town centres, it is privately owned. That is unlike the situation in Kilsyth, where the high street is public property and the council can act in ways in which it cannot act in relation to Cumbernauld town centre. To be fair, I should say that the oldest part of Cumbernauld town centre has new owners who have plans to renovate it. I look forward to seeing those plans emerge. Any town centre action plan that can help Cumbernauld and other town centres is very much to be welcomed. The Government is to be congratulated on its plan, which, as the minister said, is the first of its kind in Scotland. The town centre housing fund, the town centre investment zones, the extension of the fresh start scheme and the money that is being provided for town centre charrettes are all examples of innovative approaches to reinvigorating town centres that I—and, I am sure, all other members—very much welcome. I heard some concern being expressed about the levels of funding for some of the measures, but the fact that they have been put in place should be welcomed by all members. The one thing that I have not mentioned that is set out in the town centre action plan is the town centre first principle. I broadly agree with the principle—it is not that different from existing principles for retail. However, I hope that we can be clear—the minister will perhaps respond—that it is not a hard-and-fast, absolute rule stopping development outwith the town centre entirely. Town centre first is a principle that will be very applicable in most cases—for example for Kilsyth within my constituency, which is a town of 10,000 with a concentrated population very close to the town centre. However, in cases such as Cumbernauld, which is a much bigger town of 50,000 people with some people living quite far away from the town centre, development outwith the town centre is appropriate—although development in the town centre is very much needed as well. I look forward to seeing what emerges from the discussions with COSLA in that regard. I also look forward to seeing the action plan being rolled out further and, I hope, reinvigorating Cumbernauld and Kilsyth town centres and town centres across the country.

I welcome the debate, and I thank the committee for bringing it to the chamber and for the work that it has done in assessing the draft climate change adaptation programme. If I picked the convener up rightly, he said that that work will continue, which I welcome. In the Parliament, we often hear members talk about the pride that they have in the legislation that we have passed to try to tackle climate change. It is clear why we need such legislation. Over the past few decades, our country has become warmer and wetter, with an increase in the amount of rainfall, especially in winter, and the occurrence of heavy downpours. That has very much been the case in recent weeks, which have given a vivid demonstration of climate change. Human activity obviously contributes to that, so it is clear that we must respond to the challenge. We can be proud of our legislation, but only if it is going to be effective in so far as it leads to any positive change. Scottish Environment LINK, which provided a briefing for the debate and welcomed the draft programme, made the point: “Scotland needs to plan now for the consequences and impacts of our changing climate. … Scotland must reduce” greenhouse gas “emissions but also adapt how we run our economy, our society and how we look after our environment.” However, it is clear that the legislation that we passed with targets that we have to achieve is working to some extent. Scotland’s adjusted emissions have fallen by 25.7 per cent from 1990, so we are on track to meet the ambitious 2020 target. Any climate change adaptation programme must complement and build on other efforts and make a positive contribution. The programme is, of course, a requirement in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 so I am confident that it will meet the test of complementing wider efforts to tackle climate change. I will speak about a couple of areas in the draft programme and focus on some of the areas that the committee picked up on. Before I do that, I say that I am positive about the programme. Jim Hume was a little critical of the consultation, but I welcome the wide consultation that there has been. There have been efforts to engage with public, private and third sector organisations that work across a range of different areas, such as planning, energy and transport. That seems to me to be a pretty diverse group of respondents. The first area I will focus on is the effort to build resilience in responding to emergency situations, which is topical given the problems that we have witnessed recently. I note that “The Committee considers local partnerships are vitally important in helping build the resilience of local communities.” The Government responded to that, setting out some of the work that it has done, such as guidance on building community resilience, support for a number of mechanisms that enable groups to share good practice and the ready Scotland website, which the minister mentioned. It is clear that work is going on to build community resilience. I ask the minister to set out in his closing speech how those tools are used in practice in responding to emergency situations. The other issue that I want to focus on concerns the idea of embedding in Government departments and society in general the wider approach to tackling climate change. The minister spoke about the dialogue with his colleagues, and I know that the committee made a recommendation about trying to deliver that approach. I ask the minister to update us on that, as it is an important issue. It would be good if he could set out how the Government is working to that end. I close by re-emphasising that I am extremely positive about the adaptation programme. I look forward to this chamber returning to this subject matter in future.

I thank witnesses for their evidence, the clerks for their support and other committees for the evidence that they provided the Finance Committee with—as others in the Finance Committee will undoubtedly do and as the convener has already done. I will speak from the perspective of not only a member of the Finance Committee but deputy convener of the Welfare Reform Committee during its budget scrutiny. As the convener set out, the Finance Committee focused on two main areas: the national performance framework and how it interacts with the budget process; and the preventative spend agenda. On the NPF, I confess that I have not been particularly engaged in thinking about the Scotland performs website that is associated with it and have not particularly utilised it, so I will need to consider how I do so in the future. However, it is clear that those who are engaged in that area and who think about it like what they see. The cabinet secretary quoted from the Carnegie UK Trust report and set out its perspective. The trust also told the Finance Committee that the NPF is “a tool of international significance.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 9 October 2013; c 3124.] Donald MacRae said in written evidence that the national performance framework “deserves strong support and positive endorsement”. Jeremy Peat said that it is “a remarkable achievement”. The Centre for Public Policy for Regions said in written evidence that “setting ambitious targets across all the areas identified” in the national performance framework “is to be commended.” Therefore, it is clear that the NPF is well-liked by the policy-making community. Some concern was expressed that the NPF is not particularly well known. When the cabinet secretary was giving evidence to the Finance Committee in Arbroath, he stated that he felt that the NPF is probably “pretty well known” at public leadership level and “probably well known” by the policy-making community. There was a degree of irony in having people before the committee telling us that the NPF is not well known when they are there telling us everything that they know about it because they do in fact know about it. A more appropriate question than whether the national performance framework is well known is probably whether it is being used as well as it could be. To reflect on my own experience, a number of witnesses and other committees spoke about how the national performance framework could be better linked to spending priorities. I take on board the cabinet secretary’s points about how it would probably be impossible to link every outcome to every pound that has been spent—Gavin Brown made that point, as well—but I wonder how the national performance framework might interact better with the budget process. Perhaps that is as much a matter for Parliament as it is for the Government in setting its budget, and perhaps there is as much an issue for the Parliament in how we use the national performance framework in our budget scrutiny across the committees. We will have an opportunity to consider that in light of the consultation on the community empowerment and renewal bill, as the cabinet secretary has confirmed that the Government will consult on putting the national performance framework on a statutory footing in that consultation. Perhaps when members consider that bill, we can think about how we might utilise the national performance framework better in future. The other area is the preventative spend agenda. Obviously, the committee’s assessment builds on previous work in previous years. It is clear that preventative spend has to be a priority for all of us. In an environment in which budgets have been tightened, we must ensure that every pound in the public purse is spent wisely, but we must also, of course, consider that the preventative spend agenda can lead to better outcomes for individuals. Various examples have been cited, such as the older person who wants to stay in their home and not have to go to hospital. Clearly, if we can deliver that, it will be a better outcome for them; and it would be a better outcome for the public purse. Intervening early with a young person who may be in danger of falling into the criminal justice system and keeping them out of jail is also better for them and for the public purse. Therefore, I welcome the change funds that have been delivered to help to achieve that end and look forward to continuing to assess the preventative spend agenda. I note that the Finance Committee said: “The Committee welcomes the additional money to alleviate the impact of the welfare reforms”. There was a similar experience at the Welfare Reform Committee, which focused its budget scrutiny work on the Scottish welfare fund and the council tax reduction scheme. As a committee, we commended “the actions of the Scottish Government in supporting” the Scottish welfare fund “and protecting the vulnerable”, and supported the proposed level of funding. On council tax reduction, the committee welcomed ”the steps taken by the Scottish Government and local authorities to work together on the provision of this scheme, which has avoided some of the difficulties being experienced in England and Wales.“ I note that other committees, such as the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee and the Equal Opportunities Committee, have engaged in thinking about the welfare reform agenda. Like the Welfare Reform Committee, they are doing so on a collegiate basis. I was disappointed that there was a division in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. Some members, including the two Labour members, voted against the money that is being delivered for discretionary housing payments. That rather puts in context Iain Gray’s demands now for additional money, as Labour members cannot even welcome the funds that have been delivered.

I think that Ms Marra is mistaken. The cabinet secretary did not appear before the Welfare Reform Committee; it was the Deputy First Minister, and when she was there, not one Labour member asked for any more money for the bedroom tax.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

My point has already been made.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with Creative Scotland regarding the establishment of a film and TV studio for Scotland. (S4O-02719)

The cabinet secretary referred to the studio that has been established in my constituency. I am aware that other sites are in the running for a long-term studio for Scotland. Given that a studio has been established in Cumbernauld, and given the good connections between Cumbernauld and the rest of the country, can the cabinet secretary confirm that that location will be looked on favourably?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that proper use of the NHS workforce planning tool has a role to play in helping to improve the board’s performance and in further reducing the HSMR, in particular at Monklands hospital, which serves my constituency? Does he agree that boards should regularly publish the projected staffing requirements that the tool produces?

I welcome the debate and congratulate Kezia Dugdale on securing it. She has put a tremendous amount of effort into her campaign. I also apologise to Ms Dugdale, the Presiding Officer and other members because I will probably have to leave before the end of the debate. I thank Citizens Advice Scotland for its efforts to highlight the very important issue of payday loans. It is clearly important that people who struggle to secure access to credit get the opportunity to do so, but we have for too long seen a pattern of irresponsible lending practice. Credit is often given too readily and at a rate of interest that any person would struggle to keep up with, let alone our poorest citizens. Kezia Dugdale did well to make the point that a broad range of people use payday lenders. Citizens Advice Scotland has told us that its “recent public survey, run over the past year, found that ... Over 50% of borrowers of a payday loan were using it for essentials including food, energy, and rent”, as Kezia Dugdale pointed out in her opening remarks. It also told us that “The average amount borrowed was between £100 and £400; however 14% of respondents had borrowed over £1,000” and that “The majority of respondents were in full time work meaning many Scots are struggling with finances for basic needs even when working full time”. That is the reality that Citizens Advice Scotland found. StepChange Debt Charity Scotland has told us: “There has been a dramatic rise in payday lending” among the people with whom it works, and that “Almost 20 percent of clients had at least one” payday loan “in June 2013—a ten-fold increase since 2010.” StepChange can break the figures down to constituency level. In my area—Cumbernauld and Kilsyth—it advised 60 clients in 2012. The average payday loan debt was £843, which was up from £624 in 2010. It is therefore clear that we need the industry to tighten its practices. Citizens Advice Scotland asked borrowers to complete its survey and to et it know whether their payday lender had stuck to the voluntary code of conduct pledges that it had asked the industry to sign up to. I think that Kezia Dugdale gave a little information from that. There was some good news. Some 76 per cent of people reported that the lender had made it clear how much it would cost in total to repay the loan, and 77 per cent were told how the repayment would work. However, some of the other statistics are particularly depressing. Only 35 per cent of the lenders checked a person’s personal finances before giving them a loan, only 20 per cent asked for documentation to help to ensure that the person could afford to repay the loan, and only 2 per cent checked personal finances to see whether the person would be able to pay back an extended loan. It is therefore clear that we need to take more action to change the sharp practices of the industry. I would welcome any proposals in that regard—Ms Dugdale set out some. We need to ensure a better outcome for the people whom we represent. I thank Kezia Dugdale for securing the debate.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

It was particularly peculiar to hear Gavin Brown laud the OBR’s growth projections—much of his motion is in that vein, as was his speech—because OBR projections have had to be revised time and again, as they have proven to be wrong. Mr Brown is on the Finance Committee with me, and those matters are constantly brought to its attention. I am surprised that he has not taken that on board. Just last week, Professor David Bell, whom Gavin Brown is not shy of latching on to if he has said something with which he agrees and that suits him, provided the Finance Committee with written evidence that said that the OBR does not have a good record on projections. Gavin Brown was there, and he seems to ignore Professor David Bell’s views on the OBR’s track record. If we are to rely on the OBR, we have to look at what it has said over the piece. The latest OBR forecast is that, by 2015, the UK economy will be 7.5 per cent larger than it was in 2010. In June 2010, it forecast that the UK economy would grow by 14.3 per cent over that period. In that month, it also forecast that, in 2013, public sector net debt would be 70.3 per cent of GDP. December’s forecast put the figure at 75.5 per cent. It previously forecast that, in 2014-15, public sector net borrowing would be £37 billion. December’s forecast is that it will be £96 billion, which is 159 per cent higher than the 2010 estimate.

Just to be clear, it is not my calculator that has been out; it is the OBR’s calculator. We heard such good things about the OBR from Mr Brown and from you, Mr Rennie, although to be fair to Mr Rennie—

I beg your pardon, Presiding Officer. We heard such good things about the OBR from Mr Rennie earlier. He can at least be forgiven because he is not a member of the Finance Committee, so he does not see the regular updates. I would have thought that it is well placed to put such matters on the record. If we are going to laud the OBR, we have to reflect that growth has failed to reach its previously predicted figures, and that debt and borrowing are higher than were previously predicted. It was interesting to hear Mr Brown suggest that external factors were to blame. He talked about the euro crisis. Surely any person in the street could tell us that the austerity agenda must have contributed to the failure to match previous predictions. Let us not forget that that agenda has seen some £3.1 billion cut from the block grant and a 25 per cent reduction in Scottish capital budgets. That has put us in the position that the cabinet secretary and Mr Gray referred to. The GDPs of countries such as Canada, Japan, the USA and Germany are now above pre-recession levels, but in the second quarter of 2013, the UK’s GDP remained at 3.3 per cent below its pre-recession peak. It was interesting to hear the exchange between the cabinet secretary and Mr Brown. When the Scottish Government called for borrowing to invest in the economy and the economic recovery, we heard Tory hysteria that that would somehow lead to a market crisis. Borrowing by the UK Government is now much higher than was predicted—and that is borrowing to fill a hole that has been left by the failure to grow the economy as predicted. If that money had been borrowed earlier, we might have seen rather better economic growth than we have seen over the past few years. The talk of economic growth will ring hollow for too many. I think that Iain Gray made the point very fairly that families are feeling squeezed right now. Kevin Stewart rightly put on the record that another 50,000 children are likely to be pushed into poverty as a consequence of the UK Government’s welfare reform agenda. Just this week I was contacted by a constituent who is an engineering graduate who has £16 per week to live on through the welfare system. We must reflect on the fact that, for such people at the sharp end of the economic experience, talk of economic growth certainly does not reflect their personal experience.

Indeed. That rating was one of the UK Government’s holy grails. Of course, it was said that independence would jeopardise the AAA rating, but we have seen agencies revise downward the UK’s rating. I turn briefly to the Labour amendment. I said that I agree with what Iain Gray said earlier, but I disagree with his amendment. I do not disagree with its sentiment, because I think that we all want to see better childcare provision in Scotland. However, I think that my colleague Mark McDonald’s point was a fair one, because we must reflect on the fact that the Barnett consequentials that Mr Gray wants to pay for childcare extension are for only a two-year period. How can we possibly extend childcare for only a two-year period with no guarantee thereafter? I heard the catcalls earlier that our plan is independence. Indeed, it is. I hope that we will have independence and I believe that we will, but I do not know that we will. Only when we have the powers of independence will we really be able to see the Scottish Government’s ambitious vision being taken forward, which will cost some £700 million per annum. If any member can identify £700 million for the agenda that the Scottish Government has identified in the current context, they are somewhat of a magician. That is just another reason why we need independence.

Will the member take an intervention?

It is right to have the debate on this, the 65th anniversary of the signing of “The Universal Declaration of Human Rights”. As the minister said, it is apposite to have it following the motion of condolence for Nelson Mandela. There is probably no finer embodiment of a person who values our fundamental human rights than him. Human rights are often viewed in a silo and as a somewhat legalistic matter. As Alex Johnstone said, human rights are often viewed negatively—I am not sure whether his speech is likely to improve that perception, but perhaps we will leave that for another day. People often feel that human rights have little relevance to their lives, but that is not the case—they are important to us all. The minister quoted Eleanor Roosevelt, who was fundamental to bringing into being “The Universal Declaration of Human Rights”. I will expand the quotation that was used. The minister started with: “Where, after all, do universal human rights begin? In small places, close to home—so close and so small that they cannot be seen on any maps of the world.” Eleanor Roosevelt went on to say: “Yet they are the world of the individual person; the neighbourhood he lives in; the school or college he attends; the factory, farm or office where he works. Such are the places where every man, woman and child seeks equal justice, equal opportunity, equal dignity without discrimination.” In that context, the national action plan is very welcome. We should probably also reflect on the fact that it is the first such action plan to be developed in the United Kingdom. Given that Parliament has a responsibility to ensure that our legislation is compatible with the ECHR, we must have a plan that sets out how we might achieve that. We must also set out in detail how we can get across to people the fact that human rights are relevant to them. I have not been able to read the plan in detail, although I will do so, but it is clear from its methodology and what is planned that it is about trying to create a participative process that brings human rights alive for people. It has been welcomed outside Parliament. Amnesty International tells us that it was asked to participate in the development of the plan, that it welcomes its publication and that it looks forward to working with others to implement the outcomes that it believes “have the potential to deliver real and meaningful improvements to the lives of those who live and work in Scotland.” I should declare an interest as a member of Amnesty International and in the fact that my wife works for the organisation and wrote the excellent briefing from which I have just quoted. The Scottish Human Rights Commission, the chair of which also chaired the team that pulled the plan together, talks about implementation of the plan being “a process of culture change: unlocking the transformative potential of human rights in all areas of our lives.” We might expect those organisations to welcome the plan, but we also received a number of briefings from other organisations. The Health and Social Care Alliance Scotland talks about how human rights are important in the area that it works in. Inclusion Scotland talks about how human rights are important for it and how disabled people self-define independent living as the “rights to practical assistance and support to participate in society and live an ordinary life.” I was surprised to get a briefing from Community Land Scotland, which talks about the relevance of human rights to land ownership. The fact that those organisations are involved in thinking about how the national action plan can interact with their areas of interest demonstrates that the plan is not going to exist in the silo that I spoke of earlier. I very much welcome the fact that the plan has been published today and look forward to its being put into practice in better embedding a human rights culture in Scotland. I hope that it is a subject to which we can return to debate in the chamber in the future.

At the outset, I will set out my reason for taking part in the debate. I am the father of a young daughter and have two young nieces, and I aspire for them to be able to grow up and live in a society in which their opportunities are not determined by their gender. I also recognise the hugely positive economic impact of women being able to participate in the workplace. It is very important that we consider how we can remove barriers to that. I acknowledge Kezia Dugdale’s personal commitment, but I disagree with the Labour amendment, not in its tenor—John Mason made that point—but in some of its inference. The first part of the amendment talks about childcare and suggests that the Scottish Government does not recognise that childcare is not the only important issue in the context of women and work. I refer Ms Dugdale and other members to the Government’s motion, which talks about “tackling all of the barriers faced by women that prevent their full participation in the labour market”. The Government has taken a range of measures to encourage women into the labour market using the powers that it has now, so let us not hear anything about Scotland being “on pause”.

Ordinarily, I would, but I am afraid that I will not, because I do not have much time and I want to make a number of points. In addition, the sentiment of the amendment seems to lessen the role of childcare. My wife and I have secured excellent childcare, which has enabled her to remain in work. She is hugely helped in that regard by the generous scheme of support that her employer provides, without which she might not have been able to remain in work. My experience underlines the importance of childcare to the debate. The Equal Opportunities Committee’s report on women and work has been mentioned. It highlighted the importance of childcare.

With respect, my answer is the same as it was to Ms Dugdale. In conjunction with Save the Children, I hosted an event in the Parliament, to which many parents with young children who were struggling to secure childcare came. Many of them were young women in their late teens or early 20s who were raising a child on their own. They wanted to work or to study, but were struggling to do so. That is why the Scottish Government sees the extension of childcare as being so important. The transformative vision that is set out in the white paper—which has been denigrated by some members—is vital. It will put Scotland in a position that is akin to the situation in the Nordic countries. Let us not forget that in Denmark 79 per cent of mothers with children who are under the age of six work, whereas the UK figure is 59 per cent. I absolutely understand the point that Siobhan McMahon made about the urgency of the issue and the fact that we need action now, but as well as thinking about the current generation of children, we must think about the future and what it holds for our grandchildren and subsequent generations. I say to Liam McArthur that we can have all the policy-making leeway that we want, but when it is constrained by factors including the lack of leeway in the policy and budgetary assumptions of the UK Government and by the fact that, in reserved areas, we do not have control over all the resources in the country, which means that we do not have the money to pay for the policy that the Government wants to put in place under devolution, that is the perfect example of devolution being power retained. In the 30 seconds that I have left, I want to focus on what the amendment says about the constitution not being important. The constitution is important; it is not about changing flags. It is about three things: where power lies, who has it and what they are doing with it. All those things affect the real, lived experience of women and, indeed, men. What we see emanating from south of the border tells me—I think that it should tell every member—that we need the relevant powers to lie in our hands, rather than in the hands of the Government in London, which is damaging the prospects of women.

I point out to Ms Marra and other members that they are not going to get rid of me that easily.

I thank Christian Allard for his thoughtful and heartfelt speech. The debate very much benefits from such contributions. I welcome the debate, which follows a debate we had last year. The issue is important.

Okay.

I will try to talk louder, Presiding Officer, and see whether it helps. People do not usually have difficulty hearing me. Few of our constituents have a dependency issue, so I will use some of the statistics that are available for the NHS Lanarkshire area that covers my constituency. Those statistics set out the situation in some detail, but there is a serious impact on an individual who has such a dependency. Such people often suffer from complex multiple problems and they can be very vulnerable, as Elaine Murray said. There is, of course, an impact on the person’s family. Who among us would hope for their child to have a drug addiction? Then, of course, there is the impact of dependency on our wider society and our communities. We know that many people get involved with criminal activity to feed their habit. It is therefore absolutely right that we are having this debate and I welcome the expert group’s report. This has been a historic week and this is an important debate. It might not be as historic as some of the other debates that we have had this week, but it gives the lie to the suggestion that some in the Parliament have made that Scotland is on pause. Today’s debate is a vivid demonstration of the Scottish Government taking action and getting on with the business of Government by working to improve support for and treatment of those who have an addiction. The Government has a good record in that regard. It established and published the national drug strategy, “The Road to Recovery”, in 2008. Last November we had a debate to follow the commissioning of the independent group whose report we debate today. That is a significant effort towards improving support for those who have an addiction. As I said earlier, I will talk about the situation in my area. Mary Scanlon said that she is concerned about the rate of progress. We should all be concerned about that and do everything that we can. However, there is broadly a good record in the NHS Lanarkshire area, which covers my Cumbernauld and Kilsyth constituency. In this year, the Scottish Government has allocated almost £6 million, up from £4.3 million in 2008-09, for drug and alcohol treatment, and that has made a real contribution to starting to tackle the problem of drug taking in the NHS Lanarkshire area. Drug taking across the general population has fallen from 12.6 per cent in 2006 to 9.1 per cent of 16 to 59-year-old self-reporting drug users in 2010-11. Again, among young people, the figure in 2010 was the lowest it had been for a decade. It dropped from 23 per cent to 11 per cent of 15-year-olds reporting drugs use in the past month. In the NHS Lanarkshire area, 98.8 per cent of people are treated for drugs and alcohol addiction within three weeks, as opposed to the Scotland-wide figure of 96 per cent. No one is waiting more than six weeks for treatment in NHS Lanarkshire. Lest I be accused of painting an entirely rosy picture, I recognise that, in the past four years, there has been an increase in the number of drug-related deaths in the Lanarkshire area. I am not saying that everything is perfect. There is obviously still more to be done, but the overall picture is one of progress and that is to be welcomed. I very much welcome the report of the independent expert group. It has to be seen as a contribution to and building on progress. Dr Brian Kidd, who chaired the group, set that out when he said that the review has identified a range of areas in which progress is required. Looking at how people have responded to the report, we see that David Liddell, the director of the Scottish Drugs Forum, has welcomed the expert group’s report, which is very important given the fact that the forum works with people on the ground who are affected by addiction and campaigns for greater awareness and change in the area. It obviously supports the report. Willie Rennie made a good speech, and his point about the work of pharmacists was well made. They buy into the report, too. Community Pharmacy Scotland made a number of important points in its briefing to members. It points out that community pharmacists are the health professionals who have the most interaction with patients who receive opioid replacement therapies and that pharmacists are probably the healthcare professionals that people who live in the areas of greatest deprivation will see most often. We are aware of the correlation—it is not a hard and fast rule—between poverty and addiction, and community pharmacists have an important role in rising to the challenge. It is clear that the report has been welcomed. I very much welcome it and I look forward to seeing further work from the Government on the issue.

Will the member give way?

I thank Richard Lyle for bringing the debate to the chamber. The question, “Where were you when Kennedy was assassinated?” is often posed. I should declare that I was not born for another 15 and a half years, almost to the day, so I have no personal memories of the incident. However, it is one of the most pivotal moments of the mid-20th century, and I welcome the chance to reflect on that. A four-minute speech—and indeed a whole member’s debate—probably would not do justice to any life, let alone that of Kennedy, but it is worthwhile for us to have the debate. Kennedy did not have many links to Scotland, although the motion refers to the incident in which his father, as the Ambassador of the United States to the Court of St James, sent him to meet those US citizens who had been caught up in a German attack on a ship that was sailing for America. Another connection, which David Torrance highlighted, appears in today’s Daily Record. There is an interview with the last remaining member of the Black Watch pipe band that played at President Kennedy’s funeral, which had been planned so meticulously by his widow Jacqueline Kennedy; the origins of Camelot lay therein. There is a tendency in assessing the life of President Kennedy to oscillate between hagiography on the one hand, and demonisation—as we just heard from Mr Carlaw, if I may respectfully say so—on the other. The truth is somewhere between the two. It is probably fair to say, for example, that Kennedy did not exhibit exceptional moral qualities in his personal life. However, in his public life, there were many achievements. I will reflect on one of those achievements, which has been mentioned. In those 13 days in October 1962 during the Cuban missile crisis, Kennedy ignored the more bellicose demands of the American military leadership—epitomised by the head of the American air force, Curtis LeMay—for military action. He charted a different course with more sound counsel from some wiser heads and avoided the mutual assured destruction to which Christine Grahame referred, which would have obliterated the entire world. We should reflect on the fact that Kennedy’s greatest achievements were probably never fulfilled. As the title of Robert Dallek’s biography states, his was “An Unfinished Life”. The assassination was a pivotal moment and we have to ask what would have happened if Kennedy had lived. That is, of course, necessarily revisionist. The first thing that we can accept is that he would definitely have won the 1964 election. His assessment that Barry Goldwater would be the Republican candidate was correct; Johnson decisively defeated Goldwater, and Kennedy would have done too. There are indications of how things might have been different. The first is in the commencement address at the American University, to which David Torrance referred and from which I will also quote. In talking about relations with the Soviet Union, Kennedy made the salient point: “For, in the final analysis, our most basic common link is that we all inhabit this small planet. We all breathe the same air. We all cherish our children’s future. And we are all mortal.” Those are only words, but they were well received in the Soviet Union. Indeed, the speech was made available in its entirety in the Soviet press, which was very unusual at that time. Khrushchev received it well, and it was followed up by the nuclear test ban treaty. We know that Kennedy’s last executive order—to which Richard Lyle referred—planned the beginning of the withdrawal of American troops from Vietnam and that he had established a back channel to Cuba. There was discussion of normalising relations between Cuba and America and we could perhaps have avoided the 50 years of strained relations that have followed since then. We do not know what would have happened if Kennedy had lived, but I think that there is enough evidence to suggest that a different course would have been charted and there would have been an ambitious agenda for global peace. That was all lost in the street on 22 November 1963 as a result of an assassin’s bullet. Of course, that event is shrouded in mystery, and will—sadly—probably remain so for ever more.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

I welcome the debate, although I regret some of its terms. I recognise the importance of shipbuilding to our country. It would be an exaggeration to say that I grew up in the shadow of the yards, but it was not a million miles away—within earshot of the horn rather than in the shadow of the yards—so I know the importance of the industry to Glasgow and Clydeside. It is an important part of our country’s industrial heritage and it has to be an important part of our country’s industrial future. Like Stewart Stevenson, who made this point very well, I hope that that perspective is shared by all members. I regret the conclusion of the motion, which seeks to make the debate a constitutional bun fight. We hear consistently from Labour members that the SNP has a constitutional obsession, but the motion is just another example of the inconsistency of that argument. I find that, actually, it is the Labour Party that most frequently brings up the constitution in the Parliament. Frankly, when a number of members state directly that yards will close and jobs will go in the context of independence, that can only be described as naked scaremongering.

No, thank you, Mr Gray. Anas Sarwar, deputy leader of the Labour Party in Scotland, has made the point that the issue does not need to be a constitutional one and we do not need a constitutional rammy. That point should have been heeded, but we are where we are, and I am happy to debate the issue in that context. Johann Lamont said that she is keen to ensure that trade union voices are heard, and I am, too. Jimmy Webster’s words have been quoted already, but his comment on “Newsnight Scotland” on the type 26 contract is worth hearing again: “What I will say, and declare publicly: If the situation is that Scottish people by democratic vote, vote Yes, I would expect, no sorry, demand, that every single politician of every section supports us to hell and back”. He is absolutely right to make that demand.

No, thank you, Mr Smith.

No, thank you, Mr Rennie. It is extraordinary that the local member of the UK Parliament called for a “break clause” in the contracts so that the MOD could withdraw work from Scottish yards in the event of a yes vote. Johann Lamont suggested that Mr Davidson is “second to none” in his defence of shipbuilding, but that is a peculiar form of defending the industry and his constituents. It is one of the most cynical calls that I have ever seen and it actively works against his constituents’ interests.

No, thank you, Mr Rennie. On the day of the UK Government’s statement on shipyards in the House of Commons, Mr Davidson made a quite extraordinary comment. He said: “This has been an excellent day for shipbuilding and industry on the Clyde”. That comment is still on his website. Of course, we all welcome the greater certainty for the future of the Clyde yards, but what Mr Davidson called an excellent day was a day on which more than 800 people in the yards lost their jobs. How excellent a day would they have felt it to be? It is sad to reflect on the point that, as Johann Lamont and Willie Rennie said, we knew that this day was coming. To me, that speaks of the point that the issue is a long-standing one, as Margo MacDonald said. Under UK control, we have seen the managed decline of the shipbuilding industry in Scotland. Johann Lamont referred to the fact that 100,000 people worked in shipbuilding at the industry’s peak. More recently, in 1998, 10,100 people worked in shipbuilding in Scotland, and, in 2011, the figure was down to 6,600, which is a decline of one third in 13 years. The number will fall by a further 15 per cent as a result of the recent announcement. The point about BAE Systems recognising the expertise of the Clyde yards has been well made. The Clyde yards are the place to build the type 26 frigates, which can and will be built there when we are independent. We should reflect on the fact that Scottish shipyards already build ships for countries outside the UK. Whatever the circumstances might be, they already do that. They were involved in £1.5 billion-worth of export contracts with BAE, including eight ships for Malaysia, Brunei and Brazil and the reactivation of five frigates for Romania and Chile. The most important question is what the future for the yards is once the type 26 frigates are built. On the current trajectory, will we be looking at another day that we all knew was coming? Independence, far from threatening the yards, can help to secure their future. I will compare our situation with that of Norway, which other members have mentioned. In Norway in 2011, 22,210 people were employed in the building of ships, boats and oil platforms. In 2012, 42 shipyards built more than 100 ships. Murdo Fraser set out how we have a competitive market, which is absolutely the case—I cannot disagree—but I have set out the reality of shipbuilding in Norway compared with the reality in Scotland. When we are independent we will need the expertise of Scotland’s shipbuilding sector. Murdo Fraser inadvertently made that point when he said that he cannot conceive of the circumstances in which a Scottish Government would not award contracts to Scottish yards. He is saying that there will be work for the industry in an independent Scotland. He is absolutely right. Indeed, I have a copy of the Scottish Global Forum’s letter to Willie Rennie—incidentally, I think that he misrepresented its report; the forum certainly thinks that—which talks about the number of vessels that could be procured from the Scottish yards in an independent Scotland. We should all get behind Clydeside and Rosyth no matter what our constitutional future is, but let us hear no more about independence threatening Scotland’s industries.

At present, the state dictates what the position of each religious denomination should be on the matter: it explicitly does not allow them to marry people of the same sex who wish to enter into a marriage. Does the cabinet secretary agree with me that the Government’s approach is to empower religions to make a decision and that, in that sense, it is about the freedom of religion?

I thank Ruth Davidson for giving way during her very eloquent contribution; I am enjoying it very much. She spoke about the next generation. I am the father of two very young children. I do not know what their sexual orientation will be, but if they grow up and have a same-sex attraction, and if the Parliament fails to pass the proposed legislation that is before us today, what would the member suggest that I should say to them in future if they want to be married? How does she think that I could look them in the face and say that this Parliament missed the opportunity to give them that right?

I did not plan to begin my speech by disappointing Tavish Scott, but I find that I will, because I will bandy about a certain term. I believe that today is a historic occasion. Surely we can all recognise the historic significance of putting in place the framework in which the people of our country will get to decide their future—whatever anyone thinks about what that future may be—notwithstanding what else is happening in the world and other matters that concern us all. I have said that I think that today is a historic occasion. It also marks the end of the focus on procedural matters relating to the referendum. There has been some criticism that we have been too focused on procedure, but I suppose that we had to be by necessity. We can now focus by and large on the issues in the debate ahead of us on Scotland’s future. I suppose that most of us have already been engaged in that debate, and I hope to say a little bit about that later, but it is probably right to focus a little bit more on the process that we have gone through to get to the place that we are at today. We must recognise that we were in a different place from where we are now. At stage 1, all members came together to agree the bill’s principles. I am not sure yet—indeed, none of us knows yet—what will happen tonight, but I hope that we will all likewise agree to pass the bill so that we all accept that it is right that Scotland has a referendum. There has not always been agreement. I turn to what the leaders of other parties have previously said. In The Times of 3 September 2009, Iain Gray spoke against our having a referendum. Tavish Scott, too, opposed a referendum. In The Scotsman of 1 December 2009 he was quoted as saying: “I will neither vote for independence, nor will I facilitate it.” In The Scotsman on the same day, Annabel Goldie talked about the Scottish Government ditching its attempts to hold a referendum. The anti-independence parties were previously therefore anti-referendum parties. I do not think that any of us should fear putting the question to the people and I very much welcome the change in stance that we have seen. I recognise that those parties continue to oppose independence, but I welcome their support for the referendum. Another part of the process that I want to touch on is the role of the Electoral Commission. There was concern that the Scottish Government would ignore its findings and there were demands that the Scottish Government sign up to its recommendations before it had even announced what its findings were. We now know, of course, that the Scottish Government has signed up to those recommendations, which are reflected in the bill before us. That ends the nonsense and accusations that were made. I firmly believe that the bill will deliver a fair referendum for the people of Scotland. The SNP is consistently accused in the Parliament of having an obsession with independence, but I briefly reflect on the fact that the issue of independence is raised most frequently in debates and questioning of the Scottish Government by our opponents. It is somewhat ironic that we are the ones who are accused of having such an obsession. I am certainly not obsessed with independence or the trappings of statehood; I am obsessed with making Scotland a better place for my children. I want a Scotland that can tackle the problems of intergenerational poverty and help those who have the best of no worlds, let alone the best of both worlds. I want us to tackle the problem of young people having to seek opportunities elsewhere and leaving Scotland because the opportunities do not exist here. I want us to avoid squandering our resources. Ian Macwhirter had an interesting column in today’s Herald about the consequences of allowing Westminster to continue to use our resources to underwrite its agenda, which we have not backed at the ballot box. I want us to tackle our voicelessness in the world. I want Scotland to be a more confident place. Above all, I want to ensure that Scotland always gets the Government that reflects the priorities and values of its people. I appreciate and agree with Malcolm Chisholm’s point that many of those objectives are shared across the parties, but I and others in the chamber believe that we need independence to achieve the list of ambitions that I have just set out. If there is a yes vote next year, I firmly believe that my children and my grandchildren, should I have any, will grow up asking what the issue was. For them, independence will be normal just as it is for most countries. I hope that they will grow up in a better Scotland, which depends on who is elected to form the Government of the day. Independence will give us the chance to make a better country. This week’s Westminster vote on the bedroom tax demonstrates why I believe that to be the case. In that vote, 15 of 59 Scottish MPs did not bother to vote. That is almost a quarter of Scottish representatives at Westminster who did not vote on an issue that is causing great concern and is raised here regularly. Can we imagine any circumstances in which a quarter of the members of this legislature would not bother to turn up to vote on an issue of that importance? I cannot conceive of such circumstances. I agree with Alan Miller, the chair of the Scottish Human Rights Commission, when he says that he cannot conceive of the circumstances in which the Parliament would even have legislated for something as pernicious as the bedroom tax. That is one reason why power over such matters should be vested with the Scottish Parliament. I look forward to the debate ahead. Like Drew Smith, I hope that it is well-informed and that we get better than we saw yesterday from the Secretary of State for Scotland when he asked how much it would cost to set up a new Scottish state from scratch. We know that independence will not be year zero, as Alistair Carmichael implied. We also know the difference that devolution has made. If we fully equip this Parliament with those powers that are currently reserved to Westminster, I know that we can make a bigger difference. That will be the essence of our case in the future, and I look forward to making it between now and 18 September. Above all, I look forward to securing that yes vote next year.

12. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the abolition of prescription charges will have over this coming winter. (S4O-02543)

The United Kingdom shadow health secretary recently told Holyrood magazine that he wanted to see health policies that can be consistent across England, Scotland and Wales. He said: “Wouldn’t that be a good thing, pulling in the same direction ...?” Does the cabinet secretary agree that, given that Labour at Westminster has shown no enthusiasm for free prescriptions and given that nothing is off the table for Johann Lamont’s cuts commission, in the circumstance that Labour were in government Andy Burnham’s formula would threaten free prescriptions in Scotland?

I admire Malcolm Chisholm’s ability to remember what he said 10 years ago. I struggle to remember what I said in a debate last week—I wish that I was joking about that. I welcome this debate. I think that the quality of healthcare is a key concern for all the people we represent. People will not have to interact with every agency, but everyone will have to interact with the NHS at some stage in their lives, be it when attending their GP, having planned care in hospital or presenting at accident and emergency. Indeed, I cannot help but reflect on the fact that in 2012 there were 68,483 attendances at Monklands hospital’s A and E, which serves my constituency and that of the cabinet secretary. Clearly, how the NHS deals with individuals is important. Frankly, a person-centred form of healthcare must be viewed as the only type of healthcare worth having. By and large, that is the system that we have. The NHS is staffed by thousands of dedicated individuals who are motivated by patient care. We should reflect on the words of the health practitioner whom Mark McDonald quoted, which really got to the essence of what motivates the people who work in the NHS. A number of members, including Malcolm Chisholm in the previous speech, have made the point that there are circumstances in which the NHS lets people down and does not meet the standards that it should meet. We have all had experience of constituents bringing to our attention cases of that happening. Our task is to deal with them individually, take them forward and try to resolve the problem for those people, but the health service has to learn the lessons of such experiences, where appropriate, to try to ensure that the concept of person-centred healthcare remains the driver for the national health service. We should reflect on the fact that, as has been commented on, satisfaction with our national health service is high. The Scottish household survey in 2012 found that 87 per cent of people were satisfied with local health services. The figure has gone up by some 7 per cent in the lifetime of the current Scottish Government. We should all welcome that. It suggests to me that people’s experience of the health service is a good one. However, we should not run the risk of being complacent. We should be willing to continually respond to calls for further improvement, placing the person at the centre of healthcare. We have seen the Scottish Government doing that in recent years. I was pleased to see the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing responding to patient feedback and piloting extended visiting times in five health board areas. That came on the back of his four visits to hospitals across Scotland. Jean Turner, who is known in this place and is now chief executive of the Scotland Patients Association, welcomed that move. It is a small change, but it responds to the concerns of patients and their families and it can make a big difference to the individual. It would be helpful if the minister, in closing, could tell us what the early lessons from the pilots have been. Bob Doris and Aileen McLeod mentioned the investment of some £4 million to trial innovative approaches, to ensure that the NHS is genuinely a seven-day service and that pharmacists, physiotherapists, porters and all the other staff that we need for patients to move through and be discharged from hospital are available every day of the week. Again, it would be useful to know what the early lessons from the pilots have been. Of course it is important that the relevant staff are on hand to ensure that no one is in hospital for longer than they need to be, because of the costs that are involved, but it is also important that no one is in hospital for longer than they want to be. No one wants to be in hospital for longer than is absolutely necessary. We need to ensure that people are discharged when they are ready for that, rather than their having to wait for the relevant health professional to be available. Bob Doris made that point. With those approaches, we are seeing a more effective and efficient health service with reduced costs, but also a more patient-centred health service. The change fund for older people can also play a role in improving person-centred health care. The change funds are an important part of the preventative spend agenda and they ensure that there is better use of public funds. As a member of the Finance Committee, I know how vital that is at a time of straitened finances. However, more important even than that is to improve outcomes for individuals through use of the change funds. If we can ensure that people are more active and that their care is delivered differently, that can reduce the requirement for hospital admissions. Again, that is better for both the NHS and the individual. Recently, I was happy to meet Cumbernauld Action on Care of the Elderly—an organisation that I know the cabinet secretary knows well—and it was able to tell me about the work that it is undertaking with NHS Lanarkshire, North Lanarkshire Council and the change fund locally to deliver some really imaginative local projects that put people at the very centre. It will be critical to ensure that the change funds are working effectively. I raised that point at the Finance Committee yesterday, and it will be important for the Parliament to look at whether the investment is making a difference on the ground. I want to raise what might be thought of as a difficult issue, which Nanette Milne and George Adam also mentioned: the importance of person-centred healthcare at the end of life. We all had a briefing from Marie Curie Cancer Care, which emphasised the importance of ensuring that people have greater choice as they come to the end of their life. We rightly think that person-centred healthcare is about working to get people better or to support them in dealing with and managing whatever condition they have. However, as we all know, medicine has its limits, and the way in which we care for people at the end of their life and ensure dignity is important. Marie Curie has made a number of recommendations—I am sure that the Government is aware of those, and it would be interesting to hear about how it might respond. I believe that the Scottish Government is doing what it can to ensure that we have a person-centred healthcare system. There have been a range of actions in recent years, such as the healthcare quality strategy in 2010; the 2020 vision for healthcare in Scotland; the setting up of four quality ambition delivery routes, including a person-centred delivery route; and the person-centred health and social care collaborative. There has been real action to ensure that we have an NHS that can serve all the people of Scotland in the 21st century, moving into the years ahead.

In welcoming the debate, I join my colleagues in congratulating Malcolm Chisholm on securing it. Spina bifida is a very important issue, so I am rather surprised that this is the first time that we have debated it in the chamber. I certainly do not think that it should be the last time. I was also surprised that Nigella Lawson merited a mention in the debate but rather less surprised that it was Stewart Stevenson who managed to mention her. I apologise to Malcolm Chisholm and to the Scottish Spina Bifida Association for being unable to attend last night’s reception. The SSBA is an organisation that I know very well because it is based in my constituency, in Cumbernauld. I have been very happy to visit it many times and, indeed, I have visited it previously with the Minister for Public Health. Under the direction of its chief executive, Andy Wynd, the SSBA is playing an outstanding role in supporting families where someone has spina bifida. If members have been unable to visit the SSBA headquarters, it is well worth a visit—it is an excellent facility. When families learn that they have a child who has spina bifida it must be a very frightening time for them and the facility is a very welcoming place. The association is also doing great work to raise awareness of the condition, through the folic acid awareness campaign that is the subject of this debate. The most recent figures in Scotland confirm that around one in 1,000 pregnancies is affected by spina bifida. Some people might consider that rate to be fairly low, but last year there were just under 60,000 births in Scotland, which suggests that around 60 children were born with spina bifida. We must remember that the rate is higher in Scotland than it is elsewhere, as Malcolm Chisholm said, and that the condition can be very severe and have a huge impact on the life of the person and their family—I am sad to say that some people who suffer from the condition die in infancy. We must remember that there are individuals and families behind the figures, who are struggling with a serious condition. That is why the folic acid campaign is so important. We do not know what causes the condition, and research continues, but we know that folic acid supplements can reduce the risk of spina bifida affecting an unborn baby. As Malcolm Chisholm said, where there is no family history of spina bifida it is recommended that women take a dose of 400 micrograms a day; where there is a history of spina bifida a dose of 5mg is required. Such an approach helps to reduce the occurrence of neural tube defects by some 72 per cent but, despite the guidance that is out there, only about half the women who become pregnant take folic acid before conceiving. It is important to emphasise that those women are planning to become pregnant, which suggests that there is some way to go to raise awareness of the issue more generally. I welcome the Scottish Spina Bifida Association’s efforts. It would be helpful to know how the Scottish Government can support the campaign and what it is doing to improve uptake of folic acid. I look forward to hearing what the Minister for Public Health has to say in that regard, and I again congratulate Malcolm Chisholm on securing this important debate.

In welcoming the debate, I congratulate the cabinet secretary on managing to finagle a mention of Adam Smith into his speech. As someone who studied Adam Smith’s works as a student at the University of the Glasgow, I never imagined that I would hear his name mentioned in a debate on waste management in the Scottish Parliament. That is surely the ultimate triumph of the cabinet secretary’s opening remarks. When we debated the Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill, we spoke about the historic nature of the debate because it was the first time that we had discussed a new Scottish tax in this Parliament—we said that it was a new chapter in the story of devolution. We cannot quite describe the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill in the same historic terms—it has managed to be the runner-up in the posterity stakes—but, for the reasons that have been set out thus far, it is still important as part of the general sweep of the devolution of new taxation powers. I will focus on a few points that arose during stage 1 consideration of the bill by the Finance Committee, of which I am a member. First, it makes a lot of sense to devolve the tax. We can align our approach with our climate change ambitions—the Scottish Parliament’s ambitious climate change legislation has been well remarked on, and encouraging more recycling is surely part of the effort in that regard. The core aim of the landfill tax is to transfer waste from landfill, so that it is recycled instead. It therefore makes sense for the Scottish Parliament to have control over landfill taxation. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement during stage 1, which he reiterated today, that he will ensure that the act that we pass does not encourage waste tourism, by setting the rate of landfill tax at an appropriate level. If the tax is to be a mechanism to secure environmental improvement, transporting waste across jurisdictions would be counterproductive and would make no sense. I also welcome the provision for a disincentive in relation to illegal dumping, which is and will remain a criminal offence whose perpetrators are subject to a fine. Under the current arrangements, there is no mechanism for levying tax in such circumstances and a fine might be less than the tax that should have been paid. The bill will ensure that anyone who dumps waste illegally will have to pay the tax as well as any fine that results from criminal proceedings. It seems strange that the UK Government has not taken that sensible step and it is good that the Scottish Government is doing so. The landfill communities fund will continue to be important, which is also welcome. I think that all members are aware that many local organisations, including organisations in my area, have benefited from the fund, which is probably the most visible element of landfill tax in many localities. There is debate about how near to landfill activity an organisation must be before it can apply for funding, and Michael McMahon, who is a member of the Finance Committee, has been assiduous in pursuing the issue at stage 1, given the landfill activity that takes place in his constituency. A degree of flexibility is sensible, but it is right that areas that are affected by landfill should be the primary beneficiaries of the fund. The cabinet secretary told the Finance Committee that although Scotland’s share of the total UK landfill tax take since 1996-97 has been 9.2 per cent we have received only 7 per cent of the UK Government’s landfill communities fund for projects in Scotland. There is therefore clearly an opportunity for organisations in Scotland to benefit from the devolution of the tax. John Mason’s point about the need for more cost-effective administration of the fund was sensible, and the cabinet secretary’s response was the right one. That relates to the issue of an audit of fund holders, which was raised in evidence to the committee by the people who administer the fund. If the administration of the fund is more effective, there will surely be the potential for more funds to be released to organisations. I look forward to hearing the Scottish Government’s suggestions in that regard. I do not have much time left, but I briefly mention the block grant adjustment for landfill tax, which will be crucial. The Chief Secretary to the Treasury told the committee that he wants the adjustment to be based on forecasts. I gently say that the OBR has been unable to provide a coherent and sensible forecast in relation to landfill taxation. I hope that the UK Government will agree to a fair mechanism and I look forward to seeing what emerges. I look forward to considering the bill at stage 2.

Thank you, Presiding Officer, for the news that I now have eight minutes. I was going to start by saying that I felt at a distinct disadvantage compared with Christine Grahame because I did not have the flow chart that she presented. However, now that I have found it in my briefing and had a look at it, it is not clear to me that having it is a particular advantage, as it makes for rather difficult reading and is difficult to understand. That said, I welcome today’s debate. Clearly, we all have a shared interest in ensuring the effective rehabilitation of offenders. Allowing such individuals to become productive citizens is important. Of course, it is not always easy. We know that many of those who are in our justice system—in the prison system—have difficult and challenging underlying issues such as alcohol dependency and other substance reliance issues. Quite often, dealing with those issues requires a multi-agency approach. Nonetheless, rehabilitation is important. It is important for the individual if a person can, after having completed their sentence, go on to lead a life that is free of criminal activity and secure gainful employment. It is clearly best for them as an individual; it is best for us all as well. Reduced levels of criminal activity may arise from rehabilitation, with fewer people being harmed by such criminal activity. If there are fewer victims of crime, the burden on the justice system will be reduced and there will be less cost to the public purse. It is well understood that incarcerating those who are convicted is an expensive—

I will give way—I do not know whether I will give information.

I do not have the exact figures to hand, but I am certainly aware that other jurisdictions deal with recidivism much better than we do. It is well known that we have a problem with the cycle of reoffending. I am aware that the Scottish Government has taken some action to try to deal with the matter, be it through focusing on short sentences or indeed through investing in trying to stop those who may be on the verge of engaging in criminal activity getting involved in the first place. Margo MacDonald’s point was certainly worth putting on the record even if I cannot give detailed information in response. Of course, the framework for how we can best achieve rehabilitation is important, particularly when we consider it in the context of the numbers involved. They were a bit of a surprise to me. It is a pretty stark statistic that more than one third of the adult male population and nearly one tenth of the adult female population in Scotland are likely to have at least one criminal conviction. I can certainly assure Mr Carlaw that I am not among that number. The cynical part of me cannot help but notice that there are only a small number of Conservative members in the chamber. Perhaps that is to reduce our suspicions. There are only two male Conservative members in the chamber—there are not even three—so we can presumably be reassured of the credentials of Mr Johnstone and Mr Carlaw. More seriously, it is important that we have the right framework for achieving rehabilitation. Rehabilitation can take form in a variety of ways, but those must include the provision of meaningful activity for prisoners who demonstrate that they are willing to acquire skills that they can use once they are out of prison. Margaret Mitchell gave an interesting example of such activity in the literacy programme at Saughton prison. Maureen Watt made the important point that prisoners who engage in such activities are three times more likely not to reoffend—a statistic that speaks for itself. Of course, alternatives to a custodial sentence can also help to rehabilitate people. In my constituency, I have seen that at first hand, as did the cabinet secretary during his visit, in Duncarron fort, which is being built by the Clanranald Trust for Scotland. In that project, which is designed to be for education and tourism purposes, the restorative justice teams at North Lanarkshire Council and Falkirk Council have involved those undertaking community payback orders. I was impressed to learn that some of those who have been compelled to attend through that mechanism have subsequently returned to help the project after the completion of their sentence. That engagement in positive activity perhaps demonstrates the rehabilitative effect of community sentences.

As a west of Scotland male, I have to confess that yoga is not my area of expertise, but I bow to the member’s knowledge of the subject. More seriously, I suppose that, if prisoners can focus their activities in that fashion—whether that be through undertaking yoga or going to the gym or whatever—that is probably a positive thing for them to do. Beyond that range of activities, we must consider how those with a conviction can be best supported to normalise their lives following the conclusion of their sentence. Of course, what information they should be required to release to prospective employers about their previous convictions is an important part of that process.

I always listen to Christine Grahame’s speeches avidly. Only so much can be done to normalise the experience of people who are denied their liberty by being incarcerated for a period of time. Access to family should be a given, but access to the telephone might be more difficult because I am aware that those who know more about these matters than I do have highlighted issues that could arise if people could engage in certain types of criminal activity.

Presiding Officer, I know that I was given eight minutes, but if I give way will I get a bit longer?

Potentially. I will come to that point, but I think that that is an important point to consider in any changes that may be made as a result of this process. It is potentially an important part of the process. As Graeme Pearson said, the issue of what information should be released by someone with a conviction is undoubtedly controversial. However, I think that we have a duty as a Parliament, as Bob Doris said, to act together on the issue. It is important to emphasise that the issue is not about how individuals are punished for their offending behaviour but about how information about their offending behaviour is considered in the future. As has been well stated, the current position comes from the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974. Some members have said that those provisions should be looked at because they are 40 years old. I am not necessarily convinced that that in itself is an argument to look at the issue—we should always consider whether legislation on the statute books is effective, whether it is 40 years old or four years old—but I am aware that there has been criticism of the 1974 act. I agree with Bob Doris that the cut-off in the length of sentence that is used to determine whether someone must disclose a previous conviction seems arbitrary. Alison McInnes’s point about the changed sentencing policy between 1974 and 2013 is also important, as that could mean that the current system is somewhat arbitrary. Given that concerns have been raised and that the Government has engaged with a range of stakeholders, it is important that we are willing to look at the act again. Personally, I have no fixed views, but the system needs to be proportionate and effective. I certainly agree that, for some categories of offences and, crucially, some categories of employment, disclosure will always be necessary, but we have to put in place a framework that protects the public but gives those who want to put their criminal conviction behind them the chance to do so. I look forward to seeing what emerges from the Government’s work.

For the purposes of absolute clarity, I should say that I recently took part in a yoga class at my daughter’s nursery.

I think that we can take it as our starting position that all members in the chamber agree on the need to get it right for those who have a learning disability. I will not re-rehearse the precise figures, which have already been set out, but the significant number of people in Scotland who have a recognised learning disability deserve the support of this Parliament to live full, active and dignified lives. On that basis, it is understandable that there has been much consensus across the chamber. I very much welcome the new strategy, “The keys to life”. One of its useful findings is that “People with learning disabilities tell us that they are generally much more accepted and valued in their communities than they ever were before.” I am sure that we all regard that as positive but, of course, we cannot fall back into complacency, as Malcolm Chisholm rightly pointed out. We can all agree that we need to do more to assist those with learning disabilities. In that regard, I very much welcome the Conservative amendment—not something that I am inclined to say regularly—especially its reference to the need to consider “that particular attention should be paid to the transition between child and adult services”. All members will be aware that that is a particular challenge for young people with learning disabilities and that the post-education destination outcomes for such individuals are not as good as those for the population more generally. It is therefore important to consider how we can improve on that record. A good example of how that can be done is Glencryan school, a special educational needs school in my constituency. It does not deal only with pupils with learning disability, but such students form a part of the school population. I have been impressed with the school’s efforts to equip pupils with practical vocational skills in a range of areas. It runs a bistro and a launderette, to which customers from the local area can come, and in which the students undertake activities. That gives the young people real skills and, equally important, confidence in themselves and their abilities. Some of the school’s students have certainly had more positive destinations compared to what might have been the case in the past. It is very much a success story. It was disappointing to learn about the son of Mary Scanlon’s constituent. I certainly know, from bitter experience of having to assist constituents, that things do not always go right in my area, but I wonder whether, if that particular young man had attended Glencryan school, his experience might have been rather better than the disappointing experience that Mary Scanlon set out. A lot can be learned from the Glencryan experience. I have been pleased to welcome Angela Constance in her capacity as Minister for Youth Employment to the school in the past. If the Minister for Public Health fancies the short trip from his Falkirk West constituency, I am sure that we can arrange that, too. I recognise that the challenge of ensuring better outcomes for young people with learning disabilities is dealt with in “The keys to life”. In the “Break the stereotypes” section, recommendation 39 is that, by 2014, stakeholders should “provide earlier, smoother and clearer transition pathways (to include accessible information on their options, right to benefits and Self Directed support) for all children with learning disabilities to enable them to plan and prepare for the transition from school to leavers destination.” Recommendation 41 is that the learning disability implementation group should work with a range of organisations “to develop ... supported employment opportunities for people with learning disabilities and that those organisations should lead by example by employing more people with learning disabilities.” Recommendation 42 talks about developing work skills for young people with learning disabilities in tandem with the third sector. Those are concrete examples of how the strategy that we are debating can effect meaningful change for those who have a learning disability and particularly those who are in transition from childhood to adulthood. I look forward to progress on those ambitions being reported back to Parliament. Recently, we had the 60th anniversary of the European convention on human rights. Human rights are of course important to everyone, but they are particularly important to those who might be considered to be more vulnerable. I am glad that “The keys to life” recognises the issue of human rights. The “Independent living” section encompasses the sense of how the human rights of those with learning disabilities can be embedded. It begins by saying: “The Independent Living in Scotland project describes independent living as ‘disabled people of all ages having the same freedom, choice, dignity and control as other citizens at home, at work and in the community. It does not mean living by yourself, or fending for yourself. It means rights to practical assistance and support to participate in society and live an ordinary life’.” Inclusion Scotland rightly points out that it is important that the definition came from disabled people. In other words, it sets out how such individuals aspire to have their human rights recognised and put into practice. At the end of the day, although we have 52 recommendations, some of which I have quoted, that sense of ensuring the rights of people with learning disabilities is probably the most important element of the document. I very much welcome the publication, which is evidence that the Scottish Government is doing what it can to support those in Scotland with a learning disability.

I very much welcome today’s debate. We have one year minus one day to go until the referendum. Yesterday’s debate was obviously the main focus for that landmark, in parliamentary terms. It is also appropriate to see today’s debate in the light of that landmark. The need to secure an economy that is fair and which delivers for the needs of the people of Scotland is one of the reasons why we need independence. I thought that Mr Gray’s case to the contrary was interesting. His contribution took us through the ages. He rehearsed some of the arguments of the 18th century when he quoted a member of the Scots Parliament of 1707. He then managed to drag himself into the 20th century to traduce the experience of Slovakia. I thought that it was interesting to use that country’s experience, because the point has been well made how well Slovakia is doing.

I will do so in a minute. Mr Gray surely must recognise that the circumstances in which Slovakia and the Czech Republic emerged as independent countries are somewhat different from the Scottish experience today. We are not re-emerging from behind the iron curtain, whatever Mr Gray might say. Talk of “capital flight” hardly smacks of a positive case.

Mr Gray might think that it is a ridiculous example but, to be frank, that was a ridiculous intervention. In his speech, Mr Gray finally turned to the 21st century and raised the spectre—the bogeyman—of an independent Scotland being prostrate before the challenge of recapitalising the banks. However, he must know that if Scotland had been independent in 2008, there would have been a clear role for the rest of the United Kingdom in recapitalising the banks. All members must surely understand that the great part of the UK domestic portfolio of RBS and HBOS is based furth of Scotland, so there would have been a clear need for the rest of the UK to help in recapitalising those banks. After all, that is why the United States of America made a payment towards recapitalising RBS.

I will give way in a minute. To take Mr Gray’s argument to its logical conclusion, I will use the example of one of the banks in Scotland that did not need to be recapitalised: the Clydesdale Bank. Under Mr Gray’s peculiar logic, it would have been left to the Government of Australia to recapitalise that bank, because it happens to be part of National Australia Bank. It must be placed on the record that Mr Gray’s argument is nonsense, and the people Scotland must see through it.

I think that the point is clear. Mr Brown himself has made it clear, because the United States Government did make a payment towards helping RBS through its financial difficulties. The argument that the rest of the United Kingdom would not have had a role to play if Scotland had been independent in 2008 is, frankly, nonsense.

If Mr Gray cares to take a look at what the United Kingdom actually did—it used its anti-terror legislation to bring the Icelandic banks to their knees—he will see what actually happened in relation to those banks. However, let us move away from Iceland and get back to Scotland. It is clear that we have a strong basis of a good and sound economy here in Scotland. We are well resourced with oil and gas and have 25 per cent of Europe’s tidal and offshore wind resources, we have a well-educated population, and we have a variety of strong sectors. In addition, Scotland has one of the best sets of national accounts of any country in the developed world in terms of GDP per head; Scotland would be ranked eighth out of 34 OECD countries, whereas the UK is ranked 17th. Another measure of economic and social progress is the United Nations human development index, which shows Norway ranked first. Ireland, which is much traduced by other members in this place, is jointly seventh with Sweden, and the United Kingdom is 26th. The Scottish Government has taken forward a range of measures to support the Scottish economy, be it through its capital investment programme last year supporting 40,000 jobs across the economy or the appointment of the only dedicated Minister for Youth Employment in the UK. We could do so much more with independence, of course. It was interesting to hear Ken Macintosh quote Joseph Stiglitz. He was part of the fiscal commission working group, whose report stated: “the opportunities for the Scottish Parliament and Government to adopt a different approach are particularly limited.” Later, it states: “Under the current constitution arrangements, the full range of economic policies cannot be tailored to the specific structure, opportunities and challenges of the Scottish economy.”

That is why we need independence.

Will Neil Findlay give way?

It is true that a new flag or drawing a line on a map will not allow this Parliament to deal with those matters. However, might not vesting the requisite powers in this place and taking those matters away from the hands of the Tories allow us to deal with them much better?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what guidance it provides to local authorities on gull management. (S4O-02358)

In the Carbrain and Greenfaulds area of Cumbernauld, people’s lives are being made a misery by the presence of a significant number of gulls. Some constituents report that they have been attacked. The minister mentioned the Dumfries initiative. Does the Scottish Government share my regret that North Lanarkshire Council has refused to consider implementing such a scheme or any long-term strategies to deal with the issue despite the concern of a considerable number of my constituents?

As a one-time student of history and someone who maintains a keen interest in our country’s heritage, I welcome today’s debate. Some of the figures that were set out earlier demonstrate that there is, across the country, widespread interest in it. I understand why that is so; our heritage forms an important part of our story as individuals and as a nation. Our historic environment can tell us something about ourselves, which is why it is important that we have a plan to preserve our historic sites. I therefore welcome the Scottish Government’s historic environment strategy. I also welcome the strategy because it is not driven by economics. It certainly recognises that our historic environment is important to our economy, but that is not its core purpose. Maria Miller, the UK Government’s Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, said earlier this year: “When times are tough and money is tight, our focus must be on culture’s economic impact.” That is a fairly utilitarian viewpoint. Although economics is important, surely we can look at our historic environment as an important end in itself, rather than as an economic lever. I also welcome this debate because, as for other members, it gives me a chance to focus on the historic environment of my constituency, to talk about some of the good work that is taking place locally to help to preserve it, and how that might interact with the strategy that we are debating today. It also provides me with a chance to dispel some of the misconceptions about my area. Cumbernauld is obviously well known as one of Scotland’s five new towns. It was so designated in 1956, which is, of course, of historic significance. Graeme Dey, Clare Adamson, and Rob Gibson mentioned the great tapestry of Scotland; I was very pleased to see that Cumbernauld new town is featured as one of the panels in tapestry. Rather less well-known is the long history of the area. Cumbernauld’s history stretches back to Roman times, with a settlement having been built near the Antonine wall—which is, of course, now a world heritage site. The Romans also erected an altar, which is known locally as the Carrick stone, where Bruce is believed to have rallied his troops before Bannockburn. Nearby Cumbernauld castle was owned by the Comyn family before being granted to the Fleming family after Bruce killed John Comyn in 1306 in Greyfriars kirk, which is another link to the story of Bruce and the wars of independence. Also, because it seems to be important to mention him, James IV was a frequent visitor to Cumbernauld castle. Mary Queen of Scots also visited the castle, and I mention her because she married into the Hepburn family when she married the fourth Earl of Bothwell. However, the sad turn of events meant that no Hepburn dynasty was established, which I am sure is a source of great regret to members across the chamber. Cumbernauld house is now located on the site of the former castle. It is important to mention that because it provides an example of a missed opportunity to secure such a place for the public, because it is now in private hands. It was bought privately when it went up for sale recently. I had rather hoped that North Lanarkshire Council might buy it for public use. It is now being turned into flats, which will at least maintain the building, but it hardly serves to promote participation, as is called for in the strategy. It would be good to know how the strategy might interact with similar situations in the future. Cumbernauld village, which is near Cumbernauld house, is the most historic part of Cumbernauld town. It hosted Burns and the Jacobites—not simultaneously and certainly not in that order. It is a good example of how the local authority is working to preserve heritage. It has had a conservation area since 1993, which has been supported financially by Historic Scotland. We also have in the area Cumbernauld village action for the community, which is a group of dedicated local volunteers. The group is working to preserve the lang riggs, which are traditional strips of land the locals would have lived off through growing their own produce or using them for their work. It is also trying to ensure the future for the former village primary school. Again, it would be useful to know how small local volunteer organisations such as CVAC can play their part in the strategy. Having mentioned Cumbernauld, it would obviously be remiss of me—even dangerous—to fail to mention Kilsyth. Like Cumbernauld village, Kilsyth town centre has a conservation area. It is rather older—it dates back to 1971. It is probably fair to say that Kilsyth is more recognised as having historic status than Cumbernauld. Some of the claims may be unexpected, in that they cover less-than-conventional parts of recorded history. Kilsyth apparently has a claim to being where the winter sport of curling was first constituted, and nearby Kelvinhead was apparently the first place where potatoes were planted in Scotland. The cabinet secretary will be relieved to know that I am not going to ask about how the strategy might mark those particular elements of our national history.

Perhaps the cabinet secretary can tell Mr Gibson, but I am not going to ask her. Kilsyth is probably better known for its links to the covenanter and Jacobite periods of history. There was, of course, the battle of Kilsyth, which was a tremendous defeat for the covenanters and a victory for Montrose and the royalists. However, I want to turn to the story of Lady Kilsyth, whose husband, the third viscount of Kilsyth, was a Jacobite supporter, and died in exile in 1733. Lady Kilsyth is buried in Kilsyth. I visited her tomb yesterday and it is in a very sorry state—it seems that it is being used as a drinking den. It would be useful to know how the historic environment strategy could help to identify such sites and how help can be obtained to maintain them. That is a small flavour of my area’s history. I look forward to seeing how the strategy can be developed further to support places such as Cumbernauld and Kilsyth.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the underoccupancy charge, which is commonly known as the bedroom tax, is having on communities in Scotland. (S4O-02347)

During the recess, we saw Labour-controlled North Lanarkshire Council threaten to evict a severely disabled single mum suffering the bedroom tax and, reportedly, the council leader turning up on her doorstep to harangue her rather than assist her. Does the minister agree that that conduct was shameful, as was North Lanarkshire Labour’s vote on the council against Scottish National Party councillors’ motion in favour of a no bedroom tax eviction policy?

Will the member give way?

Neil Findlay, in common with other Labour members, has mentioned his concern about the bedroom tax. I do not doubt his concern about the bedroom tax, but his party is presently engaged in a campaign to ensure that power over welfare, including the bedroom tax, remains at Westminster. Can he point to one statement from Ed Balls, Liam Byrne or Ed Miliband in which they have committed to getting rid of the bedroom tax?

Will the member give way?

Iain Gray bemoans the fact that SNP members call for power over welfare in this place, but he is presumably presently engaged in a campaign to retain power over welfare at Westminster, as he is campaigning for the Labour Party to be elected. Neil Findlay failed to answer the question earlier. Can Mr Gray tell us of any commitment from Labour front benchers at Westminster to get rid of the bedroom tax?

I have not read the document but it sounds like I might be sympathetic to that argument. However, does Mr Macintosh agree that, although the awarding of the franchise is devolved, the terms of the franchise are hugely encumbered by the fact that they are set by Westminster at this moment in time?

For the benefit of the record, will Gavin Brown remind us who introduced automatic early release?

I welcome today’s debate and the Government’s programme that has been laid before us. I also welcome the First Minister’s statement that set out that programme. I thought that it was interesting to hear Johann Lamont suggest that it is not in the First Minister’s interests to state what the Parliament can do. I presume that she was not listening to the First Minister because his statement was entirely imbued with the achievements of the Parliament. Perhaps her rhetoric does not match the reality. I will focus on a couple of the bills that have been specifically mentioned today. As a member of the Finance Committee, I undertook scrutiny of the Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill and the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill, which formed the first legislation on taxation that the Parliament has ever considered. I therefore welcome the proposed new revenue Scotland and tax powers bill, which will establish revenue Scotland as the tax authority that is responsible for Scotland’s devolved taxes from 1 April 2015. That is an important first step in taking on greater responsibility for setting and collecting taxes in Scotland. It is entirely unclear to me why Gavin Brown does not think that that is the case—and now that we know that he is not interested in the issue of revenue Scotland, I look forward to him disengaging from any thorough and rigorous assessment of the proposed bill when it comes before the Finance Committee.

It is all about different opinions, is it not, Mr Brown? The fact that this is the first time that the Scottish Parliament has had the chance to enact legislation on taxation could be described as historic. That is my perspective on the matter. We know that the proposed bill will include provisions for resolving tax disputes quickly and efficiently, thus providing the public with confidence in the taxes that we are establishing. Crucially, the bill will include provisions on tax avoidance. Too often we see people trying to avoid paying the taxes that they should pay, so it is important that it is set out in legislation how we avoid that scenario. In the same way as Mr Brown, I look forward to scrutinising the proposed legislation at the Finance Committee. The Scottish Government is also using the powers of the Parliament for the proposed Scottish welfare fund bill. As the deputy convener of the Welfare Reform Committee, I have a clear interest in that proposed legislation. We know that the Scottish Government has already taken measures to support mitigation of the welfare reforms. Working with COSLA, the Scottish Government has plugged Westminster’s £40 million cut to the council tax benefit budget for this year.

That was an interesting intervention when I was talking about council tax benefit. The point that I was going to make is that 560,000 people in Scotland will not be impacted by the cut from the Westminster Government, which Ms Davidson supports. Professor Steve Fothergill from Sheffield Hallam University told the Welfare Reform Committee that people in Scotland are comparatively better off as a consequence of that move. We have also seen around £8 million being set aside to support advice agencies, and we have had assurances of the continuity of the payment of passported benefits. Those are important measures that will protect people in Scotland. The Scottish welfare fund will be another important part of the Scottish Government’s work to use the powers of this Parliament to mitigate the effects of welfare reform and to plug the gap caused by the cuts imposed by the UK Government. Christina McKelvie made the point that 20,000 people have already been assisted and that we have the capacity to assist around 200,000 people. It is extraordinary to hear the Labour Party criticising the proposed new fund. I would have thought that the Labour Party would get behind the fund and support it, but instead we hear criticism of the Scottish Government establishing a Scottish welfare fund.

I will let you in in a minute, Ms Baillie. It is particularly peculiar when we see that research by the Children’s Society found that funding for local welfare schemes in England has been cut in real terms by £150 million compared with equivalent funding in 2010, which is not a scenario that we have here in Scotland.

I do not see that as a real characterisation of what is happening on the ground.

I will let you in in a minute, Mr Gray, if you will let me answer Ms Baillie first. I will come to you in a minute, Mr Gray.

I beg your pardon, Presiding Officer. I will come to Mr Gray in a minute. We know that the welfare fund is a new fund that has just been established, but people are becoming more aware of it. It would be better for the Labour Party to get behind the fund instead of criticising it.

I remind Mr Gray that he is not actually on the Welfare Reform Committee any more, because he has resigned from it. [Interruption.]

I also make the point that this is a new fund and that its funds have to be spent over the entirety of the year, so we will look and see what the position is at the end of the year. We will put the welfare fund on a statutory footing, and I look forward to scrutinising that over the coming period. However, as much as I welcome the measures to mitigate the effects of the welfare reforms, I think that we can surely aspire to do more. When we see £2 billion per annum cut from benefit payments, with a disproportionate impact on women and on families with children, and a bedroom tax hitting tens of thousands of households that was introduced by a Government that people in Scotland did not vote for, surely we can aspire to do more than just mitigation. A letter from Mark Hoban MP, the Minister of State for Employment at Westminster, to Glasgow City Council contains the UK Government’s apparent explanation for the increased reliance on food banks. I quote directly from the letter: “The increased emphasis on reducing food waste may well be one of the drivers for the growth in the number of foodbanks and similar initiatives and, consequently, the increased use by companies.” That is through-the-looking-glass stuff. Why are we allowing those people to determine Scotland’s welfare system for us? I welcome what is being done for mitigation, but I think that we can aspire to do more. That is why I welcome part of the on-going Scottish Government work programme in the form of the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill, through which we will have the chance to put power back into the hands of the Scottish people, complete the powers of this Parliament, do more than just mitigate, and create a better society.

Does the minister agree that there would be a lot less concern about the affordability of transport infrastructure projects if the Chancellor of the Exchequer heeded the call from the Scottish Government and a range of other bodies and economists to use this week’s spending review to change course and invest in capital spend?

The cabinet secretary referred to the criticism by the OECD and the IMF of the UK Government’s economic strategy and to the fact that the Scottish Government is pressing the UK Government to adopt a strategy other than the austerity agenda, which is suppressing growth and recovery. What response has the cabinet secretary received from the UK Government on that? Can we expect it to change its strategy, or will it be more of the same?

In welcoming the debate, I apologise for the fact that my speech will suffer from a deficiency of information about monks, salmon and talking washing machines. Unfortunately, I have a paucity of detail on such matters. I am happy to contribute to the debate. Over its lifetime, the Parliament has had a strong commitment to tackling climate change and reducing carbon emissions. We have also seen a strong commitment to renewable energy from the Scottish Government. The Government has set ambitious targets and we are well on the way to achieving them. We had a pertinent time for reflection today, which I thought was of more interest and relevance to people out there than the line of questioning that followed, which was referred to by Jamie McGrigor. In his remarks, which were entirely about climate change and climate justice, Jon Cape spoke of the need for a game changer to rise to the challenge of climate change, which is the great challenge of our times. We know that renewable energy can play its part. If we are serious about renewables, they can be the game changer and we know that, of the mix that is needed, hydro power is proven to deliver. According to Scottish Renewables, 12 per cent of our electricity now comes from hydro power. Stuart McMillan pointed out that, in 1930, Scotland had 45MW of large-scale hydro while the rest of the UK had the same but that, by 2012, Scotland had 1,339MW of large-scale hydro while the rest of the UK had 132MW. That demonstrates the scale of the change in the intervening period, and Tom Johnston deserves huge credit for that. We currently have enough hydro power to provide almost 1 million homes with electricity every year. We owe Tom Johnston a debt of gratitude for his assiduous pursuit of hydro power, and it is absolutely right that we are having this debate to mark the 70th anniversary of the Hydro-Electric Development (Scotland) Act 1943. I was interested to hear Mary Scanlon’s suggestion—I think that I picked it up correctly, but she will correct me if I am wrong—that the 1943 act should be strengthened and enforced in relation to the environmental impact that hydro power schemes can have. She is indicating that I am correct. However, we will struggle to enforce the 1943 act because it was repealed by the Tories under Margaret Thatcher in 1989. Nevertheless, I suppose that the fundamental point is that we should learn the lessons of the intervening period, and she was right to put that point on the record.

Indeed, yes.

I thank Mary Scanlon for her perspective on my prospects. I will keep my perspective on her prospects to myself. Rather than making nasty comments, I was suggesting that Mary Scanlon was right to put that comment on the record. When she checks the Official Report, perhaps she will reflect on the fact that I was welcoming her point rather than attacking her. The fundamental point that I was trying to make was that although it is right to have this debate to commemorate the now-defunct Hydro-Electric Development (Scotland) Act 1943, which is an important part of Scotland’s history, more importantly the debate allows us to consider what part hydro power might play in Scotland’s future. As I have said, 12 per cent of the electricity that is generated in Scotland comes from hydro power. The question that we should pose is, how do we increase the percentage of electricity that is generated by that means? We can see the ambitions that the Scottish Government has set out. We know that its idea is to develop Scotland as a hydro nation. The Water Resources (Scotland) Act 2013 not only looked at the structure of Scottish Water but placed a general duty on Scottish ministers to take steps to ensure the development of the value of Scotland’s water resources. Clearly, hydro power has to form part of that agenda. We have also seen action from the Scottish Government in relation to maintaining the level of support through the renewables obligation certificate scheme, as opposed to the proposal across the rest of the UK to reduce the value of that scheme elsewhere in the UK. We have seen the Government publish online planning advice for hydro schemes, which encourages planning authorities to include hydro power development in their spatial plans. We are seeing action from the Scottish Government to encourage and foster new developments in the area of hydro power. In recent years, we have seen developments. We saw the £30 million scheme near Ardross receive planning permission in May 2013. We saw the Glendoe scheme open in 2009. I am aware that that scheme has had its troubles, but I am delighted to see that operations are back under way. On a smaller scale, in March the Deputy First Minister launched the UK’s first Difgen hydro scheme near Denny, which is not far from my constituency, which is a great example of utilising existing infrastructure to help generate energy on a smaller scale and help make Scotland a greener place. We have the potential here. We have the legacy, but we also have the future of this industry. I am confident that with the right support and the right determination we can harness the thus-far untapped potential and ensure that hydro power is an important part of Scotland’s story for 70 years and more to come.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to encourage young people to learn to swim in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. (S4O-02236)

As if that was not bad enough, North Lanarkshire Council is shutting six swimming pools at six high schools, five of which are in my constituency. That will affect organisations that have regular lets of those pools. Does the minister agree that the decision by North Lanarkshire Council not to participate in the top-up swimming programme and to shut those school swimming pools is counterintuitive and runs totally counter to encouraging local young people to learn to swim?

I thank the Equal Opportunities Committee for the debate. Any decent society should do what it can to tackle and end youth homelessness, and should give every young person the best chance in life. Obviously, that includes providing roofs over their heads. I thank the Equal Opportunities Committee for the work that it has done in assessing the problem. Elaine Murray said that homelessness has preoccupied Parliament from its very early days. That was well exemplified by Stewart Stevenson’s detailed recollection of his first day in Parliament. Our homelessness legislation is widely regarded as being among the most progressive in Europe, and it is clear that progress has been made. Dick Lyle set out the most recent figures, which show a reduction in homelessness applications and in assessments of people as being homeless or threatened with homelessness. From October to December 2012, 96 per cent of applicants who were assessed as homeless were accorded priority, which is an increase of 5 per cent on the same period in 2011. I am sure that all members welcome such progress. However, we should always be willing to make further systematic improvements, so I very much welcome the committee’s inquiry and report. The committee set out the principal causes of homelessness, which include family breakdown; a young person can be forced out of their home if there is on-going conflict with family members. The attitudes of parents or carers can put a young person at risk, and can force them out of their home for their own safety. There are also financial pressures on families, which will be exacerbated by the Westminster welfare reforms that many members have mentioned. The minister accepted the committee’s point that prevention is key to tackling the problem and to reducing the incidence of youth homelessness. The committee made key suggestions in that regard; it suggests that mediation can play an important role, and it talked about respite and education as being part of the prevention strategy. It is interesting that, in evidence, Janeine Barrett of North Ayrshire Council—which is the lead authority for the Ayrshire and south housing options hub—said that staff systematically and vigorously try to track down the parents by phone on the day when a young person presents as homeless, and that the approach is successful in most cases. That demonstrates that mediation can work. The point was accepted by Keith Brown, who was Minister for Housing and Transport at the time, and in her response to the committee’s report, Margaret Burgess said: “The Housing Options approach has embraced mediation in many parts of Scotland”. The issue is clearly important to the Scottish Government. I was interested to hear that respite features as an important issue in the recommendations of the supported accommodation implementation group, which issued its final report at the end of November. I am also well aware of the work that is being taken forward in our education sector to try to equip young people with the necessary financial literacy skills, which will stand them in good stead in the context of housing, and more generally throughout their lives. Like Linda Fabiani, I am a member of the Welfare Reform Committee. From the evidence that our committee gathered—it is often mentioned in Parliament, and several members have mentioned it today—it is clear that the Westminster welfare reforms undermine the good work in Scotland on tackling homelessness, and threaten to exacerbate the problem. Some 105,000 people in Scotland are likely to be hit by the pernicious bedroom tax, for example, although only about 20,000 socially rented properties will become available for rent in the next year. I am sure that other members are, as I am, already being contacted by constituents who are in arrears as a consequence of the bedroom tax. The problem that people have been talking about for some time is starting to emerge. It was interesting to see in paragraph 87 of the committee report the concerns that have been expressed about the time lag in paying community care grants. It was suggested that the problem can be “insurmountable.” The committee saw evidence of how that can impact negatively on a young person’s prospects of maintaining a roof over his or her head. I was therefore delighted to see that the Scottish welfare fund, which is the successor to community care grants, gives longer lead-in times—eight weeks rather than the six weeks under the Department for Work and Pensions current social fund—for people making applications to local authorities before they take up a tenancy. I hope that the reforms will make the situation better. James Dornan mentioned the danger that is posed by the under-25s losing their housing benefits. I very much agree. Concern has also been expressed by Crisis about the changes to the shared-accommodation rate for people aged up to 35 years, which will affect 7,500 claimants in Scotland. It states: “As a result of the changes, the vast majority of single people under 35-years-old in receipt of housing benefit can only afford a room in shared accommodation in the private rented sector. In many areas of the country this type of shared accommodation simply doesn’t exist or there is not enough available.” We are therefore again seeing the dangers that are posed by Westminster welfare reforms, which are working against how homelessness is tackled in Scotland. I very much commend the committee’s report, and I look forward to hearing what the minister has to say.

Will Liam McArthur give way?

It is just to correct the record.

I am grateful to you, Presiding Officer, for your useful clarification for the Official Report that Mr Mackay’s and Mr Swinney’s names were added by clerical error in support for a motion from Mr Johnstone. Without that clarification, Mr McArthur’s speech could have made for rather misleading reading in future years. The energy sector is important for Scotland. Dennis Robertson suggested that Scotland is the energy capital of Europe. He did not say, although I have heard him say it before, that his part of Scotland—the north-east—is the energy capital of Scotland. My constituency, Cumbernauld and Kilsyth, is probably not reckoned to be a part of the country that is directly involved in the energy sector—even I could not reasonably claim it as the country’s energy capital—but we have SSE’s call centre at the Hunt Hill estate in Cumbernauld, which is a big employer in the town. At the other end of town, Scottish Power has its training centre at Dealain house in the Wardpark industrial estate. The First Minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice visited the site this week. It is a reminder that the energy sector is an important player throughout Scotland. It is of huge importance in many places and I consider it important in my constituency. The electricity market is of obvious interest to me, as a representative of the area in which those companies are located, and those companies have an obvious interest in the UK Government’s proposals. The minister mentioned the perspective of the chairman of Iberdrola, which is the parent company of Scottish Power, on investment decisions and the consequence of the timescale. He asked for clarity from the UK Government on the detail of electricity market reform. As an aside, it was interesting that, although the minister could name a company that has expressed concerns about uncertainty for investment as a consequence of the UK Government position, neither Rhoda Grant nor Murdo Fraser could name a single company or point to a single investment decision on renewables that has been affected by the independence referendum.

I do not doubt for a minute that such companies are interested in the independence referendum or are considering the implications of the referendum and independence. However, not just in this area but in any area of investment in Scotland, when someone who suggests that the independence referendum is causing uncertainty in investment decisions is pressed to name a company, they fail to do so. Mr McArthur could not do so, either.

I always agree with Mike MacKenzie—I think that I do, anyway. I turn to electricity market reform because that is, of course, what we are debating. Malcolm Chisholm rightly set out that EMR is primarily a matter for legislation in the UK Parliament—for now, I should add. Rhoda Grant was absolutely right to suggest that we need the Scottish and UK Governments to work together in this area, given the split competence. Although the UK Government has primary responsibility, the Scottish Government has responsibility, too. There was almost an unspoken suggestion that that is not happening. However, the joint concordat has been signed, so it is clear that co-operation at that level is taking place. I return to Scotland’s position in the context of independence. A few members have suggested that the sector could be harmed. I want to root that firmly in the process that we are debating. In the proposals that are contained in the Energy Bill, the UK is setting up its future markets so that generation from outside the UK can work within the Great Britain markets. Therefore, under the UK Government’s proposals, contracts for difference would be available to generation in an independent Scotland. Given that the rest of the UK is—just as Scotland is—looking to improve its environmental performance and reduce its CO2 emissions, and given that we know how well placed Scotland is to generate renewable energy in a way that no other part of Europe can, at a time when the UK is reforming the market so that companies outwith the UK can become involved in that market, it seems ludicrous to suggest that independence will harm Scotland’s energy sector. To do so is scaremongering—I agree with Mike MacKenzie on that. The Scottish Government’s direction of travel in supporting renewables is absolutely correct and necessary for a variety of reasons. I hope that the Energy Bill and the electricity market reform process support that process of encouraging renewables investment. I very much look forward to assessing that as the proposals emerge.

I welcome the debate, which is an important milestone along the way to the referendum next year. I thank the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee for its helpful stage 1 report. I will pick up on a few of the issues that have been raised in the debate. In particular, I will focus on the extension of the franchise to 16 and 17-year-olds. A referendum on Scotland’s future should let those who are the future of Scotland have their say, and it would be fair to define Scotland’s 16 and 17-year-olds as the future of our country. Personally, I have supported the extension of the franchise to 16 and 17-year-olds for some time. They can, as has been remarked on, enter the world of employment, get married, have children and join the armed forces, so I believe that we should grant them the right to vote. It has been argued that 16 and 17-year-olds are not endowed with the full swathe of rights that those who are older have. John Pentland referred to the situation as a “bit of a guddle”. The question is posited: why should such people be endowed with the right to vote? However, it is important to note that we enfranchise people not on the basis of their having uniform rights, but because they have certain responsibilities. We allow for that possibility with 16 and 17-year-olds, so we should give them the vote. The arguments that have been made against the measure seem somewhat spurious. The old idea that 16 and 17-year-olds are not mature enough to get the vote sounds very much like the arguments that were made when the age of enfranchisement was lowered to 18 from 21, although I should point out that that was before my time. It would seem ludicrous now not to enfranchise 18-year-olds. As an aside, I point out that we do not actually enfranchise people on the basis of their maturity—that is probably a good thing for many of us. Another argument is that turnout might be low among those who are 16 and 17, given the evidence of turnout among 18 to 24-year-olds. Mr Carlaw reasonably made that argument. Clearly, it is important to enthuse voters of all ages—doing so is incumbent on all of us who are involved in the political process—but we should be clear that we enfranchise people not on the basis of the likelihood of their voting, but on the basis that, because they are endowed with certain responsibilities, they should be endowed with certain rights, including the right to vote. Many of those issues are probably moot points anyway because although there is not quite uniform agreement in the committee, there seems to be overwhelming support for giving 16 and 17-year-olds the vote. I welcome that broad support, because it was not always clear that that would be the case. It is a welcome step forward. We have seen widespread support from civic Scotland to extend the vote to 16 and 17-year-olds. For example, a majority of the respondents to the Scottish Government’s consultation document “Your Scotland, Your Referendum” said that they broadly agreed that 16 and 17-year-olds should have a vote. Many organisations have set out their support for that proposition as well. Concern has been expressed about armed forces personnel not being able to participate in the referendum. It is clear that they will be able to do so because the franchise will be based on that for the Scottish Parliament and local government, which means that service or Crown personnel who are serving in the UK or overseas in the armed forces or with her Majesty’s Government and who are registered to vote in Scotland will be entitled to vote. Patricia Ferguson has highlighted a reasonable concern about the sons and daughters of some who make a service declaration and still live with those service personnel not being able to vote. However, I note that the committee has taken that on board and is urging the Scottish Government to discuss the matter with the UK Government and “explore all possible options for enabling young people to vote if they are of voting age”. I look forward to seeing where those discussions go. An issue that has not featured so much in this debate but which featured heavily in our earlier discussions about the referendum is the extension of the franchise to people outwith Scotland. Dr Elaine Murray secured a members’ business debate on the matter. It is, ultimately, sensible that those who live in Scotland are the ones who determine the country’s future. That has also been the basis for previous referenda. When Henry McLeish was the minister responsible for the devolution referendum, he said: “The key criterion for deciding who should vote, in terms of our proposals, must be residency … I accept that people in parts of the United Kingdom other than Scotland and Wales will have a genuine interest”. However, he continued, “eligibility to vote must depend on more than just interest.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 3 June 1997; Vol 295, c 273.] That was a sensible position in 1997 and it is a sensible position now. I welcome the debate. I look forward to the bill proceeding to stage 2. Above all, I look forward to the main Referendum (Scotland) Bill being passed by the Parliament so that we can move forward to the referendum and Scotland can move forward to independence.

The member said that he potentially wanted the franchise to be extended to 16 and 17-year-olds on a basis that goes wider than the referendum. Does he accept the limitations of this Parliament in that regard?

Will the member give way?

I thought that the member might give way on that point and I thank him. The member listed countries in which 16-year-olds can vote, but he omitted to mention the Isle of Man, Jersey, Guernsey, Austria and Brazil, as well as Germany, in relation to Länder elections. I wanted to put that on the record.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what its response is to OKI Electric’s plans to reduce the size of its workforce at its Cumbernauld plant by around half. (S4O-02101)

When I met representatives of the workforce at OKI, they made the point that many of the workers there have only ever had the one job and one interview. What specific support might be available to help those who are made redundant in those circumstances to re-enter employment? What support might there be from the Scottish Government to ensure that OKI remains in Cumbernauld for some time to come?

I welcome the debate and thank the Scottish Government for securing it, because it is vital to ensure that Scotland’s youngsters have the opportunity to make their way in the world of work. We are all acutely aware of the economic circumstances—the economic difficulties that we have experienced in Scotland and elsewhere over the past few years. Young people in many countries are bearing the brunt of that downturn. In Spain and Greece, for example, there are dramatic levels of youth unemployment. Therefore, it is good that the figures in Scotland are moving in the right direction. The claimant count figures for March 2013 for young people aged 18 to 24 show a decrease of 5,500—some 12.6 per cent—over the year. The labour force survey for the period from December 2012 to February 2013 shows that youth employment in Scotland was at 56.7 per cent as opposed to the UK position of 49.7 per cent. Youth unemployment in Scotland is 16.1 per cent. That is still too high, but it compares favourably with the UK rate of 20.6 per cent. It is clear that far too many young people in Scotland are still not in employment, and we must do what we can to assist them into work. However, it is important to record the good news—the figures are going the right way. The context is that youth employment is higher in Scotland than it is across the UK and youth unemployment is lower. As the minister pointed out, our youth employment rate is bettered by only five other European countries. However, it is important to do what we can to help those who still need assistance, and I want to take a look at what the Scottish Government is doing in that regard. I turn first to the modern apprenticeship scheme, which comes in for criticism from some quarters. We need to acknowledge that the target of providing 25,000 modern apprenticeships has been met for the second year in a row. In 2012-13, there were 2,126 modern apprenticeships in North Lanarkshire—of which my constituency is part—alone. Looking beyond the headline figures, we can see that the scheme is being targeted at the young. It is, of course, available to older people, but it is being focused on the young. In 2011-12, 16,791 modern apprenticeships were for 16 to 24-year-olds; in 2012-13, the figure was 19,681, which represents an increase of nearly 3,000 in a year. Some 77 per cent of modern apprenticeships were for the 16-to-24 cohort in 2012-13. Therefore, it is clear that the scheme is being more effectively focused on the people whom we are talking about today—the young people of Scotland. It is important to look at the quality of the scheme. In a survey that was carried out in 2013 of Scottish employers’ views of modern apprenticeships, 96 per cent of employers reported that MA completers were better able to do their jobs. Employers reported high levels of satisfaction with the relevance and the quality—the figures were 85 and 83 per cent respectively—of the training that is provided, and 75 per cent of employers viewed modern apprenticeships as being important or vital to their business. Of those employers who currently offer MAs, 83 per cent plan to do so in future. Research by Skills Development Scotland shows that, of those people who complete modern apprenticeships, 92 per cent are in work six months later and 79 per cent are in full-time employment. That is not to say that there are not issues with modern apprenticeships. Colleges Scotland suggested that one of the principal barriers to increasing interest in them is “the lack of knowledge of young people, parents/carers and school teaching staff and a historical view that apprenticeship should not be a young person’s first choice.” It would be interesting to hear the minister’s perspective on that but, by any assessment, it is clear that modern apprenticeships are being focused on the right people and that their quality is held in high regard by those employers who take part in the scheme.

I reiterate that, in 2011-12, 16 to 24-year-olds comprised 63.5 per cent of young apprentices, whereas in 2012-13 they comprised 77 per cent of them, so it is clear that the figures are moving in the right direction. I want to focus on the college sector, which Mr Macintosh mentioned and which has been prone to be the subject of much comment of late—although not so much, I noticed, by the Labour candidate for the forthcoming Aberdeen Donside by-election. We should celebrate the good record of the college sector. In 2011-12, colleges delivered nearly 120,000 full-time equivalent places, which was 3 per cent above the level of the Scottish Government’s commitment. There has been a 36 per cent increase in the average hours of learning per student and a 1 per cent increase in funded FTE places between 2006-07 and 2011-12. This issue was raised with me when I was engaged with a college in my area. There was always concern about certainty of budgets for colleges, although we know that there is certainty for colleges for the next two years. There is stability in funding from this year to the next. The closest comparable budget in England is down by 15.7 per cent, so once again we can see that much good work is being done in the college sector.

We all know about the funding situation across the UK, which has clear consequences for the funding that is available in Scotland. It is a set of circumstances that Mr Macintosh is presently engaged in a campaign to ensure remains the case. I reiterate my point that the closest comparable budget for colleges in England is down 15.7 per cent. That has clear consequences for the money that is available for colleges in Scotland. I also reiterate the point that I made about the number of places at colleges. I referred earlier to “nearly 120,000” places, but let me give you the exact figure: colleges delivered 119,448 full-time equivalent places in 2011-12, which was 3 per cent above the commitment that was given. That is a good record. I had hoped to focus on a number of other initiatives that the Scottish Government is taking forward. However, I will conclude by saying that there are many good examples of what is happening on the ground. There is still a challenge out there, but I am confident that the minister is up to that challenge and I look forward to seeing her take her work further in the future.

Will the member give way?

Let me begin by declaring an interest as a father of two pre-school age children. I know how difficult it can be to secure decent, reliable and affordable childcare. My wife and I have been very fortunate to be able to arrange such care for our own children. I very much believe that an aspiration to secure further improvements in the provision of childcare across Scotland is something that we should all welcome and work towards. However, we should put this debate into context by looking at the situation in Scotland today. As Joan McAlpine set out, there has been an increase in free nursery provision by some 20 per cent since 2007. The Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill will legislate for a 45 per cent increase over the same period of time, with some 120,000 children in Scotland benefiting by the provisions of that bill. I have already recognised the concerns about the cost of childcare. Save the Children has done a lot of work on that. I have been very happy to work with that organisation in the past and shall be happy to work with it again. We should recognise that costs are stabilising in Scotland but increasing elsewhere. The Daycare Trust published a report in March, which indicated that there has been no increase in Scotland in childcare costs for the under-fives compared with increases across the rest of the UK of 4.2 per cent for the under-twos and 6.6 per cent for two-year-olds and over. It is important to provide that context. The move to the childcare provision of 600 hours is hugely welcome and compares favourably with the position elsewhere. Some people have made much of extending childcare further, to two-year-olds; Liam McArthur espoused that position. The UK Government’s position is often given as an example of what to do, but we should look at the reality behind the proposals. The proposed ratios of staff to children for childcare in England will increase to 1:4 for under-ones and 1:6 for two-year-olds; the ratio for three and four-year-olds could be 1:13. The Scottish ratios are much better. That has led to criticism from Professor Cathy Nutbrown, the chief executive of the Daycare Trust, Anand Shukla, and the founder of Mumsnet, no less, who has suggested that the UK Government needs to rethink its plans.

I do not accept that the ratios were much better for many years. They were roughly similar and the issue is that they will be dramatically worse in England if the proposals go ahead. On the proposal for a childcare commission, it was interesting to see that, in her conference speech, Johann Lamont said “We don’t need the Council of Economic Advisers to tell us what a difference investing in education and childcare can make”, but, apparently, we need a commission. That ignores the fact that work to dramatically improve access to childcare is continuing. We have spoken about the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. We are aware of the early years task force. We are also aware of the work of the Council of Economic Advisers. Let us not pretend that that work is not happening; it is under way. The proposition seems to be that we should create another commission and wait for its conclusions before we make further improvements. That is a nonsensical position. I commend the Scottish Government for its work and support its amendment.

I welcome the debate and, like Sandra White, I am quite happy to speak on an important subject. It is important to get the structure to deliver community justice right. As was stated at the outset, the debate is an open one in which members can contribute their views, and it is good to know that the Government will take those on board. Various levels of criminal activity make the lives of the people we represent a misery. It is appropriate that those who commit the most serious offences and who pose a danger to society face a period of incarceration. However, there is a vital role for community justice if we are to ensure that those who have caused damage to their community are in some way seen to be giving something back to that community. In my area, the local authority has an effective restorative justice team. There are various examples of how it has ensured that offenders on community payback orders who have been referred to it work and give something back. I want to speak about a positive example. The cabinet secretary is aware of it as he came to visit the Carron valley medieval fort that the Clanranald Trust for Scotland is building. The initiative will be important for educational purposes and local tourism and has involved a huge amount of work. I was pleased to see that North Lanarkshire Council has allowed its restorative justice team to assist the trust in making—I should give it its proper name—the Duncarron fort a reality. Indeed, even Falkirk Council has contributed in that way, too. I mention that not only because it allows me to highlight an important project in my constituency—which is always positive—but because my experience of the restorative justice teams’ engagement with the project has demonstrated how that method can work. Those who were involved through that mechanism not only were giving something back to their community, as I mentioned; some of them learned something about themselves. Some of those who were sent there under a community payback order returned once their sentence was complete. That is important to mention, because it demonstrates that community justice can rehabilitate, too. Often, community justice is seen as the soft option. I do not accept that: it is an effective mechanism for delivering justice. We know that prison does not always act as an effective deterrent to reducing reoffending. Therefore, we must be prepared to do something else, and it is good that the Scottish Government has embraced the concept of community justice. In the introduction to the consultation paper, the cabinet secretary wrote: “Public spending should aim to prevent rather than only react to crimes and harms. This approach will lead to better results in the long term for individuals, families and communities and save money for the public purse.” I entirely agree. The Scottish Government has set out that reoffending rates are at the lowest for a decade and Rod Campbell pointed out that recorded crime is at a 37-year low. We should not only celebrate that fact but look to build on that record. Therefore, it is right to look at the structure for delivering community justice. Reference has been made to the Audit Scotland reports, the commission on women offenders report and the consultation paper. I am also aware that the Justice Committee published in March its “Inquiry into purposeful activity in prisons” report. It is clear that the work that the Scottish Government is undertaking to redesign community justice is not being done in isolation; rather, it is building on work that has gone before it. I hear the concerns about the timing of this debate—I appreciate that it was mild criticism—but I think that we should be rather relaxed about having the debate today. I turn quickly to the three options that are set out in the paper. Option A is the enhanced CJA model. Malcolm Chisholm made the point that that would avoid institutional upheaval. That said—Sandra White made this point too—I am not entirely convinced that CJAs are very visible entities. I am not particularly aware of the CJA that covers my area. Option B is the local authority model. Clearly local authorities are very visible entities and have a clear line of accountability. However, Colin Keir asked the fair question whether they are equipped to provide all the necessary support. Option C is the single service model, which Elish Angiolini has posited. Given her reputation, we have to take it seriously. All the approaches have merits, as might option D. I am afraid that I am going to sit on the fence just now, but I look forward to the Scottish Government taking this work further forward and to seeing what type of model emerges. I wish the cabinet secretary well in that task.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it is making on seizing illegal drugs. (S4O-02062)

I welcome the progress that has been made. Will the minister set out what progress has been made specifically on tackling the illicit trade in methadone?

I welcome this stage 1 debate. The bill is, of course, the first of three bills arising as a consequence of the Scotland Act 2012, and I look forward to scrutinising the other bills when they come before the Finance Committee. I very much welcome the bill’s proposed changes to the scope of stamp duty land tax or, as it will become, LBTT. The proposal to move from the slab structure of taxation to a progressive tax structure has been welcomed across the board. That has been welcomed by just about everyone who has given evidence to the committee, because of course a progressive structure has a greater relation to the ability to pay and deals with market distortion. Just now, there is a huge disincentive for builders to build properties that are valued around the margins of the thresholds or for property to be put on the market around the margins, but the new structure will remove that disincentive. I recognise that there is on-going dialogue or debate about the timing of the announcement of the new bands. We need to be careful, because doing that too late or too early could influence market behaviour. The cabinet secretary is right to be cautious about that. The bill will also bring modifications to reliefs and exemptions, including the withdrawal of sub-sale relief arrangements. I concede that, when the committee took evidence, views on that proposal were more mixed. However, on balance, the bill has got it right in that regard. Clearly, one of the drivers for the legislation is to reduce tax avoidance, and the various reliefs set out in the old tax regime have allowed tax avoidance to arise. I therefore welcome the proposed changes. I want to raise two issues in particular, if time allows. The first is relief for zero-carbon homes and similar reliefs, and the second is charities relief. I started the process of assessing the bill by being quite sympathetic to the idea that there should be some form of relief to encourage environmental improvements in homes. Organisations out there gave evidence in support of that. However, we should bear in mind the point that Homes for Scotland made, which is that very few people buy their home with environmental improvement uppermost in their mind. Certainly, when I bought my home, its energy efficiency was not particularly uppermost in my mind. I take on board the cabinet secretary’s point that there may be other, more appropriate ways of incentivising the use of energy efficiency measures than doing so through the bill. If sensible measures are proposed, the committee will consider them. However, on balance, the bill has it just about right at the moment. Charities relief will ultimately affect very few transactions in any year. However, it took up some of the time that the committee spent on considering the bill at stage 1. I very much support the element of LBTT that will offer relief for charities. Organisations out there doing charitable work should be supported in that way. In essence, the relief will mean that the Scottish taxpayer will subsidise charities, so we must have the right mechanism for charities to benefit. Brodies solicitors and ICAS suggested that charities relief should be available to organisations whose charitable status is granted by HM Revenue and Customs, but I have some concerns about that, notwithstanding the good relations that I am sure exist between the Scottish Government and HMRC. HMRC is not answerable to this Parliament on a legislative basis or to the Scottish Government on an executive basis. For that reason, OSCR is a much more appropriate organisation for charities to be registered with in order to benefit from charities relief. Some expressed concern that foreign charities cannot register with OSCR, but we have had clear evidence that section 14 of the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005 allows for foreign charities to register with OSCR. Concern was also expressed that registering is an onerous task for charities. However, the requirement to register with OSCR already exists, so it will be no more onerous for a charity to register for charities relief purposes. If a foreign charity wants to get a subsidy from the Scottish taxpayer, the least that it can do is register as a charity. Let me conclude by focusing briefly on an issue that the convener of the committee mentioned—the block grant adjustment.

The block grant will be reduced on a one-off basis for LBTT. We have to get that right. I say to Mr Macintosh that how fairly the Treasury plays on the matter might demonstrate how effective devolution is in comparison with other options that are available to Scotland. I support the methodology that the Scottish Government has suggested. I look forward to looking at that in the committee and to stage 2 of the bill process.

Will Neil Findlay give way?

Given that that is the situation in Denmark, does the member not consider as somewhat ludicrous the suggestion posited by some organisations that the requirement that charities furth of Scotland register here is an onerous one?

Will the member give way?

Although control over postal services presently remains reserved to Westminster, concern about the shape of those services is uppermost in the minds of many of my constituents in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth and, indeed, of people across the country. It is therefore right that this Parliament has the chance to debate such matters, and I begin by thanking the members who supported my motion and enabled it to be discussed this evening. Although my interest in the matter arises because the post office branch in Cumbernauld town centre is one of those affected, the motion notes that other branches are affected, including that in East Kilbride, in Linda Fabiani’s constituency. I lodged the motion with her support; I view her very much as the co-sponsor of tonight’s debate and look forward to hearing from her later. I thank members who will participate in the debate. That participation is, doubtless, because the Post Office’s plans might affect their areas, like Linda Fabiani’s area and my area. I look forward to hearing what they have to say. I understand that representatives of the Communication Workers Union who represent postal workers are in the public gallery. I welcome them to the Parliament and congratulate them on their Crown post offices campaign, which is represented by the badge that I am very happy to wear. I thank them for meeting me previously to discuss the matter. In the interests of fairness and transparency, I should also thank the management of Post Office Ltd for meeting me. Cumbernauld and Kilsyth has already experienced changes to the shape of its post offices in recent years. I was hugely disappointed when the Post Office decided to close its branches in Banton, Queenzieburn and Kildrum. Those closures came in the face of widespread local opposition, as communities value their local post offices and recognise that they are an important component in the social fabric of their area. The loss of those three branches was hugely contentious, and I very much regret their removal. I mention that to demonstrate that the latest proposal is not isolated; rather, it is the latest in a line of alterations that, it could be argued, have led to a diminution of local post office services. I also mention it because it relates directly to the current proposal, to which I will return. It is important to be clear about the issue. The latest proposal is not identical to previous proposals on closures that I have mentioned, at least in respect of Cumbernauld. This time, there is at least a commitment to retaining a branch in the area, but that does not mean that concerns that have arisen from the proposal do not remain. There are some 373 Crown post offices throughout the United Kingdom. They are branches of the Post Office that are run directly by it rather than by a franchisee. The Post Office is talking about franchising some 70 Crown post offices throughout the UK. Five branches in Scotland are included in the programme: the aforementioned branches in Cumbernauld and East Kilbride and the Crown post offices in Perth, Alloa and Stornoway. The reassurance that a branch will at least be retained at those sites, albeit with a franchisee, is tempered by a number of concerns that have been expressed by the CWU and others who are worried about the proposals. First, there is the impact on staff who work in the Crown post offices that are under threat. They might be able to move under the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations to any new franchisee. The other options are redeployment elsewhere or a compromise agreement that involves them leaving the company. Given that the options for redeployment seem to be diminished by a reduction in the Crown post office network, it is hard to see where they might be deployed to. That and the fact that some staff might not want to TUPE to any new employer might result in a compromise agreement being viewed as the most attractive option for staff, which would mean a loss of experienced and well-trained members of staff in the post office network. From my meeting with a representative of the CWU, I understand that Crown post office staff are provided with regular training to ensure that they are equipped with the necessary skills to deal with customers’ requests for assistance. It is unclear that any franchisee will continue that rigorous training, and that could reduce the skills sets of the staff and diminish the post office customer experience. There are concerns about the experience of franchising Crown post offices thus far. Some 85 such post offices were transferred to franchise holders in 2007. In November last year, Consumer Focus published a report that assessed the level of service, accessibility and queues at high street post offices. The report, which is entitled “Are you being served? Service, accessibility and queues at High Street post offices”, demonstrated that Crown post offices had performed the best on accessibility, shown the most significant improvements since 2009 and scored high on the quality of service. On the other hand, the report said that one of the franchise holders, which had secured the overwhelming majority of the offices that were transferred in 2007, was the worst performer on queue times, and it scored badly on the quality of service and accessibility. In other words, the Crown post offices were performing better than the former Crown branches that had been transferred to a franchisee. That raises a clear concern about the likely impact on the customer experience. There are also concerns about where any franchisee might locate one of the five Crown post offices in Scotland that are encompassed in the proposal. Might it relocate a branch to a place that is less convenient for those who use it? Might the premises not be as well set out as the current premises that are used? The location is important for Cumbernauld. I mentioned that Kildrum post office was closed previously; part of the rationale for that was that the Cumbernauld town centre branch was located close by. However, that branch might now be moved. If it ends up being further away than the location of the old Kildrum post office, that will undermine the case that was made when that post office was closed. I believe that that would mean that people in my area had been fed a false premise to justify in part the Kildrum closure. I remind members that I set out the importance of being clear about the issue. To be clear, the proposals might come to nothing, and perhaps no potential franchisee will be identified for any of the branches, which would mean that no transfer could take place. I will certainly be interested to see where in Cumbernauld could be identified as an alternative location for the current branch, as it is not immediately clear where that might be or who might be interested in it. Let me also be clear with the management of Post Office Ltd that, if the proposals are advanced, the concerns that have been raised by the CWU, by many local people in the areas affected, by me and, doubtless, by other members in the debate must be listened to and taken seriously. The people who use Scotland’s Crown post offices will expect nothing less.

I thank those members who have taken part in today’s debate. At the outset, let me say to Willie Rennie that he should not be ashamed of reading one of my press statements—he should always be happy to do so—but, as I am speaking on behalf of the committee, I might be less strident in my defence of the aforementioned statement than I would usually be. Today’s debate was never likely to lead to unanimity across the chamber, but it has been no less productive for that. Members have identified a number of important issues, which will help the committee as we take forward our work. I thank the various bodies and agencies that have provided briefing material for today’s debate. That demonstrates the great level of interest in the report before us and in the issue of welfare reform more generally. I also echo the convener’s thanks to Steve Fothergill and Christina Beatty of the centre for regional, economic and social research at Sheffield Hallam University for their work in pulling together the excellent report, “The Impact of Welfare Reform on Scotland”, which the committee commissioned. I will pick up on as many as I can of the points that members raised—I apologise if I am unable to respond to every point—but I begin by reiterating some of the report’s headline figures, which have been mentioned already but are worth re-emphasising. First, as Jackie Baillie and others pointed out, although the financial losses are large, the scale of the loss in Scotland as measured per adult of working age is broadly on a par with the GB average. Indeed, table 3 in the report sets out that the figures are broadly in line, with the impact in Scotland being only marginally higher than the GB average. However, the report makes the important point, which is worth putting on record, that “the gap between Scotland and the GB average would have been somewhat wider – around £20 per adult of working age – if the Scottish Government had chosen to pass on the cut in Council Tax Benefit to local authorities and thence to claimants.” The absolute headline figure that attracted most attention when the report was released and which has been cited today, including by the convener in his opening remarks, is that, when the present welfare reforms have come into full effect, they will take more than £1.6 billion a year out of the Scottish economy, which is equivalent to about £480 a year for every adult of working age.

Briefly.

Of course, beyond the headline figures, the reforms affect real people. That has been remarked on during the debate and, if time allows, I will say a little about it, too. The headline figure is £1.6 billion, but the impact is greater in some areas than in others. Bob Doris and Drew Smith correctly identified that, in absolute terms, Glasgow is the most heavily affected area and will lose about £269 million per annum, which is second only to Birmingham of the local authorities throughout Great Britain. In Scotland, Glasgow is followed by Edinburgh on £135 million and my local authority area of North Lanarkshire on £123 million. The loss per working-age adult is also highest in Glasgow at about £650, which is followed by Inverclyde, where the figure is £630 per annum. That indicates that, probably unsurprisingly, the most deprived areas are hardest hit by the reforms. That is demonstrated clearly in figure 1 in the report. There has been some contention about the figure of £1.6 billion per annum, with Mary Scanlon and Alex Johnstone questioning the idea that it is money being removed from the economy. That line of inquiry was pursued with Professor Fothergill when he came to the Welfare Reform Committee to present his figures. I understand the point that Mary Scanlon was attempting to make, but I want to be clear that the report that the committee commissioned was not intended to be an assessment of the UK Government’s overall economic policy; rather, it was meant to be an in-depth look at the impact of welfare reform in Scotland.

That might be a fair point. I pursued that line of inquiry with Professor Fothergill when he came to the committee. In essence, the point is that we could argue that £1.6 billion is not being withdrawn from the economy only if an equivalent £1.6 billion were being handed back to the people of Scotland, but there is no evidence to suggest that that is the case. We must also consider the impact on local economies, which George Adam talked about. Professor Fothergill said: “I am aware that plenty of research demonstrates that welfare benefit claimants actually spend most of, if not all, their income, whereas more affluent groups can afford to put some away for a rainy day. You would therefore expect most of that loss of income to feed through fairly directly to a loss of spending.”—[Official Report, Welfare Reform Committee, 16 April 2013; c 701.] Therefore, there could be an impact on local economies and economic recovery. I turn to specific areas of loss. Within the figure of £1.6 billion, the biggest financial losses arise from reforms to incapacity benefit, which account for about £500 million a year, and the changes to tax credits, which account for about £300 million a year. Combined, those make up half the reduction. The changes in incapacity benefit affect 144,000 households and involve a reduction of £500 million per annum.

Do I have time, Presiding Officer?

Okay. I apologise to Mr Rennie, because I would have been happy to take an intervention. The estimated loss per annum from the changes in incapacity benefit is £500 million, with an average loss per affected household of £3,480. On the move from DLA to PIP, the report identifies an average loss per affected household per annum of £3,000. As the convener mentioned, some households will be affected by the loss of both and may lose more than £6,000. What household could sustain that level of loss? There was much discussion about the changes to housing benefit—the bedroom tax. I do not have time to go into those changes in great detail, but we took some important evidence from a variety of individuals today in Glasgow. It was quite emotive evidence, which demonstrates the point that Dennis Robertson made in his intervention. Behind all the figures that are detailed in the report that we debate today are individual stories and individuals who are being impacted. I reassure those individuals that the committee will focus on them as it takes its work further forward.

What would be the likely impact on bus services in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth and throughout Scotland if the concessionary travel scheme—which, as he said, seems to have lukewarm support from the Labour Party—was withdrawn?

Is that, therefore, how the member would define society?

At the outset, I want to say that I believe that there is such a thing as society. As members will be aware, Margaret Thatcher was elected on 3 May 1979; 18 days later happened to be the day of my birth. I mention this not to demonstrate my comparative youthfulness but to suggest that if anyone could be described as a child of the Thatcher age, it could be me. Of course, I use that term very carefully; I am not a child of Thatcher, which I think has a rather different meaning. Clearly, I was not immediately aware of her existence, but I became so. Growing up in Glasgow in the 1980s and 1990s, I was aware of a general disdain for her politics and those of her successors and I became aware that that was the view held by my own family. My mother was a public sector worker at the time—she was a teacher in Drumchapel. She saw first hand the damage done to the confidence of young people in one of the poorest parts of Scotland. She also saw the attacks on teachers undermining the profession. I remember the teachers’ strike of the mid-1980s. Although, I was probably not aware that it was a strike, I remember being taken to the rallies. The damaging effect of that undermining of the teaching profession was felt in Scottish society for a long time. I also remember the concerns about the poll tax being discussed at home and in wider society. Clearly, I would not have understood its implications at the time, but it was an absolutely outrageous form of taxation and one that bore no relation to the ability to pay.

I do not accept that the poll tax was a fair form of taxation. As was mentioned, it was defended on the basis that it was Scottish Tories who argued for its early implementation in Scotland. To argue that it was Margaret Thatcher’s Conservative Party, as represented by the Scottish rump, that demanded its early implementation is a poor form of defence. I am also aware of Thatcher’s negative impact on wider society. I represent a former mining area. I must be fair and acknowledge that the closures of the pits in my constituency were long ago and pre-dated Margaret Thatcher’s Government. However, there is a clear sense of community in those former mining areas. That sense of community—which is strong in my constituency—is a vital component of our sense of society. Not long ago, Clare Adamson secured a debate on the steelworkers’ memorial fund, and the strong sense of community in those former steel working areas was made clear in that debate. The deindustrialisation process of the Thatcher Government gave no thought to that sense of community. Undoubtedly, the nationalised industries needed reform—they were centralised and allowed the industrial conflict that has been mentioned to take place. I suggest, though, that they needed to be reformed, not killed off. I do not always agree with James Kelly, but I absolutely agreed with his point that the industries were being closed when no alternative forms of employment were being created in those same communities. That process, although it is wholly consistent with Margaret Thatcher’s unseen hand approach to the economy, could be described as not being consistent with a view that there is no such a thing as a society. Let me turn to Margaret Thatcher’s quote that is the subject of the debate. As has been mentioned, she remarked to Woman’s Own: “there’s no such thing as society. There are individual men and women and there are families.” Clearly, there are individual men, women and families. There are also neighbours, friends, work colleagues and clubs and organisations that bring together like-minded people, which was a point made by Gordon MacDonald. There are communities in villages, towns and cities across our country. There is such a thing as society. What type of society should we seek here in Scotland? That was an issue mentioned by the Minister for Local Government and Planning. I believe in a society in which access to education for our pupils is based on their ability to learn, not pay; in which the 600,000 people in Scotland who earn under £16,000 a year who used to have to pay for their medication no longer have to worry about doing so; and in which single parents who have their children at the weekend are not financially penalised by a bedroom tax. I believe in a Scottish society that is underpinned by cohesion and solidarity and in which the markets are servants of people, not their masters. I believe in a Scotland where we need not suffer a Government that hammers our people and that we did not elect. I believe that there is still such a thing as society.

The member sets out his party’s love for the concessionary travel scheme. Is that why his party refused to back the scheme when it was before the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I appreciate that the member considers that the debate is entirely about independence, but he says that his party should take time to consider its position on the issues. We are aware that his party’s commission will not report until after the referendum. Is that a mere coincidence?

Will the member taken an intervention?

Christine Grahame talked about a self-denying ordinance. Does she recommend to Siobhan McMahon that she operates a similar system? She talked about being able to afford to pay more council tax. Should she perhaps be writing an additional cheque to her local authority?

Let me begin by thanking the Scottish Government for today’s debate. First, I say to Duncan McNeil that no one on the SNP benches is suggesting for a moment that universality is a cure-all, or that universality is the only route to tacking poverty. I do not think that anyone on the SNP benches has argued for that proposition. However, what might help us to begin to tackle poverty a little more would be transfer of the levers of economic control to this place, where Duncan McNeil sits, rather than keeping them in the hands of the Tories, for which he is currently campaigning. Before I come on to the wider issues underpinning universalism, let me deal quickly with the council tax freeze, which was picked up on during the debate. Mr Rennie made the extraordinary comment that a council tax freeze is okay during the good times. The flip-side of that argument, I suppose, must be that a council tax freeze is bad in the bad times. That seems to be a peculiar form of economic illiteracy. Surely, if any time is right to introduce a council tax freeze, it is during the bad times when families are struggling to make ends meet. That is surely the correct time to freeze the council tax in order to reduce the burden on them. It will be interesting to hear when Mr Rennie thinks would be the right time to increase the burden of taxation on families and others.

I presume that, if the council tax had not been frozen, it would have continued on the trajectory that it was on under the Labour Party, when it increased exponentially. The burden would have increased across the board, including on the poorest families in society. That seems to be a peculiar line of argument for Mr Smith to take. Siobhan McMahon said—I do not want to take up too much time on this, because I want to focus on the wider issues—that she had a concern about the effect of the council tax freeze on the quality of local services. She said that we need to have an honest debate about the issue. That is interesting, given that a leaflet that was distributed by Hamilton Labour Party for the May 2012 council elections in South Lanarkshire, which is in Ms McMahon’s area, stated that South Lanarkshire Labour’s very first pledge was to “PROTECT our frontline services and freeze the Council Tax”. If she feels that that is a dishonest position, I suggest that she get her own party’s house in order before starting to lecture other parties about their position. I will now focus on the wider principles of universalism. As Christine Grahame said, the Government has set solidarity and cohesion as two of its main “purpose targets”. The Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations recently issued a report that set out that solidarity and cohesion would be undermined by the rolling back of universalism. It said in its report: “In the UK, means-testing has expanded steadily to over-shadow the contributory principle to a degree that isn’t matched in the Nordic countries, Germany or the Netherlands for example. In part this explains why public attitudes to benefit recipients have become harsher”. We have other evidence, such as that in the submission from One Parent Families Scotland to the Welfare Reform Committee that stated: “Universal benefits are very efficient to deliver. Once a means test is introduced, it has to be administered and policed, which is very expensive.” I concur with those perspectives. As has been remarked, it is not the case that we can provide every service universally, but the SNP in Government has made progress in widening the array of universal benefits. I think that that should be welcomed and that we should avoid rolling back those advances. In the time that I have left, I want to focus on one or two of the specific changes to which I have referred. As I think Bob Doris said, when the policy of phasing out prescription charges was introduced, about 600,000 adults living in Scotland had an annual income of less than £16,000 but were not entitled to free prescriptions. There has been a lot of talk about ending the free prescriptions policy and ensuring that those who can afford to pay do pay, but we should remember those 600,000 people who earned less than £16,000 a year who had to pay. They are people like the individual that one of my constituents who is a pharmacist told me about, who was one of those who came to the pharmacy in tears when they realised that they could not afford their prescription. If that anecdotal evidence is not enough, we can look at the research that was undertaken in 2008 involving a review of 173 studies of prescription charges in 15 high-income countries, which found that prescription charges “led patients to forego the use of essential drugs, reduced adherence to treatment, and increased the likelihood of needing more intensive care and dying.” The idea that we should roll back free prescriptions should be rejected. I also want to talk about the national concessionary bus pass scheme. Unlike Ms Grahame and Mr Dornan, I am not of an age to benefit from the scheme, but I support the initiative. It was interesting to hear Mr Macintosh make great play earlier of the fact that it was his party that introduced the scheme and that it was their ball to burst. Frankly, if his party is not prepared to back the scheme when it comes before a parliamentary committee and if his party sets up a cuts commission that says that nothing is off the table, then it is no wonder if some of us begin to think that the concessionary travel scheme is under threat at the hands of the Labour Party. Scotland’s public services are safe in the hands of the SNP.

I wish to raise a point of order under standing order 8.1.7, Presiding Officer. Yesterday I raised a point of order and asked what steps members could take under standing order 7.3.1 to correct what they had said when they had misled the chamber. You advised that there are opportunities to do that in such cases. Yesterday I pointed out that an email had been sent to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities’ head of media and communications to ask whether COSLA had called for Scottish Government legislation to prevent bedroom tax evictions, or for the Scottish Government to meet the rental-income deficit, given claims that were made earlier in the day that it had done so. The reply to both questions was no. Jackie Baillie then told Parliament that she had not misled the chamber, stating, “I shall say—

Just to remind members, Jackie Baillie said that COSLA had passed a motion. Earlier today, COSLA was asked to confirm that such a motion exists. It has provided no such confirmation. At most, evidence can be found of a discussion of housing legislation, in relation to what is or is not a bedroom. So far, nothing has been found in relation to evictions. [Interruption.]

To mislead the chamber once might be considered unfortunate; to do so twice might be considered more than a little careless. If Ms Baillie cannot provide us with the motion, can you advise what action is available to you, to Parliament collectively or to Ms Baillie herself to ensure that what she said is corrected?

Presiding Officer, I wish to raise a point of order under standing order 8.17. Earlier today, in an emergency question, Jackie Baillie asked the Scottish Government to consider whether it would introduce emergency legislation on the bedroom tax. In her exchange with the Deputy First Minister, Ms Baillie suggested that that proposal goes along with calls for action that are echoed by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. Later, an email was sent to COSLA’s head of media and communications to ask whether COSLA had made a call for Scottish Government legislation to prevent bedroom tax evictions, or for the Scottish Government to meet the rental income deficit. The reply was no, to both questions. Presiding Officer, can you advise what opportunity exists for members—perhaps under rule 7.3.1, which talks about members behaving in a “courteous and respectful manner”—to correct the record when they have misled the chamber?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, for all the unionist hot air about oil prices, the UK Government is quite happy to accumulate the revenue that oil brings in, no matter what the price is and that, therefore, the argument that Scotland should not accumulate that revenue seems somewhat hollow?

4. To ask the Scottish Government how civic society is engaging with the process involved in the lead-up to the independence referendum. (S4O-01918)

Will the cabinet secretary join me in welcoming the decision of the Scotland number 2 branch of the Communication Workers Union to back our country’s independence? Does the cabinet secretary regret the language used by the leader of the Liberal Democrats in Scotland, who described the branch’s decision as “turkeys voting for Christmas” because, he said, “One of the big strengths of the UK is the universal service”? Surely such language is unbecoming of any parliamentarian, let alone a party leader, and is somewhat ironic given that the Office of Communications has already concluded that “There is a very real risk to the universal service”. Surely the threat to the universal service comes not from independence but from the United Kingdom Government, of which Mr Rennie’s party forms part.

Neil Bibby rightly mentioned the challenge that is posed by welfare reform. One of the reforms that will offer particular challenges to families with children is the bedroom tax. Does Neil Bibby share my disappointment that during the week, Helen Goodman, a shadow minister in the Labour Party in London, in essence accepted the bedroom tax?

I very much welcome the debate. I apologise to you, Presiding Officer, and other members because I may need to leave the chamber briefly during it. I cannot think of a more important topic to debate in the Parliament than securing the future of our children. We recently debated Sarah Boyack’s motion on the enough food for everyone if campaign. I said in that debate that it is a human imperative for all parents to do their best for their children. That is certainly my perspective with my children. The Scottish Government is doing good work in that regard. I cannot think of anyone else who I would rather progressed that work than my friend Aileen Campbell, because I know of her personal commitment to it. The Scottish Government is doing work to achieve the ambition of making Scotland the best place to grow up. The £270 million early years and early intervention change fund has been established. The early years early action fund has also been established to work with the third sector for early years and early intervention activities. That work is focused on what we are all talking about—the preventative spend agenda—because we know that early intervention is key to that. A number of programmes have been established in the years during which the Scottish National Party has formed the Administration. The early years framework was launched in December 2008. The early years task force was set up in 2011. Only last year, the early years collaborative was launched, bringing those two strands together. The early years collaborative has been welcomed across the board. Indeed, I saw that Sir Harry Burns, who is of course the chief medical officer, said of it: “This is nothing less than saving the human race”. Those are dramatic words indeed, but they show the depth and importance of that ambitious initiative. The Government also intends to introduce a children and young people bill, which I welcome. It will be about establishing children’s rights at the heart of everything that the Government does. I am aware that, in preparing for that bill, the Government consulted some 2,000 young people. That is as it should be: the bill is about them and they should have their say. I look forward to that bill being introduced and welcome the minister’s commitment to working with others across the spectrum to make it work. All members have received some briefings from stakeholders who welcome the children and young people bill. Children in Scotland suggests that a duty be “placed on all public bodies to ensure that their policies and services are consistent with the UNCRC”. That was also picked up by Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People. It would be interesting to see how it tallies with what the Government plans. I am sure that the minister will be able to respond in her closing speech and speak a little about that. The children and young people bill will be an important opportunity because, although good work has gone on, we still have a set of challenging circumstances. The minister rightly spoke of the challenges of poverty. We should reflect on the fact that child poverty is at its lowest since devolution was instituted—it is now at 17 per cent. Although it is, of course, welcome that we have the lowest figure since devolution, it is still too high. I will not rehearse all the likely outcomes of poverty because the minister went into great detail about them. However, we know that the life chances of those who are born into poverty are influenced significantly by those early circumstances. Save the Children provided a detailed briefing that set out some of those challenges. I turn to the Labour amendment, which suggests that more needs to be done in education, health and housing. The point was made in an intervention that no indication is given of where that additional investment is meant to come from. Labour’s amendment also implies that nothing is being done in the first place, but we know that work is being done in those areas. For example, we have the family nurse partnership programme, which has been awarded extra money. We know that the national health service is one of the partners in the early years change fund and that a working group is looking at health inequalities. We also know that additional funds are being invested to help local authorities to target fuel-poor households and that the Government plans to do more on childcare. Therefore, it is completely wrong to suggest, as Labour has done, that nothing is being done with the powers that we have. We are not saying that people must wait for independence, but independence can make the difference. Frankly, Mr Bibby’s response to my intervention was far from reassuring. It was almost as if he was not aware of his party spokesperson’s position on the bedroom tax. That is a further indication of why we need this place to be invested with the necessary powers. The welfare reforms that are being brought in will make it hugely difficult to achieve the ambition of making Scotland the best place to grow up in, so we need to have those powers.

Does the member agree with the proposition that, if a family refuse to move to another property that has been identified for them, they should suffer the bedroom tax? That was the position that Helen Goodman, from his party, advanced.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

The amendment before us says that we should “mitigate the impact of the so-called bedroom tax.” To echo the point that Kevin Stewart made, does Ms Baillie seriously argue that the Labour position, as expressed by Helen Goodman, which essentially accepts the premise of the bedroom tax, is about mitigation?

I agree with Jim Hume that there is more to health care than waiting times. However, given that the subject of the debate is waiting times, he should not be too surprised that we are focusing on the issue. I agreed with Jackie Baillie when she said that people do not want to have their faith in the NHS undermined. I think that I have got what she said right; if I have not, I apologise to her. I agree with that sentiment totally. However, one of the main reasons why faith in the NHS is being undermined might be that Jackie Baillie comes to the chamber week in, week out to decry what is happening in our national health service as if it were broken. Indeed, I think that I am correct in saying that she suggested that our NHS was at the point of breaking. That is hugely unhelpful and does not reflect the reality on the ground. As Mark McDonald said, the NHS is a human institution. As a large institution, it will not always meet the standards that it should. How could that not be the case with an institution of that size? What do I do—what does any of us do—when a constituent comes to us with a problem about the NHS? I will tell Jackie Baillie what I do. I try to resolve that problem for that individual. I do not come to the chamber and use my constituent’s problem in a form of political knockabout to suggest that the NHS is at the point of breaking.

Jackie Baillie has the temerity to seek an intervention. When I tried to intervene on her, she would not accept it. However, lest I bear the brunt of Mr Findlay’s wrath, I will give way to Ms Baillie.

I am sure that Jackie Baillie’s constituents are delighted that she does what the rest of us do to try to get their problems resolved. What I do not do and what I do not see other members do is bring that problem to the chamber and say, as Ms Baillie did, that the NHS is at the point of breaking. That is unhelpful hyperbole and does not reflect the reality on the ground. I do not come to this chamber to seek to undermine people’s faith in the NHS, which is what Ms Baillie does.

Her card is not in.

I appreciate that, Presiding Officer. I should have known better, because the last time that I gave way to the member, she made the same mistake and did not have her card in the console. I will need to learn my lesson. I absolutely agree that it is the responsibility of members on the back benches—not just Opposition members, but all of us—to scrutinise what the Government is doing. However, we have to do that in a responsible fashion. We should not come to the chamber and suggest that the NHS is at breaking point. That does neither the NHS nor the people whom we represent a service. Jenny Marra suggested that the debate was brought to the chamber to shine a light on what is happening on the ground. That would be all well and good if that was the case but, to be frank, the motion is a travesty. It is a travesty in several ways, not least because the waiting time circumstances are far improved from what they once were. Under the previous Administration, we had availability status codes that in essence allowed people to be put on hidden waiting lists for time immemorial. They would not get an appointment and they were stripped of any guarantee. Little wonder, then, that 10 years ago 6,494 patients were waiting longer than nine months for in-patient treatment, which represented a doubling since 1999. As of December 2012, there were 395 patients across Scotland waiting longer than 18 weeks. That is a dramatically improved set of circumstances. We saw at least some recognition from the previous Administration that the availability status code system was not working. In 2004, Andy Kerr said: “by the end of 2007 we will end the system of availability status codes”.—[Official Report, 15 December 2004; c 12892.] It was all well and good for him to say that, but he did not deliver on it. It took the election of the SNP Government to deliver in that regard. We have instituted a system that is immeasurably better at ensuring that people can get seen by the NHS. Audit Scotland has been cited several times during the debate. I point out that, in 2010, it released a report that stated: “The NHS has done well to implement the new arrangements.” It stated that the new system “has stopped people remaining on waiting lists indefinitely.” That was recognition by Audit Scotland that the new system was working far better than the old one. Even those with unavailability are being referred for treatment much more quickly. Since 2008, the median wait for treatment in Scotland, including those who have been marked as medically or socially unavailable, has reduced from 40 days to 32 days. The suggestion in the motion that there is some scandal is, in itself, a scandal. The NHS is in far better hands under the SNP Government.

I join others in welcoming the debate, because the inquiry and the report are important. I joined the committee pretty much at the opposite end of the inquiry from Malcolm Chisholm, at its outset, and I was happy to be involved in this important and interesting inquiry. I echo the committee convener’s thanks to the clerks for the support that they provided to the committee, and I echo the thanks to all those who gave evidence. Scotland’s population is changing. To set that out, I will quote the report. Paragraph 15 says: “The National Records of Scotland ... highlighted in its submission that Scotland’s population has been growing steadily in recent years. The latest estimates show the population on Census Day in 2011 to be 5,295,000—the highest ever. Since the 2001 Census, the population has increased by 233,000 (5%). This represents the fastest growth rate between two census years in the last century. The population has also become older over the last 100 years with the proportion aged under 15 falling from 32% to 16% while the proportion aged 65 and over has increased from 5% to 17% ... The NRS projections also indicate that although the working age population is set to increase by 7 per cent between 2010 and 2035 those of pensionable age will increase by 26 per cent over the same period”— I note that Annabel Goldie made that point. The report continues: “The number of births is expected to rise slowly for a few years from its current level of around 58,900 before falling to around 56,500 by 2035. This decline in the number of births will contribute to the overall ageing of the population.” As Annabel Goldie did, I point out how the population is getting older, which is set out in paragraph 16: “Between 2010 and 2035 those aged 75 and over are projected to increase by 82%.” Even more remarkably “The estimated 820 centenarians in Scotland in 2010 is projected to increase to 7,600 by 2035.” That clearly demonstrates that Scotland’s demographic base is changing, which of course raises questions about the nature of the services that are required and how we sustain them. We would be well advised to be careful about the language that is employed in any debate on the issue. The convener referred to paragraph 6 of the report. We had to report what the IMF referred to as “unfavourable demographic trends.” I take umbrage with that terminology because it is not particularly helpful to suggest that there are “unfavourable demographic trends.” It is important to recognise that people living longer is a good thing. Fiona McLeod made that point well, and I know that the deputy convener raised the issue several times throughout the inquiry. Indeed, I was happy to hear the cabinet secretary make that point in his opening statement, too. We should remember that older people are the volunteers who—of their own volition—give their own time to support their communities. We should also remember that many older people provide a vital care role for their families. Of course, many older people have disposable incomes that they spend to sustain our economy. All those matters must be recognised and they should, by necessity, form part of consideration of the issues that have been raised in the report and, more generally, of how we will support the population in that changed demographic base. We should also reflect on the fact that much is being done to respond to the changed circumstances. For example, we have free personal care for the elderly. The amount of money that local authorities are spending in support of services to older people in their own homes “has increased from £133 million in 2003/04 to £342 million in 2010/11”. Some might argue that that in itself imposes a financial burden and that it poses questions about the scheme. However, it supports 77,000 vulnerable older people and, through it, more people are being cared for in the home, rather than in hospitals or care homes.

I agree entirely. We see a number of changes that have been introduced by Westminster that undermine utterly the work by successive Scottish Administrations to deliver for older people and others. In 2003-04, 32,870 people were being cared for in their homes and by 2010-11 the number had increased to 46,720. That is not only good for the individuals, but good for the public purse. According to Age UK, it costs about £5,000 a year to provide personal care at home, but it costs £25,000-plus a year for a person to be looked after in a care home. Caring for people in their own homes therefore makes a positive contribution. The Scottish Government has committed itself to a preventative spend agenda as well as establishing the older people’s change fund, which was increased last year from £70 million to £80 million, and NHS boards and local authority partners are working together in that regard, all of which demonstrates the importance of intervening early; it gives a better outcome for not only individuals but Government funds. I could say a lot more, Presiding Officer, but I see that you are not allowing me to do so. I therefore conclude by saying that the subject should be seen as a challenge, not a burden, and that the work that is taking place now and the work that can be brought forward—informed, I hope, by the report, which I commend to Parliament—suggest that we are well capable of rising to it.

4. To ask the First Minister what the impact will be on the Scottish economy of the downgrading of the United Kingdom Government’s bond rating. (S4F-01203)

Moody’s set out one of the reasons for its downgrade action as being “further potential austerity measures included in the government’s next Comprehensive Spending Review”. Does not that demonstrate that Scotland’s remaining part of the UK threatens rather than secures Scotland’s fiscal position, and that those who have argued that we must be part of the UK in order to maintain a AAA rating have been shown to be completely wrong? Surely no one can trust a word that the no campaign says.

Let me be the first member to congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing this debate—I must apologise to Ms Boyack, because I will not be able to attend her reception next week. The enough food for everyone if campaign is an excellent and important initiative, which is well worthy of debate. I also congratulate all the organisations that are involved in the campaign. It is good to see them coming together in that fashion. “If you, if we, if everyone believes in no hunger or despair We’ll change the world for everyone.” That is the chorus to a song that was written by Whitelees primary school in my constituency and performed at the launch event for the campaign. I was very happy to visit Whitelees primary on Monday to see that song performed, which was excellent and reaffirmed the school’s commitment to concepts of global citizenship, which have been well entrenched by its headteacher, Ann Kay. The school has done work of that nature before; in fact, it wrote another song for fair trade and worked on it with SCIAF. I know that the school hopes to record its current song and work with SCIAF to do a bit more fundraising. I wish it well in that regard. While I am at it, I invite the minister to come and visit Whitelees if he gets the opportunity. I know that he would be made welcome and I am sure that the school would love to perform the song for him as well. Earlier this week, the prophet Isaiah was mentioned at time for reflection. I am reminded of one of his commands, to “undo the heavy burdens” of the oppressed. I think that we would all agree that doing the best for their children is a human imperative for all parents. I know that when I am with my children, that is the imperative that I have. Trying to do the best for one’s children should not be viewed as a heavy burden, but for too many around the globe it is. No one should see their child die before them, least of all because of hunger, yet we know that four children die every minute because of malnutrition. That is why the if campaign is important. We know the four key aspects of the call on David Cameron to use the UK’s G8 presidency this year to take action on the root causes of the hunger crisis in the poorest countries. We know that it is about stopping farmers being forced off their land; trying to get Governments to keep their promises on aid; trying to get Governments to close loopholes to stop big companies avoiding tax in poor countries; and forcing Governments and investors to be open and honest about the deals that they make in the world’s poorest countries. Those would be far better aims than redirecting international aid to defence spending, which has been suggested elsewhere. I hope that the UK Government will respond to the call and I am sure that the Scottish Government will put pressure on it to do so. Malnutrition also affects children’s life chances. Sarah Boyack talked about the health impacts on those who survive malnutrition. Save the Children has told us: “Malnutrition can undermine children’s future earning potential by as much as 20% and inhibit economic growth by as much as 3% of GDP”. That is perhaps not something that we think of when we consider this challenge. It is an important point to make, because the life chances of those affected by poverty have to be part of the equation as well. I hope that the Scottish Government will respond to the calls from the campaign, which has set out a number of ways that we can help here in Scotland. I thought that one of the interesting ones was to try to reflect on Scotland’s historical experience of land-rights issues in the Highland clearances and the Lowland clearances and perhaps to host a global land hearing to discuss how lessons from Scotland’s experience can help inform better practice around the world. I will be interested to hear how the Scottish Government can take that forward. I congratulate Sarah Boyack once again on securing the debate.

The public transport links between Cumbernauld, Kilsyth and the rest of north Lanarkshire are notoriously poor. Will the cabinet secretary assure me that when any business case is presented to him, he will ensure that those in my constituency who want to access courses in their local area will still be able to do so?

The minister will be aware that Cumbernauld high school, in my constituency, is the school in which frozen meat was found to be contaminated with horsemeat. Although parents should be reassured by the higher standards that are set for school meals, will the minister say what steps will be taken to work with North Lanarkshire Council to ensure that it is meeting the standards?

I welcome the debate and say at the outset that I agree with John Pentland that we should not have reform for reform’s sake. However, ensuring that public services work effectively and achieve their purpose for the people that they serve will always be important. Mark McDonald’s point that public services reform can be seen as an opportunity was well made. When the public purse is being tightened, as the UK Government is doing now, it is even more important to ensure that services work effectively. In that regard, it is essential to consider how public services can be reformed. I congratulate the Local Government and Regeneration Committee on its work on public services reform. I confess that I have not been following it intimately, but I was delighted that the committee visited Cumbernauld, which is always to be encouraged—everyone should come to Cumbernauld. The visit was more about regeneration than public services reform per se, but I was at the event that the committee held in Cumbernauld. The local organisations that attended gave good feedback on it and I believe that some of what was said can inform the committee’s work on public services reform. The committee has been working on public services reform on a comprehensive basis over a significant period of time, which means that it has considered the issue in depth, which is welcome. It is also welcome to hear the convener say that communities and the third sector will be involved in the committee’s on-going work on the issue, which is as it should be, because they are of course the people who use public services. Indeed, third-sector organisations sometimes deliver public services. We should reflect that work to reform public services is already under way. The Christie commission, which was established by the Government in 2010, has been referred to in that regard, and its report had a number of key objectives for public sector reform. It will be interesting to see how the Local Government and Regeneration Committee can play a role in assessing how those priorities are taken forward. However, as the cabinet secretary said, the Scottish Government has responded to the Christie commission recommendations. It is therefore clear that public services reform is being looked at across the board, which is the way to do it. We have also seen some focus on preventative spend, an important aspect of public service reform as set out by the Christie commission. As a member of the Finance Committee, I think that that is an important area to focus on, given that the Christie commission recommended a shift to preventative spend. We have seen the Scottish Government do that to a degree. It is important to move towards preventative spend for two reasons: first, as was said earlier, we are in straitened financial times; and, secondly, it is far better for any individual who has a public service delivered to them to have an earlier intervention, which might lead to a better outcome for them and allow them to lead a happier and more productive life without needing a more serious intervention further down the line that might cost the public purse rather more. We have seen the creation of the three change funds, which have been referred to. I very much welcome the establishment of those important steps towards preventative spend. The Finance Committee will continue to scrutinise preventative spend, as it did in the recent budget scrutiny, reflecting the importance being placed on the matter. The Finance Committee’s inquiry into demographic change and the ageing population also placed a priority on preventative spend. The public sector has to face up to the challenge of preventative spend; it is a social and fiscal priority. Indeed, we are seeing the Scottish Government respond to that challenge. It will be interesting to see how the Local Government and Regeneration Committee continues to look at that area. Mark McDonald referred to the committee’s acceptance of the need for preventative spend. The public sector set out the challenge of the cut to the Scottish block grant, but that is not the only challenge that is out there. I am the deputy convener of the Parliament’s Welfare Reform Committee, on which I serve with Kevin Stewart. We regularly see evidence of the effect of welfare changes on not only the individual, but public services. It is little wonder that SCVO said: “Welfare changes and reform may well prove to be a tipping point for current public services.” The bedroom tax and the change to the payment of benefits to individuals rather than landlords pose a huge challenge to registered social landlords. The duress that work capability assessments cause individuals can add to the pressure on our NHS. The confusion that has been caused by the litany of changes to the welfare system will inevitably lead to increased demand for local advice services. Welfare reform is making a huge impact on the public sector. It will be interesting to see how public services reform can step up to that challenge, which I am sure is not beyond it. I look forward to the committee reflecting on that as it takes its work forward.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what importance is placed on Education Scotland’s findings on local authority plans to close schools. (S4O-01821)

Where Education Scotland finds that a proposal does not give sufficient consideration to the impact on the local community of closing a school; where it takes the view that closure might have a detrimental impact on the education of some young people, particularly those with additional support needs, who require careful transition planning; where it finds that stakeholders are justifiably concerned about the timescale for implementation and the lack of evidence on the possible detrimental effect on young people’s education; and where it finds that concerns about the walking route are also justified, would the cabinet secretary expect any local authority to amend its proposals significantly?

I welcome this debate. We have all had constituents approach us with concerns about the indebtedness in which they have found themselves, and that can be a difficult subject to deal with. The early part of any year is a difficult time for families, so it is no surprise that last week we had a debate about the cost of living and today we are debating the debt arrangement scheme. While it is true that the early part of any year is a difficult time, the current situation is exacerbating matters. We know that the economic downturn is putting increased pressure on household budgets, and that is being further exacerbated by the welfare reform agenda that is emanating from Westminster, which, it is likely, will increase the pressure on families and increase the likelihood that families will turn to the payday loan companies that have been referred to throughout today’s debate and in last week’s debate. We all know that going to such companies can lead to problems. That might be why this debate is largely consensual, and I will try to stick to that approach, although a few things have been said that I disagree with. It is clear that the debt arrangement scheme is working well. In 2005-06, 149 debt payment programmes were approved. By 2011-12, the number had risen to 3,319 and, so far in this financial year, there have been 3,655. That indicates a level of success, because those families could have faced real problems if there had been no debt arrangement scheme. It is right to build on that success, and I welcome the changes that the minister has announced today. They will definitely enhance the situation. I acknowledge the Government’s intention to introduce a bankruptcy bill, which, I understand, will have the debt arrangement scheme at its heart. It is clear that the debt arrangement scheme is an important tool in helping people on the ground. There have been references—including in the Labour amendment—to the fact that the Scottish Government has powers over these matters. To an extent, that is right. We have heard Labour members say, as they did last week, that the Scottish Government could use its advertising budget to help in this regard. It was interesting to hear Margaret McDougall talking about the Daily Record’s supplement. I agree that it is great that it has published it, and I note that it provides evidence that the Scottish Government has already done what it is being urged to do because, on the back page, there is an advertisement by the Scottish Government and, on the inside front page, there is a message from Fergus Ewing. If that is not the Scottish Government using its resources in the manner that has been requested, I do not know what is. However, we should recognise that the Scottish Government’s powers to take action on payday loans are somewhat limited, although Fergus Ewing has written to the UK Government to call for action. Kenneth Macintosh suggested that we could close down payday loan outlets. Superficially, that is an attractive thing to do, but it would be better to regulate the industry. At the end of the day, people are still going to be in financial trouble and, if they cannot go to payday loan outlets, where are they going to go? I know that some people will respond that they could go to credit unions, and the Scottish Government has supported the credit union sector. Between 2008 and 2010, some £12 million was invested, so I think that it would be wrong if anyone who is watching this debate came away with the impression that the Scottish Government is not doing what it can with the powers that it has. I wish that the Government had more powers to act further.

I point out that my sympathy for the Opposition is limitless.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to encourage healthy eating in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. (S4O-01776)

I welcome the activity that took place at St Patrick’s primary school, which recognises that one way to encourage healthy eating is to engage with young people early. Will the minister join me in congratulating the staff and pupils of Abronhill primary school—who need some cheer today, because North Lanarkshire Council has decided to close their local high school—on their success in earning the healthy eating initiative award 2012?

I very much welcome the budget that is before us. I want to talk about some of things in it: the £180 million that is to be provided over two years for investment in construction, skills and the green economy; and the £80 million of planned investment in the schools for the future programme, which will increase the number of schools being built from 55 to 67—I am delighted to say that one of those will be a new Greenfaulds high school. In addition, commitments have been made to a wage increase for most public sector employees and to no compulsory redundancies. I say gently to Mr Macintosh that it is somewhat galling to hear criticism of the amount that is being spent on redundancies when Labour-controlled Glasgow City Council made a pay-off of £500,000 to the head of the Glasgow East Regeneration Agency. The Labour Party should do more to get its own house in order instead of criticising others.

Perhaps it is because organisations such as Glasgow City Council are paying £500,000 to certain individuals. The key point, of course, is that the Government has a policy of no compulsory redundancies.

That is a useful clarification from Mr Mason. Let us talk a little more about what the Government is doing. It is delivering free university tuition. It is keeping the council tax down, delivering free prescriptions and supporting concessionary travel. In Labour’s cuts commission, none of those are off the table. In December last year, the Government also announced an additional £205 million package of capital investment. Rather than welcoming those initiatives, Ken Macintosh demanded that all the money be spent on housing. We hear demands from Labour members for support for the further education sector. Ken Macintosh will have to explain to them why he would want the £19 million support for capital investment in that sector to be cut. We also regularly hear Labour members decry the condition of the NHS. Ken Macintosh will have to tell them why he wants the £10 million for health maintenance to be cut.

No, I will not. I have already taken an intervention from Mr Macintosh and he would do well to remember that he did not take a single intervention during his speech. I point out the other areas of investment that Mr Macintosh wanted to be cut. They include the £4.6 million of investment in Scotland’s canal network. That represents regeneration at Pinkston basin, Bowling, Port Dundas, Spiers wharf, Sighthill, Applecross, Grangemouth and seven locations along the Caledonian canal. There is also £21 million for regeneration projects in Dalmarnock, Irvine and Ardrossan. Those are all projects that Mr Macintosh presumably wanted to be cancelled.

I was going to turn to that a little later, but I will turn to it now. I very much welcome the £61 million of funding for colleges in addition to the budget that had been set. It is surely good news. When Mr Parker came before the Finance Committee, of which I am a member, the convener asked him to say where, if he did not want the settlement, the money should come from, but, as in the chamber, answer came there none. I can see Mr Rennie’s reaction. I will not criticise Mr Parker for that because it is his role to advance a proposition for his interest group. However, to be frank, if the other parties in the Parliament aspire to government, they must raise their game and tell us where the money will come from, but they never do. What is particularly welcome about the college settlement is that it is a two-year settlement. When I am in discussion with my local college, one of the concerns that it expresses is about looking further ahead. To be frank, I would have thought that the fact that there will be sustainability and a level of stability from the coming year to the next would be welcomed across the board. It is unfortunate that that is not the case, because the college sector will welcome the investment. We would also do well to remember that, as the cabinet secretary pointed out, the highest-ever level of investment in the college sector before the SNP came into government was £510 million. To be frank, the calls from the other parties sound hollow to me. The additional £40 million for housing is also welcome. Two aspects of that in particular are welcome. The £4 million for preventive adaptations is hugely welcome, because one of the key themes that have come out of the Finance Committee’s changing demography inquiry—the report will be published soon—is the need for such investment. Also, like Mr Stewart, I hope that the £2 million pilot on regenerating our town centres—finding ways to get people to live in them and to increase activity in them—will be a huge success. The town centres in my constituency could do with some attention. It was interesting to hear Mr Rennie having the audacity to bemoan SNP members’ welcome for the budget. Let us consider what his party’s Government has done. It has cut capital spending and only belatedly reversed a little of that cut. Even then, Nick Clegg—his party leader—has admitted that the UK Government had cut too far too fast. His party is also introducing austerity budgets, cutting investment and hurting growth and families. That is before we even get to the UK Government’s draconian welfare reforms. SNP members can be proud of their Government’s budget. Willie Rennie should be ashamed of his.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The member has set out that Labour does not support cutting child benefit but I seem to recall that Malcolm Chisholm, who is sitting in the row behind Mr Bibby, resigned from the Government because that is exactly what Labour did when it was in government.

Mr Chisholm said that he was surprised by the terms of the motion and that the Labour Party is worried about a number of other things, such as the attack on tax credits, as are SNP members. If Labour is so concerned, why does its amendment not mention those issues?

At the outset of my speech, I should declare an interest: my family is a beneficiary of child benefit. I cannot exactly say that I welcome the debate—I said the same at the start of our debate on fuel poverty. I would prefer that the changes were not happening, but it is important that we debate the issue. Before I go into details, I say to Malcolm Chisholm, whom I normally very much enjoy listening to, that it was somewhat galling to hear his upset over the Labour Party being accused of cutting bus passes. I remind him that it was his party that set up a cuts commission for which nothing is off the table. I have lost count of the number of times that I have met individuals when I have been out canvassing on behalf of my party who have informed me that they believe that my party will cut bus passes. Now we know that the SNP is preserving the bus pass and Labour is threatening it.

I reject the suggestion, which I have heard countless times, that the SNP will abolish the bus pass. Quite frankly, that was an unconvincing explanation of why the charge cannot be levelled against the Labour Party. Let me get on to child benefit, because that is what we are debating. I want to look at how the change is affecting people in Scotland. We know that child benefit cuts will mean that a family with two children will lose more than £1,100 a year and that a family with one child will lose more than £650 a year. According to the UK Government, in the next financial year, approximately 85,000 families in Scotland will be affected by the high-income child benefit charge, which will reduce or remove their benefit. That, of course, creates a nonsensical situation—I think that that has been referred to. It is absolutely bizarre that the UK Government has come up with a formula that means that a single-income family that earns more than £50,000 will lose child benefit, whereas a couple with a combined household income of just under £100,000 might not do so. Even Iain Duncan Smith’s favoured think tank, the centre for social justice, has criticised that aspect. There are other flaws with the high-income child benefit charge. Lest we think that it is only the higher earners who will be affected by the child benefit changes, that is, of course not the case. The Welfare Benefits Up-rating Bill, which is being considered at Westminster, will limit increases in working-age benefits to 1 per cent for three years. That will affect child benefit as well. It will, of course, affect people at the lower end of the income scale. Today, an article has been published in the Daily Record that says that, with the changes, there will be some 15,000 more children in relative poverty in Scotland and 200,000 more children in relative poverty across the UK. I say to Drew Smith that we are all concerned about kids being pushed into poverty anywhere. However, on his party’s unwillingness to see the powers invested and used here, I will not go back to my constituents and say, “We won’t do anything for you because other parties in the Parliament are not confident enough to take powers here.” If we had the powers, we could help our constituents. I always think that the Labour Party’s solidarity is a bit phoney. Mark McDonald made the point well that it seems that the Labour Party’s social solidarity extends no further than the white cliffs of Dover. The changes that make child benefit a targeted measure will make it far more complex. I do not have time to go into that in great detail, but there are concerns. The Scottish Government has set out solidarity and cohesion as two of its main purpose targets, and the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations has suggested that the move away from universality reduces solidarity. My colleague Mr Stewart referred to the position as espoused in The Observer by the leader of the Labour Party. I agree with Ed Miliband that attacking universal benefits such as child benefit is “a dangerous erosion of the social solidarity that comes from a universal system.” The Labour members here would do well to reflect on that. Frankly, it is somewhat galling for the Tory amendment to conclude that “many people will benefit from ... the forthcoming roll-out of the universal credit”, on a day when the Daily Record published an article that says that 15,000 children in Scotland “will fall below the poverty line” as a consequence of the changes. I remind those on the Tory benches that those are DWP figures—their own Government’s figures. I will gently ask Alex Johnstone a positive question. Like me, he is a member of the Welfare Reform Committee. I ask him to name a witness who has come to our committee and spoken of the benefit of the changes, because I cannot remember a single one. I turn briefly to the Labour amendment, which suggests that “the issues that are central to tackling poverty, such as health, childcare, schools and housing fall within current legislative powers of the Scottish Government.” Indeed they do, but the suggestion is that the Scottish Government is doing nothing. I remind Labour members that the SNP Government has protected the national health service budget when Labour would not have ring fenced it; looked to roll out increased hours of nursery education; provided free tuition in education; and delivered more affordable homes.

We heard from Labour members about all the great achievements from the 1940s, 1960s and 1970s. The SNP Government is achieving here and now, but we could do much more with the powers of independence.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

I fear that Liam McArthur somewhat wittingly misrepresented the position of my colleague Stewart Stevenson, who reasonably tried to make the point that, if Scotland had access to its own natural resources, we could utilise them for the benefit of the people of Scotland and invest the money in tackling fuel poverty rather than squandering it on an austerity agenda, as the UK Government is doing. Part of Mr McArthur’s solution is not only that we should not control Scotland’s oil but that we should not even control Scotland’s water. He needs to rise to the occasion rather better. I welcome this debate. I use the word “welcome” advisedly, of course. I welcome the debate as the subject is an important one that we should be debating, but we would all rather not be having the debate. We are having it only because we have a problem with fuel poverty. It is a disgrace that Scotland, as an energy-rich country, has fuel poverty. I think that that was commented on earlier in a disparaging manner. We have debated the issue in the past. Homes for Scotland has pointed out that one problem that is exacerbating fuel poverty is the significant increase in energy bills. It has made the point that, “With energy bills having rocketed by 91% since 2006, fuel poverty now affects 684,000 Scottish households.” The minister mentioned that figure. Indeed, Energy Action Scotland has said that, once more up-to-date figures are looked at, the figure could be higher than that. It is therefore clear that we have a problem. How does that problem manifest itself? What does it lead to? As I said in a previous debate on fuel poverty, “Professor Hills, who is director of the centre for analysis of social exclusion at the London School of Economics, has argued that fuel poverty poses serious public health and environmental problems. According to the Office for National Statistics, there are some 27,000 extra deaths in the UK each winter compared to other times of year. That figure is worse than the figures for Finland, Sweden and Norway, all of which have severe winters more regularly than these islands do.” Professor Hills also pointed out “that, in about half of cases in which a death was attributed to lower-than-average indoor temperatures, there were economic reasons.”—[Official Report, 26 October 2011; c 2758.] Those reasons exacerbated the problem. It is therefore clear that the problem is a serious one. I turn to the amendments. We have heard the call for increased funding, but we must recognise what the Scottish Government is doing. It is committed to investing some £200 million between 2012 and 2014 to deal with the issue. The Labour amendment says again, somewhat disparagingly, that some of the money might come from energy companies. Given that we live in an age in which the average dual fuel bill is a four-figure sum, it would be scandalous if those companies were not contributing to tackling the problem.

I will gladly give way to Mr Baker.

My reference was to Mr Baker’s amendment, in which he almost blithely says: “of the £200 million budget that the Scottish Government states that it has set for energy efficiency and tackling fuel poverty, almost two thirds is to come from energy companies”. Frankly, what is the problem? I point out that that is in line with a recommendation of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, which asked for a combined budget of at least £200 million between Government and energy company obligations. The Scottish Government has risen to that challenge. I welcome the retrofit programme, as it is right to consolidate efforts and to attempt to improve existing homes, make them more energy efficient and reduce fuel poverty. I see that the existing homes alliance Scotland briefing for the debate states that it welcomes that approach. Other briefings from housing sector organisations have offered suggestions to the Scottish Government. I do not necessarily support those suggestions, but they are at least worthy of exploration. Homes for Scotland suggests developing a retrofit reward solution, through which home builders would “have the option of either complying with new Standards or continuing building to current 2010 Standards and making a financial contribution to a retrofit fund”. That is an interesting suggestion that is worth exploring, although I am unclear as to whether it would be effective. The Scottish Federation of Housing Associations calls for the utilisation of European money to fund improvements. Again, I am not entirely sure of the merits of that approach, but at least the federation is offering suggestions. I am sure that the Scottish Government will respond to it. In the background is the UK Government’s approach to welfare reform. I am on the Welfare Reform Committee, which just yesterday heard evidence about how that reform will push a large number of people further into poverty. Against the trend of increased energy costs, welfare reform will make tackling fuel poverty ever more difficult. In the past, when progress has been made on tackling fuel poverty, price increases have served to wipe that out. If the UK Government suppresses people’s incomes through welfare reform, that will serve only to make it ever more difficult to tackle fuel poverty.

The background of the UK Government’s welfare reform agenda belies Alex Johnstone’s suggestion that the UK Government is working towards tackling fuel poverty. I look forward to hearing the minister’s closing speech.

Does the member not also think that it is somewhat ironic that the Tories, in slamming wind farms, failed to mention that two of their members are trying to sell land on which wind farms can be built?

The welfare reforms are taking place against that backdrop. Changes to tax credits will leave some 100,000 households in Scotland worse off by £700 a year on average, and the bedroom tax will leave 100,000 households worse off by £600 a year on average—that is even before we consider the changes to child benefit. Can Liam McArthur honestly say that those families will find it easier to meet the cost of their fuel bills?

I will ask Murdo Fraser essentially the same question that I put to Liam McArthur. Murdo Fraser rightly points out that household incomes have had a tough time over the past few years, but changes are being made through welfare reform and a number of households in Scotland will be affected by changes to tax credits and the introduction of the bedroom tax. Does he accept that those changes will make it harder for people to pay their fuel bills? I would appreciate a yes or no answer, unlike the response provided by Liam McArthur.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

That is in England.

Elaine Murray said that it was not germane to talk about what the UK Government is doing, but is not the Barnett formula the reason why it is germane to do so? The UK Government is not spending that money in England, which makes it even more difficult for the Scottish Government to find money to spend here.

7. To ask the Scottish Government how it plans to ensure that student debt in Scotland remains the lowest in the United Kingdom. (S4O-01685)

Given that, since tuition fees were first introduced in 1998, their maximum level has increased by 800 per cent in England and that 69 per cent of those who were on the graduate endowment scheme in Scotland are still paying back their debt, does the cabinet secretary agree that those who advocate tuition fees—either up front or by the back door—as if they would not affect student debt are quite wrong to do so?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that it was quite wrong of Willie Rennie to suggest that this legislature is lagging behind others?

When Mr Martin advanced his arguments for amendment 12, he made the point that the Scottish Information Commissioner already maintains a partial list. Does the fact that the commissioner is able to maintain only a partial list not underline the difficulties of maintaining a full list? If the commissioner were able to maintain a full list, I presume that the commissioner would be doing that now.

Given that yesterday we heard the deputy leader of the Labour Party in Scotland deigning to say that this Parliament is “not a democratic place in the conventional sense” and that it is “a dictatorship”,—[Official Report, House of Commons, 15 January 2013; c 798.] I sincerely thank the Parliamentary Bureau for finding the time to schedule a debate on the bill rather than passing it by diktat. Its generosity knows no bounds. I welcome the bill because it builds on the Scottish Government’s good handling of freedom of information legislation and its commitment to build on the original act. If we look at the most recently available annual statistics, which are for 2011, information was released in the majority of cases in which it was requested—almost three quarters of cases. Of the 86 appeals to the Scottish Information Commissioner, some 70 per cent of decisions by the commissioner were wholly or partially in favour of the Scottish Government. Also, 83 per cent of the responses that were provided to requests were issued on time. By any standard, that is a pretty good record. Indeed, it improved on previous years. In 2005, it took longer for requests to be answered and fewer decisions by the commissioner were in favour of the Scottish Government. We have a good record and the Scottish Government has adopted a proactive approach to releasing information. It routinely releases files for public consumption 15 years earlier than it is statutorily obliged to release them. That has been touched on in the debate; I believe that others would do well to follow that example. Earlier this month, the UK Government refused to accept the Scottish Government’s position that files on devolution from 1997 should be released under the 15-year rule. With the best will in the world towards Mr Rennie, I thought that his explanation was entirely unconvincing: to blame officials is poor cover for a poor decision.

Yes, I accept that. Not only that, but I presume that we can now look forward to never hearing from Mr Rennie—whenever a decision is taken by a Scottish Government official—a demand that the Scottish Government adhere to a request for information from him. The bill is good news. It will pave the way for more information to be made public earlier, thereby building on the Scottish Government’s good practice that I touched on earlier. I also think that we can now see that those who seek to circumvent FOI will be dealt with more severely under the legal framework, which will be very useful. Ministers will have to report back more regularly on use of the legislation, which is also good; to increase scrutiny by Parliament is a good thing. The Scottish Government has, of course, listened to the committee’s and stakeholders’ concerns, which is a good approach. We have heard about the change in the position on the royal exemption. Notwithstanding Gavin Brown’s disappointment, I think that most people would welcome the fact that the Scottish Government listened to the committee and the stakeholders who spoke to it. We have also seen movement on when the Scottish Government will have to report back to Parliament on coverage of extension of the 2002 act. I hear that there is some disagreement about when that might happen, but we have seen movement from the Scottish Government’s original position. Again, it is listening to the Finance Committee’s concerns. All in all, that is a good approach that should be welcomed across the chamber. I very much welcome the bill.

Will the member give way?

Will James Kelly give way?

We did not make the law. Give way.

I welcome the debate. Some people might think that a debate on the planning system would be dry and unimportant, but we know that that could not be further from the truth. The planning framework sets out how new developments will be taken forward, to contribute to the regeneration of communities, provide new infrastructure from which society can benefit and—crucial, and a Government priority—stimulate economic recovery. I am sure that members of all parties support those core objectives, which underline the importance of the debate, as does the fact that, as the previous speaker said, planning applications are a major generator of constituency casework. That is certainly the case for me and I am sure that it is the case for other members. Community interest is another reason why I welcome the debate. I welcome the minister’s approach. He has spent a considerable amount of time thinking about how to ensure that we have the best possible planning system and he has engaged with a wide range of stakeholders. The role of the community is important. I often get the sense that people feel somewhat removed from the planning process. In that regard I welcome the briefing from Planning Aid for Scotland, which, under the heading, “Better Engagement for a Modernised Planning System”, referred to “the importance of early and inclusive engagement in planning—both in the preparation of development plans and in development applications.” PAS went on to highlight the need for “Greater involvement of children and young people in planning”, making the important point that it is young people who will have to live with the consequences of decisions. PAS also called for “Greater inclusiveness in engaging communities”, and “Greater provision of training and support for both communities and built environment professionals”. The Scottish Government has provided additional funding to Planning Aid for Scotland to help to develop those areas, which has been welcomed by the RTPI. A member seemed to suggest that it is all doom and gloom from the RTPI’s perspective, but I would not want the Official Report to give the impression that the RTPI is uniformly critical of what the Scottish Government is doing.

Let us just say that Ms Boyack highlighted areas with which the RTPI is unhappy and I am highlighting areas with which it is happy. We will leave it at that. Design charrettes are useful—the term is interesting, as Ms Grahame said. The approach is useful because there is an attempt to involve everyone who has a stake in the planning system, including the community, in developing a detailed master plan for an area. I see that there has been a series of charrettes across the country, but I think that no charrette has taken place in the North Lanarkshire Council area, which is my area. I look forward to the council engaging with the process. Mr Pentland talked about the council’s accommodating approach. It might have such an approach in some cases, but it does not have the best record on listening to communities. I know what the minister said about raising specific applications, but North Lanarkshire Council has ignored what a community wants with regard to a specific application. Indeed, in Mr Pentland’s constituency, where there is overwhelming support for an application by a major retailer for a new store, the application has been rejected by the planning authority. That rejection jeopardises that organisation’s further investment in the local area. I do not want to say too much because I know that the minister cannot speak about specific live applications, but it underlines the fact that perhaps North Lanarkshire Council does not have the best record of listening to communities in the planning system. Of course, the voice of the community should be the pre-eminent voice in the planning system. There are two issues that I want to pick up on with regard to the Labour amendment. It says that councils face “significant financial pressures”. We all know the difficulties that have been caused by the cuts that have been handed down from Westminster—a process, I remind members on the Labour benches, that was begun by their party in government under Alistair Darling as chancellor. It is important to remind the chamber that for the 2012 to 2015 period, local government revenue funding is maintained and its share of the Scottish departmental expenditure limit will still be higher in 2014-15 than it was in 2007-08. On the part of the Labour amendment that says that there is a “lack of clarity on hydraulic fracturing proposals”, we need to pay cognisance to the fact that fracking licensing is not the preserve of this Parliament; it is the preserve of the Westminster Government. Indeed, if Labour is concerned about a “lack of clarity”, it should welcome the fact that only last month the Scottish Environment Protection Agency provided updated regulatory guidance to deal with shale gas and coal-bed methane, thus providing the greater clarity that Labour is looking for. Do I have much more time, Presiding Officer?

Let me see what I can do with half a minute. I want to talk about the issue of fees because members will be aware that Audit Scotland, in a review of prices, found that the gap between income from fees and expenditure increases was “unsustainable”. In that regard, I welcome the approach that is being taken by the Scottish Government. We know that the Scottish Government has worked with COSLA to come to an arrangement that has been welcomed by the sector. That underlines the minister’s co-operative and inclusive approach and I look forward to further details about his work on the reform of the planning system emerging as he takes that work forward.

I look forward to future generations of historians looking back at the Official Report of the debate and wondering what Dennis Robertson was on about when he self-identified as Norman the barking pig. I hope that they will also look at the Official Report of today’s time for reflection to get an explanation. It seems obligatory at the start of any speech today to pass on seasonal platitudes, so I wish you, Presiding Officer, and other members a happy new year. I look forward to next year—2014—being an even happier year for Scotland. This is the third Finance Committee debate in which I have spoken on matters that were largely dealt with before I became a member of the committee. I hope that, before too long, I will get to speak in a debate on a subject that I have been involved in considering in some detail. However, I thank my committee colleagues for the work that they undertook in pulling together the report and for the evidence that they gathered over the inquiry. The debate is welcome because it is always important for the Parliament to consider how better to support employability. However, it is particularly important in a time of economic difficulty. It is important to consider the current situation to place the debate in a little context. The latest labour market statistics show that the Scottish unemployment rate decreased by 0.6 per cent from August to October, which was the largest fall since March to May 2008. They also show that we have a lower unemployment rate than the UK. If we look at youth unemployment in particular, we see that it fell by 4.3 per cent during the same period, although, at 21.1 per cent, it is still only marginally lower than the figure for the UK as a whole. It is positive that the figures are moving in the right direction, but they indicate that we need to consider what can be done to make further improvements. However, it is also important to acknowledge some of the work that the Scottish Government is undertaking. In the draft budget, £18 million was announced for skills training. That, of course, will go towards the energy skills academy. I will leave that subject to my north-east colleagues, because they will want to speak about it in more detail. The money will also go towards a national employer recruitment initiative, which will create up to 10,000 opportunities for small and medium-sized enterprises to recruit young people. That was one of the issues that came through in the inquiry. In its briefing for the debate, FSB Scotland makes the point that “Employment in small firms is the most important route to employment for the unemployed and economically inactive” and it sets out that a “UK Labour Force Survey analysis of movements from unemployment into private sector employment between 2008-2011” shows that “88% find work in SMEs … compared to 12% in large businesses.” However, at the same time, although 33 per cent of those who responded “to an FSB survey felt that their businesses generated enough work to need extra help … only 28% were thinking of recruiting”, so the funding from the Scottish Government could not be better timed. In the 2012-13 budget, we saw £18 million of investment on a number of specific employability initiatives, including the £6 million for community jobs Scotland—which was delivered by the SCVO and Social Enterprise Scotland—and the £2.5 million for a challenge fund to support the third sector. We should acknowledge the issues that have been raised with year-on-year funding for the third sector, but it is clear that the Scottish Government supports the sector. The Scottish Government also gave £9 million to local authorities with particular youth unemployment challenges. I welcomed that very much because North Lanarkshire Council was a beneficiary to the tune of £1.8 million. I was happy to join the Minister for Youth Employment at Cumbernauld airport in my constituency to publicise and highlight that funding. We heard that day that the funding is very important to companies such as Cumbernauld Airport Ltd and other bodies that are looking for assistance with taking on young people. It is clear that the Scottish Government is doing what it can, and it is taking forward a range of measures to better support and improve employability. I want to focus a little on the issue of supporting those who are particularly vulnerable back into employment. In its briefing, the National Union of Students Scotland highlighted issues around those who are coming out of care. I think that we all appreciate and accept that that group faces particular challenges. For example, NUS Scotland pointed out that “in 2009-10 just 1% of care leavers went on to higher education, compared with 36% of all school leavers” and that it “supports the view of the committee that those individuals may require more tailored support to benefit from ‘mainstream’ employability initiatives”. I am sure that we are all concerned about that group of people. It would be useful to know how the Scottish Government might respond to that particular challenge. Like Malcolm Chisholm, I think that we need to reflect on those who struggle with childcare. Just before recess, I was very happy to host an event here at the Scottish Parliament with Save the Children. A number of parents from across the country were there to tell the MSPs who came to the event of the challenges that they face. The difficulties that my wife and I face in securing childcare are nothing compared to the difficulties faced by those individuals. NUS Scotland and I certainly welcome the work that the Scottish Government is undertaking to improve childcare, and it would be useful to know what more might be done. I welcome this debate and I look forward to hearing what the Government has to say.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will James Kelly give way?

I speak as a relatively new member of the Finance Committee. I am not the newest member, because Malcolm Chisholm has taken that mantle from me, but I was not on the committee for all of the evidence gathering for the report. I thank colleagues for the work that they did and other committees for the work that they undertook in assessing the budget. I commend the Finance Committee’s report. As Chic Brodie said, it is a good report. I will speak to a number of parts of it and about the Scottish Government’s budget more generally. However, before I do that, it is important to set out the background to the budget, which is reflected in the report. Paragraph 10 of our report says: “In addition to a declining budget the” Scottish Government “is also faced with considerable economic uncertainty as the European and UK economies struggle to recover from the 2008 financial crisis.” It goes on to quote the cabinet secretary’s evidence to the committee, in which he said: “the settlement that we received in the UK spending review is the toughest since devolution. Over the four-year period between 2010-11 and 2014-15, our budget will have been reduced by more than 11 per cent in real terms and, within that, our capital budget will have been reduced by a third. The position in 2013-14 is particularly challenging”.—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 5 November 2012; c 1797.] In paragraph 13 of its report, the committee states that it “recognises that continuing to meet its budgetary commitments in these circumstances remains a significant challenge for the Scottish Government.” I welcome the cross-party recognition of that point because, frankly, it is not always reflected in the debates that we have in the chamber. I turn to housing, which I know is an area of wide interest, and the part of the report that deals with it. The Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee suggested that housing should be an area of focus, and in paragraph 85 of its report the Finance Committee says: “The Committee believes that consideration is given to additional funding for affordable housing should additional funding become available.” Just yesterday, it was announced that an additional £50 million would be invested in affordable housing. I think that that deals with the point made by Mr Rennie, who I see is not in the chamber at the moment. The money will be invested in affordable housing; I do not know whether he thought that it would be invested in building a palatial mansion for some character. Before the Scottish Government has made a formal response to the Finance Committee’s report, we can see that it has responded to the request in paragraph 85, which is welcome. Concern is still being expressed about the housing budget—we have heard that again today. As Kenny Gibson pointed out in his intervention on Elaine Murray, in the final year of the Labour Government only 4,832 houses were completed—perhaps that is a ghost of budgets past for Mr Macintosh—whereas, in 2011-12, this SNP Government built 6,882 houses. I think that our record is a good one. However, we should look to do more wherever we can. We should look to lever in funding from other sources. During the part of the budget scrutiny process that I took part in, the committee visited Hawick. Eildon Housing Association made the point that we should be innovative and should try to utilise other sources of funding. It gave the example of pension funds. I know that John Swinney has responded positively to that suggestion and that the Government is looking at that general area. I turn to the core purpose of the budget: supporting the Scottish economy. I want to set out some of the action that the Scottish Government has taken over the past few years that I particularly welcome. In February of this year, a capital spending package of £380 million until 2015 was announced, which will focus on housing, transport, health, digital and maintenance projects. In addition, £700 million has been switched from the resource to the capital budget to support capital investment. A commitment has been made to no compulsory redundancies in the public sector. A living wage is being introduced for all workers who are covered by the Scottish Government pay policy. The council tax has been frozen for the fifth year in a row. Free higher education has been maintained and prescription charges have been abolished. Those measures are all responses to the economic circumstances of the time and are helping families in difficult times. In addition, the Government is providing the most generous package of business reliefs in the UK, which is helping to maintain the Scottish high street. I return to the report’s recognition of the circumstances and the significant challenges that the Scottish Government faces. In that context, I think that the Scottish Government has a good record. Ken Macintosh referred to ghosts of budgets past, present and future, which was an interesting analogy. I want to focus on the future because, if I remember correctly, the ghost of Christmas future was a portent of doom figure. If we continue to operate in circumstances in which the UK Government decides the size of Scotland’s budget, we may well reflect on just how right Mr Macintosh was to talk about the ghosts of budgets future. He was probably more right to do so than he realised, because if, as a country, we vote no in 2014, the only certainty is that we will face more austerity. In the autumn statement, the chancellor revised his economic growth forecast down once again, from the 0.8 per cent that was predicted in the UK budget to -0.1 per cent this year. Even though Joseph Stiglitz and David Blanchflower are urging a different agenda, the UK Government prefers its austerity agenda and its attack on the welfare system, all of which is harming the Scottish economy.

I hope that Ken Macintosh, like Ebenezer Scrooge, will focus on the ghost of budgets future and thereby see the error of his ways.

Will the member give way?

I thank Malcolm Chisholm for being the first of the four Labour members on whom I have tried to intervene to give way. What we are hearing is a focus on input. Mr Kelly said that there should be more focus on outputs. Does Mr Chisholm accept that more houses are being built under the SNP than were built under the Labour Party?

Will Rhoda Grant welcome the fact—which other members of her party do not seem to welcome—that more than 2,050 affordable houses were completed last year than were completed in the final year of her party’s Government?

What were the minister’s reasons for selecting the service improvements that he set out? Can he confirm that any new franchise arrangements will not preclude new services being put in place to stations such as Croy, Greenfaulds and Cumbernauld in my constituency, if they are identified as being a possibility?

I welcome the debate. We can all surely agree on the importance of ensuring that young people—indeed, any person—can get the advice that they need to allow them to make informed decisions about their career path. In preparation for the debate, I am sure that all of us who are taking part in it will have thought back to our experience of careers guidance. Some members have already mentioned their experience. My experience involved one face-to-face interview, which seemed to work out okay for me. That tells me that I was a far less obstinate teenager than Mr Findlay or Mr Adam was, but that is probably no surprise to me, at any rate. I wonder whether such an approach would be as appropriate or work as well in these times. After all, the world is somewhat different from how it was then. Scottish Chambers of Commerce makes that point in its briefing in advance of the debate. It says: “The young people graduating from Scotland’s schools, colleges and universities today and in future are entering into a world of work unrecognisably different to that which they would have encountered a generation ago.” It is appropriate to ensure that careers guidance now is much more tailored to individuals’ needs. The point has been made, but it is worth repeating, that some people will need more intensive support than others. The my world of work website has come in for some criticism, but it would be somewhat odd these days not to use the internet for careers advice. It is right to use that as part of the approach. At the tail end of my school experience, I was introduced to this thing that was not called the internet then—it was called the information superhighway—and to email. I thought that it was a load of bunkum and that I would never need to use it, which probably partly explains why I am not an internet millionaire. I make that point because, if I was at school now, my experience would be radically different, because I would have grown up with such technology. Given that, it would be peculiar if we did not use the internet as a key component of any careers service. Lest people should think that that is the only approach, I say that I would be worried if any young person who is seeking careers guidance and is watching the debate felt that the web-based approach was the only approach to careers advice. I emphasise the point that has been made that any young person who seeks a face-to-face interview for careers guidance with a careers guidance professional can get one. We should get behind the new approach. I observe that, if it is not working, I am not aware of a single constituent—young person, parent or teacher—who has contacted me to express concern about the new approach. That cannot tell us everything, but it must tell me at least something about what is happening on the ground.

I am not a member of that committee, so I have not looked in detail at everything that it has examined. It is right to assess the scheme, but it is a new approach. The my world of work website has been promoted only recently in schools, so it is early days. As for the idea that the registration rate is low, the point was well made that, if we judge a careers service’s success merely by the number of registrations, we are looking at the wrong thing—at the input rather than the output. Of course we need to look at the approach and ensure that it is working, but it is right at this time to look at modernising the careers service. I return to the point that we are in different times from those formerly, so it is right to look at a new approach. The my world of work website is a good development, because it is available for people to access 24 hours a day, seven days a week. That is not the case if face-to-face interviews are the only thing on which people are relying, as might previously have been the case. As Gordon MacDonald said and as I have just pointed out, the website’s roll-out has happened only recently—it began only in September. If we were looking for 100 per cent registration, we would be setting ourselves up for a fall. I reiterate the point that Gordon MacDonald made. Between 31 October and 29 November, there was an 11.6 per cent increase in registration. We should welcome that. Do I have a little leeway, Presiding Officer?

Okay. People argue that it is all about the web, but that is clearly not the case. There is the SDS helpline and there is the possibility of face-to-face interviews. The approach is multifaceted, and that must be right. It is peculiar that the Labour Party has criticised the traffic-light system, because it is designed to support those who have been identified as being in the greatest need. I think that Joan McAlpine made that point. I would have thought that Labour members would have welcomed that. I urge them to ditch their negativity and get behind a careers service that is fit for the modern age.

Does Kezia Dugdale accept that any person who wants a face-to-face interview will get it?

I begin by thanking the members who added their names in support of my motion in order to enable it to be debated this evening. Their support is sincerely appreciated, as is the presence of members who have stayed behind either to participate in or to watch the debate. I also thank White Ribbon Scotland for its support in advance of tonight’s debate, and for the invaluable information and guidance that it has been able to provide me with to help me to prepare. I also thank Zero Tolerance for the briefing with which it has it provided members for the debate. I note that it will hold an event in Parliament this Thursday to mark 20 years of activity, which is co-sponsored by Malcolm Chisholm and by Christina McKelvie—who I know is disappointed not to be able to take part in tonight's debate. I give notice of my apologies for being unable to attend that event. I hope that it goes well. White Ribbon Scotland began in 2006. It does not exist in isolation, but is part of an international movement to engage men in tackling violence against women. That movement began in Canada in 1991, around the same time that the City of Edinburgh Council ran its first zero tolerance campaign, which was in the winter of 1992. The white ribbon movement now exists in over 60 countries across the world, working with non-perpetrating men to tackle violence against women and recognising the important role that men have to play in tackling this social evil. Clearly, not all men are perpetrators of violence against women, but the white ribbon movement recognises that we live in a society where women do not have equality with men and that, as a consequence of that inequality, many women are victims of gendered violence. White Ribbon Scotland seeks to engage with men and boys to tackle violence against women by challenging the gender inequality that underpins it. Since 2006, White Ribbon Scotland has worked with local authorities, police departments and members of the general public to help them to challenge sexist attitudes, to reconsider their own behaviour and attitudes and to promote healthy masculinity. In that time, 2,200 members of the public have taken the online pledge to never commit, condone or remain silent about violence against women. This year, White Ribbon Scotland has been working with local authorities and partner organisations on educational events across Scotland. In particular, it has been working in secondary schools in Dundee, educating over 1,400 young people about the campaign and the link between negative attitudes and violence against women. The motion’s being lodged and its being debated this evening have been timed to coincide with a campaign of 16 days of action to tackle violence against women, which is being headed by White Ribbon Scotland. I note that my friend, Bob Doris, has lodged a motion to mark the campaign. The 16 days began on 25 November and will end on 10 December. Those dates are neither incidental nor accidental. The first date marks the international day of the elimination of violence against women, and the second is international human rights day, which marks the anniversary of the signing of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948, which was brought about by the determined work of Eleanor Roosevelt, who was famously described, in connection with that achievement, as being someone who would “rather light a candle than curse the darkness.” The purpose of connecting those dates—of tying the international day of the elimination of violence against women to international human rights day—is to encourage people around the world to see women’s rights as a vital component of the broad spectrum of human rights. The reality in modern Scotland suggests that we desperately need to focus our efforts better on tackling the problem of violence against women. In Scotland, domestic abuse is too prevalent, with an incident being recorded every 10 minutes. White Ribbon Scotland suggests that one in five women experiences domestic abuse in Scotland and Zero Tolerance suggests that one in four women experiences some form of violence or abuse. In 2011-12, domestic abuse incidences reported to the police rose by 7 per cent to nearly 60,000. In 81 per cent of those incidents, the victims were female and the perpetrators were male. In the same year, reported incidents of rape rose by 19 per cent. Around 100,000 children in Scotland live with domestic abuse and as many as one in three young women has experienced dating abuse. Almost one in four 14-year-olds has been forced to do something sexual by someone they were dating. As the father of a young daughter, those statistics are particularly alarming to me. A change in attitudes will be key to dealing with the problem. A study by the centre for research on families and relationships at the University of Edinburgh in 2011 found that young children justify men’s violence against women using gender stereotypes and a rigid understanding of adult relationships. The researchers found that young people subscribe to naturalised definitions of masculinity to explain, rather than to question, why men are violent. Those ingrained views should worry us all and we need to challenge them if we are to challenge violence against women. We need to start that work by supporting the work of White Ribbon. I hope that the debate goes some way towards furthering that work.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what guidance it provides to local authorities to deliver safe transport routes to schools. (S4O-01535)

I thank the minister for that answer. As the minister may be aware, North Lanarkshire Council plans to close Abronhill high school and to transfer its pupils to Cumbernauld high school, which would involve pupils from Abronhill walking to school along some routes that are considered to be very unsafe—they are very remote, go through wooded areas and are very poor underfoot. Many parents and pupils are concerned about the proposal. Does the minister agree that it is important that North Lanarkshire Council take those concerns very seriously indeed, before it comes to any decision on the future of the schools?

I wonder whether he is one of the college principals who are so terrified by the cabinet secretary that they are afraid to speak out against the Government.

I have done a quick calculation, and if £19 million is being spent on those 250 spin doctors, they must be earning £76,000 each. I look forward to the figures being further presented by Mr Kelly. However, even if they are correct, is the Labour Party’s solution to sack people? That seems to be the only suggestion that we have heard from the Labour Party. I welcome today’s debate, because the provision of decent college places is something that should concern us all. It is important at the outset to reflect on the position of the EIS general secretary, Larry Flanagan, who said last weekend that students and teaching staff want to see the political parties get back to the issues rather than having arguments that are “based around personal spats and party-political squabbling”. I would have hoped to see—

I would love to give way to the honourable Claudia Beamish.

Before I do so, Presiding Officer, I know that time is tight in the debate, but I hope that I will get some time back for that intervention. I see that I will not. Well, I would like to thank Claudia Beamish for the amount of time that she took. In this debate, it is important to focus on the issues rather than on the party-political squabbling. That is the point that I was trying to make. I return to the issues. I was delighted to attend Cumbernauld College’s award ceremony last week, when I saw hundreds of young people from Cumbernauld and Kilsyth and beyond being honoured for their achievements. I would have thought that this debate, if anything, should be about encouraging such achievements. I will return to the local situation later if time allows, Presiding Officer. It is important to focus on the reality of the situation for Scotland’s colleges. In that regard, I return to the point that Claudia Beamish made. Between 2007 and 2014-15, the SNP in Administration will invest £5 billion in colleges. That is 39 per cent more in cash terms than was spent under the two terms of the previous Administration. Indeed, college student support is at record levels. In 2013-14 an additional £11.4 million will be allocated to the student support budget, so that it will be maintained at more than £95 million. That is 40 per cent higher than its level when Johann Lamont was a Scottish Executive minister. It is therefore little wonder that NUS Scotland president, Robin Parker, said: “It’s fantastic that the money is now in place to provide financial help to the poorest students.” It is important to place that on record. I want to talk about some of the changes that are happening on the ground, because that is what the debate should be about. We see a different approach here in Scotland. There are massive cuts to the college budgets south of the border, but no impetus for reform of the sector. Here in Scotland we see reform of the college sector to provide a renewed focus. The approach is not that radical—after all, before the current structure was put in place by Michael Forsyth we had a rather similar model of regionalisation, albeit with different regions. Scotland’s Colleges welcomed the move to regionalisation in the briefing that it provided for this debate. Lanarkshire is the region that affects my constituents most directly. It is important to note that the four colleges in that area are establishing a federation. At one stage there was an idea that colleges would be forced to merge, which was plainly untrue. In Lanarkshire we see a different approach, which I know the cabinet secretary has welcomed. I have spoken regularly to the principal of Cumbernauld College, who, I have to say, would not be described as a shrinking violet or someone who is easily intimidated, as it has been suggested that college principals are. He speaks freely with me and talks about the challenges that are faced by the sector; I know that he has spoken to the cabinet secretary and the Minister for Learning, Science and Scotland’s Languages. The principal is behind the idea of regionalisation and an agreement has been established between the four colleges that are involved. That will provide a new focus for the sector in the area that I represent. The colleges are working to build on existing high attainment levels, increase activity levels, deliver regional specialisms, provide high-quality learning experiences and continue to equip learners well to help them secure good-quality enterprise skills, jobs and careers. That is what colleges should be about, and I am glad that Cumbernauld College and Lanarkshire are getting geared up to do that. They will work with the Scottish Government towards that end.

The First Minister will be aware of the details that are emerging about the proposed merger between AG Barr and Britvic. It has been reported that, as a result of the merger, some 500 jobs may be lost out of a combined workforce between the two companies of 4,000. Does the First Minister agree that it is incumbent on AG Barr to clarify, as a matter of urgency, what that means for the workforce and factory at the Cumbernauld site?

I am a new member of the Finance Committee and I thank my new colleagues for their work at stage 1. I do not have the benefit of having heard the evidence; this is a new subject for me. I am taking part in the debate as much because I want to be better informed at stage 2 and beyond as for any other reason. I think that most people agree that we need freedom of information legislation. The Scottish Government has six principles on freedom of information, the first of which is that the Government “Supports Freedom of Information as an essential part of open democratic government and responsive public services.” If we want active citizens, who have the right to access information, be it information about them that an organisation holds or information on decisions that affect them and society more generally, we must have freedom of information legislation. Such matters should not be under the cloak of secrecy. We have come some way in that regard, so the bill should not be viewed as revolutionary. The 2002 act changed things for the better and there is much better access to information than used to be the case. I understand that the Campaign for Freedom of Information in Scotland is somewhat frustrated—it will always want to go further on access to information, as is its right—but I cannot accept its conclusion that there is less access to information than there was when the 2002 act was passed, although I agree with it that transparency builds trust and that the ability to access information makes bodies more accountable. It is right to consider the freedom of information legislation.

If time allows, I will return to the important issue of ALEOs, which the Finance Committee has been looking at. I said that the bill is not revolutionary. One of the other principles of the Scottish Government in relation to freedom of information is to operate within the confines of the 2002 act. The bill seeks to build on that legislation. The committee, rightly, focused on specific areas. However, the explanatory notes to the bill set out that it is intended to address “the order-making power relating to the definition of what constitutes a ‘historical record’ and the lifespans of certain exemptions” and “the ability to prosecute in the event of information not being disclosed due to, for example, alteration, destruction or concealment.” The 2002 act sets out that a record becomes a historical record after 30 years and sets out exemptions to that. It demonstrates the Scottish Government’s commitment to provision of information that it has, since 2009 as the cabinet secretary pointed out, “been opening its archive files at 15 rather than 30 years”. That ties in with another of the six principles, which is to publish information proactively wherever possible. According to the policy memorandum, “Some concerns have been raised in respect of the earlier release of ... social work records, adoption records and information bequeathed for research purposes.” The Scottish Information Commissioner believes that the bill has the balance right, but there are other concerns. The cabinet secretary has written to the committee about this matter: there is a commitment that if the Government seeks to take forward the flexible powers—which I think the cabinet secretary has indicated it will do—they will be subject to consultation. I am sure that that will help to ease concerns. I agree entirely that a time limit for proceedings should form part of any legislation. As it stands, the legislation is probably somewhat restrictive. It cannot be right that if a person seeks information after a six-month period in which that information might have been destroyed, the perpetrator of that crime would escape justice because no one had noticed that the information had been destroyed. It is absolutely right that we examine that. Another issue that has attracted a fair amount of attention is the royal exemption. Although I have not heard the evidence, I heard the cabinet secretary say that she is not disposed towards absolute exemptions. I agree with that position and welcome the fact that it will be looked at again. I will try to respond to the point that Willie Rennie made about ALEOs. I accept that there are concerns. The committee has heard those concerns and committee members have such concerns. Indeed in my area, the local authority is seeking to create a new ALEO on cultural issues. It is right that we look again at the provision; I hear that the Government will do that. I look forward to seeing where that takes us and to the bill progressing to stage 2.

Could the member explain what he means by that?

When Gordon Brown instituted his absolute exemption for the royal family, did he do so for electoral gain?

I, too, congratulate John Mason on securing this debate. I understand why there is great excitement in my native city of Glasgow about the forthcoming games; 2014 is obviously going to be an important year for the city. A lot of regeneration work is already being undertaken with, for example, the transformation of the east end that John Mason mentioned and the social housing that will be left; the work on Dalmarnock railway station; and the tremendous facilities that the city of Glasgow will be left with. Ruth Davidson mentioned what is now known as Scotstoun leisure centre, which has been transformed over a number of years. Back in the day, it was known as Scotstoun showground, and I can certainly confirm that it has had a great transformation since my days as a schoolboy when I rather reluctantly had to do cross-country running there. It will be one of many fantastic facilities for the city. Of course, it is not just Glasgow that is looking forward to the Commonwealth games; as John Mason rightly recognised in his speech and motion, it is an event for the whole country and “Scotland’s Time to Shine”. Many folk across the country will have a chance to play their part as one of the 15,000 volunteers who are being sought, and I particularly wish John Mason and Patricia Ferguson well with their applications. My own constituency has already made its mark on the games. As mentioned earlier, AG Barr, which is based in the Westfield industrial estate in Cumbernauld, will be a sponsor of the event. It would also be remiss of me if I did not point out that the mascot Clyde, which has merited a mention, was designed by 12-year-old Beth Gilmour from Cumbernauld. She did very well, given that her design was selected following a UK-wide competition that attracted more than 4,000 entries. Indeed, the competition was described as UK-wide, but I understand that entries were received from across the world. I am sure that members will join me in congratulating Beth on having had her design chosen. I also note that the mascot shares its name with the only senior football team in my constituency—I am sure that as a supporter of the team John Mason will be happy to hear me to say that—and that I warmly welcome the fact that Clyde is a thistle, as it reflects my own footballing loyalties. Patricia Ferguson, too, will welcome that. I had not planned on mentioning this because I did not know about it until I came into the chamber, but I found on page 4 of Colin Keir’s copy of the Edinburgh Evening News a rather touching photograph of Clyde in a very warm and tender embrace with our First Minister. I encourage all members to have a look but, of course, only the First Minister himself can say whether that betrays any of his political preferences. As I have said, it is not just Glasgow that is looking forward to or which will secure a legacy from the Commonwealth games. I am very glad that, according to the “Legacy 2014: Be part of it” booklet we have all received, “Over £13.5 million has been invested in the Active Schools initiative” which is giving school-aged children the opportunity to participate in a wide variety of sports outwith their formal physical education classes at school. Moreover, there will be 150 community sports hubs “in place by 2016”. Such moves will be fantastic for the whole country. I close by coming back to my own constituency. The legacy for my area is that the Cumbernauld railway line will be electrified in time for the Commonwealth games to allow people to get in and out of Glasgow with greater ease. The line will be there for the long term, and my constituents will benefit from it. The fact that Glasgow will host the Commonwealth games in 2014 is good news all round and, again, I congratulate John Mason on securing this debate.

I welcome the debate, as it is helpful to have the update on the road to recovery drugs strategy. The issue affects communities in all our constituencies, and the minister was right to highlight the cross-party support for the efforts that are being made. It is important to place the debate in context. In the past number of years, the Scottish Government has invested to try to deal with the problem. This year alone, the Scottish Government has invested £28.6 million in front-line drug treatment and recovery services, which represents a funding increase of 20 per cent since 2006-07. Thirty alcohol and drug partnerships have been created and are doing good work in communities. Lanarkshire ADP, which covers my constituency, is doing particularly good work and the drug waiting times target for 2013 has been met in Lanarkshire. There is the idea that everyone who is in treatment is on the methadone programme, but that is not the case—the minister made that point well. In Lanarkshire, quite a variety of treatments are used, and 25 per cent of people who are on drug treatments for addiction are prescribed Suboxone—I do not know whether I pronounced that correctly, but I hope that I did the word justice. I will focus on outcomes, which are important. We can measure some outcomes, so it is wrong to suggest that we have no information about what is happening on the ground. We can see that progress is being made and that drug-use levels are falling. The Scottish crime and justice survey that reported earlier this year showed a decrease in the number of adults who reported that they had used any illicit drug in the past year—the figure fell to 6.6 per cent from 7.2 per cent in 2009-10 and 7.6 per cent in 2008-09. Figures also show that fewer young people are taking drugs. It is clear that there are still too many people taking substances, but the reduction must be welcomed, and gives the lie to the suggestion that has been made that the problem is worsening.

That is a fair point, which was well made and is now on the record. We know that waiting times are down. The Government set a target that, by March 2013, 90 per cent of clients would wait no longer than three weeks from referral to get appropriate drug or alcohol treatment. I emphasise that that target relates to drug and alcohol treatment. Not many families in Scotland have not been affected by drug abuse or—in particular—alcohol abuse in one way or another. The target has been met ahead of time. In the NHS Lanarkshire area, 99.9 per cent of people were treated within the target timeframe. That is a huge achievement for those who work in the field, and it should surely be welcomed by all. It is interesting to see innovation in the treatment programme. The naloxone—again, I am not sure whether I have pronounced the word correctly—

Thank you, minister. Under the naloxone programme that has been introduced, 3,445 kits were issued in 2011-12. That programme has the potential to save lives. The Scottish Drugs Forum particularly welcomes the initiative, and it says in its briefing that the programme should go further and that barriers to expanding it “must be identified and dismantled.” It will be interesting to see how the review looks at that. The idea has been suggested that pharmacists are somehow profiteering. I will deal with that gently, because the debate has been consensual and I do not want to turn it into a points-scoring exercise. The briefing from the Royal Pharmaceutical Society says clearly that “dispensing high-volumes of methadone is not a route to easy riches ... It is normally undertaken by individual pharmacists with a deep commitment to helping some of the most unfortunate people in our country.” I agree very much with Willie Rennie that it ill behoves anyone to suggest that pharmacists have any motivation other than that which is set out in the Royal Pharmaceutical Society’s briefing. I gently suggest that, if the big solution to Scotland’s drug problem was to introduce a uniform payment to pharmacists for delivering the methadone programme, we would be living in a far easier world than the one that we inhabit. That suggestion was a strange contribution to this serious debate. I strongly welcome the fact that the chief medical officer will review the strategy. In my final 30 seconds, I want to mention the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children Scotland briefing, which points out that, in any review, it is “vital that any alternative treatment options facilitate early identification and whole family assessment to identify and prevent harm to dependent children”. I would be interested to hear the minister’s response to that point, which the Scottish Drugs Forum has also made. I hope that that can be viewed as a positive contribution. I welcome the debate.

Does Mr Carlaw agree that the explanation about the ironing out of the differential pay levels is not the big solution to the drugs problem? It hardly strikes me as getting to the heart of the issue.

I thank the Scottish Government for bringing this issue forward for debate and I congratulate Humza Yousaf on leading what I am sure will be the first of many debates as a minister. Unlike other members, I have not had the privilege of visiting Malawi, nor have I had the opportunity—I say this with some trepidation—to visit the David Livingstone centre. However, that does not lessen my interest in the debate in any way. It was said earlier that the debate is timely because of the upcoming bicentenary of David Livingstone’s birth. I suppose that that is correct, but I suggest that debates on Malawi will always be important. If we look at some key statistics, we can understand why we are working with Malawi. For example, life expectancy in Malawi is 51.5 years for men and 53.13 years for women, whereas in our country it is 76.1 years for men and 80.6 years for women. The literacy rate in Malawi is 81.1 per cent for men and 68.5 per cent for women. As was said earlier, Malawi is one of the poorest countries on the planet, with some 75 per cent of the population living on less than $1, or 60p, a day, and 460 women dying in childbirth for every 100,000 births. We also know about Malawi’s HIV/AIDS problem. The minister was right to say that we should be outraged by those statistics. If a person cannot be outraged by such statistics, I do not know what would outrage them. In our relative comfort here in the west, we must be ready to question what has contributed to those statistics for modern-day Malawi. We are ready—rightly so—to talk of Scotland’s positive historic links with Malawi, and David Livingstone is the shining example in that regard. However, we should also be prepared to face up to our negative historic links with Africa. I thought that Christina McKelvie spoke eloquently about David Livingstone’s commendable righteous indignation about the slave trade. However, the target of his ire reminds us of that part of our relationship with Africa, which was largely one of imperial domination and exploitation of the continent’s people and resources. It is especially right, therefore, that we focus some of our efforts on helping the people of Malawi to help themselves. The links with Malawi that Scotland has forged are perhaps one of the greatest successes of devolution. It is right to place on record our thanks to the previous Administration in that regard. The links demonstrate what Scotland can do to play its part as a global actor. They remind us that we are not only citizens of Scotland but citizens of the world, and they are a reminder of our common humanity. Indeed, I was reminded of the words of Senator Robert Kennedy of 5 April, 1968, when he said: “We can perhaps remember, even if only for a time, that those who live with us are our brothers; that they share with us the same short moment of life; that they seek, as we do, nothing but the chance to live out their lives in purpose and happiness, winning what satisfaction and fulfilment they can.” Members will forgive the gender-specific language of that statement, but it certainly resonated with me with regard to this debate. Indeed, the minister reminded us that this is about the connection with people as brothers and sisters. The connections in our communities vividly demonstrate that. I am always delighted to visit the many primary schools in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth that engage with Scotland’s historic and on-going links with Malawi. In my constituency, an extremely positive link has been established between St Maurice’s high school in Cumbernauld and two schools in Nkhamenya. People from the schools in Nkhamenya have visited Scotland and I was delighted to host their visit to the Scottish Parliament. In the previous school year, about 10 pupils from St Maurice’s went to Malawi. Pupils had to raise £1,000 for each participating pupil. They raised funds not only to get the pupils to Malawi but for the partner schools. The tremendous dedication of the young people demonstrates the positive links between our countries. If anything keeps the flame burning between Scotland and Malawi, it will be the links that young people of the two countries forge. Of course, links go beyond schools. When I visit churches in my constituency, I am impressed by the relationships that have been built up with Malawi. There are also many links through the great work of non-governmental organisations on the ground, funded by the Scottish Government. We heard about such work during the debate. I suppose that, when we talk about such work, we do so not to commend the Scottish Government for its funding efforts—although it should be congratulated in that regard—but to commend people who are directly involved, whose example will ensure that links between Scotland and Malawi remain worth while. I support the amendment in Patricia Ferguson’s name. Joyce Banda is challenging some of the ingrained discrimination that women and gay people face in Malawi and she deserves our support in her efforts, which underline the importance of our continued engagement with Malawi and all the efforts to help people there. I am delighted that we have had the chance to have this debate.

I join others in congratulating Kenny Gibson on securing the debate, and I thank the Cystic Fibrosis Trust, the Scottish Kidney Federation, the British Heart Foundation Scotland and British Medical Association Scotland for their informative and helpful joint briefing. I hope that Dennis Robertson does not mind my singling him out, but I also want to thank him for his moving testimony. I appreciate his having the strength of character to come here and talk about what can only have been a very painful experience. We had a debate on the issue previously, on 24 January 2008. It was a members’ business debate that was secured by our departed colleague, Lord Foulkes. I recall that Kenny Gibson spoke on that day, too. In that debate, I said that part of my motivation for speaking was that I have a friend with cystic fibrosis, who may some day require a lung transplant. That also forms part of my motivation today. I said: “He is presently in pretty good health and in pretty good shape, but it is quite conceivable that, some day, he will need a lung transplant.”—[Official Report, 24 January 2008; c 5559.] He contacted me in the past few days to say that he will be assessed for a lung transplant on 17 December. Obviously, I wish him well. I have to say, though, that even if he is assessed as requiring a lung transplant, under our current system there is no guarantee that he will get it. Nothing has changed since the debate in January 2008 to alter my view that the time is right to go for a system of presumed consent. Indeed, if anything my belief is deeper, given the experience of the intervening period. As Patricia Ferguson mentioned, some 650 individuals in Scotland are waiting for a donor organ. Indeed, the briefing that I mentioned states: “Every day, throughout the UK, three people die waiting for a donated organ.” I make that to be more than 5,000 people who have died across the UK in the period since we had the debate in 2008. Members will forgive me if my calculations are slightly wrong, but that is a significant number of people. Of course, not all those lives would have been saved if we had had a system of presumed consent, but I believe that many could have been. We know that support for donation exists and that it is widespread. Kenny Gibson made the point that up to 90 per cent of people support organ donation, but for whatever reason less than half of Scotland’s population is registered on the NHS donor register. We have to square that circle, and the question is how we do that. There is big support for donation but lower levels of registration, so it is right to consider how we increase organ donation. I reflect on the fact that 70 per cent of the population support an opt-out scheme. I will finish by touching on some concerns that have been expressed about such a scheme. It has been suggested that some people have philosophical, moral or religious objections to any opt-out scheme. If those individuals seriously hold such strong beliefs, I cannot see how they will do anything other than opt out. Regarding those who are unable to consent, it is clear that we can design a system so that those who cannot consent will not be included. Those people would be under the age of 16 or 18—there is perhaps an argument for either age. Vulnerable adults would of course not be included in the system. The great red herring has not been thrown out today, I am glad to say, but I have heard it said that some doctors will wilfully neglect some patients so that they can get their organs for other patients. That will clearly not happen and it runs counter to the Hippocratic oath. We hear those concerns, but it is not beyond us to design a system that takes account of them. I congratulate Kenny Gibson on securing today’s debate and I hope that it is not long before we debate legislation on this matter.

Of course, the Labour Party is not pursuing the subject in a partisan way. I greatly regret that the Labour Party has chosen to lodge the motion that is before us. When I saw that the subject for the debate was Scotland’s future, I thought that it would be a genuine debate about Scotland’s future, but it has been a missed opportunity. It was interesting to hear from Labour members and others in the chamber that it is time to move beyond process and get to the substance of the debate. We have heard that time and again, yet Labour wants to bring it back to process every time. Last week was a shameful episode in the Scottish body politic. [Interruption.]

Labour members will hear in a moment why it was a shameful episode. We saw a scandalous press release from the Labour Party that used the term “barefaced liar”. I think that the Labour Party will live to regret using that terminology, because we need to conduct this debate in proper terms and in a proper manner. It is clear that a strategy has emerged among the anti-independence parties. They talk of a positive case for the union, but they know that no positive case exists, so every time they are going to play the man and not the ball. We see them engaging in a spiteful, vengeful, nasty, negative name-calling campaign, and we have seen some of that again today. Jackie Baillie rose— There is one of the main proponents of it, Presiding Officer, so I will gladly give way.

Just to clarify, it was kittens, not cats. If Ms Baillie had been paying attention she would know that I wanted to make the point that I was joking, whereas when she uses her terminology she means it. It is a disgrace to the political process. Our country’s future is more important than this—dare I say it—cat-calling style of exchange. It is a privilege for each and every one of us to be elected to this Parliament. That is something that we would do well to remember. By using the terminology that it did last week, the Labour Party is endangering political engagement. If our political discourse becomes an exercise in name calling, people out there will disengage from the process and from playing their part in determining Scotland’s future. It is incumbent on Labour to up its game. I utterly reject the terms of Labour’s motion. It is flogging a dead horse when it comes to the Andrew Neil interview. Earlier, I heard a Labour member asking, from a sedentary position, whether we had a transcript of that exchange. Yes, I have a transcript of that exchange. The difference from the transcript that the Labour Party utilised is that this is the actual transcript, not the edited transcript. It is clear from the terms of the First Minister’s exchange with Mr Neil that the First Minister was referring to documents that had been published at the time of the interview. It has always been the case that every document published by this Scottish Government or the previous Scottish Executive was always underpinned by legal evidence. It is interesting to hear criticism of the process by which the First Minister referred himself under the ministerial code. He did it because he was asked to by a Labour member of the European Parliament, yet Labour now has the temerity to come here and criticise the process. It is almost as if Labour wishes that he had not done so, because it could then complain that he had not done it. That is game playing. Labour needs to raise its level of debate. The process for referring a minister under the ministerial code is much stronger than it was under the previous Administration. When Jack McConnell was the First Minister, if he referred himself under the ministerial code, essentially he was investigating himself. We now have independence in the process. That should be welcomed. I said earlier that it was unfortunate for Labour to have a debate on Scotland’s future and then debate anything but. I welcome the Deputy First Minister’s amendment because it allows us to focus on Scotland’s future. I will focus on one or two of the issues that the amendment raises. I turn to Trident. Last week, as was referred to, I was on television with Jackie Baillie. I was one of those back benchers burning my credibility, according to Johann Lamont. I was interested to hear Jackie Baillie say that the difference between her and the First Minister is that she tells the truth. I will bear in mind the Presiding Officer’s statement earlier and say this carefully. I would think that anyone who made that statement would want to be a lot more careful about making claims that the removal of Trident will cost thousands of jobs in Scotland, because that is not true.

No. Ms Baillie can sit down. As a result of a freedom of information request, an article in the Sunday Herald this week reveals that “520 civilian jobs at HM Naval Base Clyde ... directly rely upon the Trident programme”. In response, Stephen Boyd, assistant secretary at the Scottish Trades Union Congress, said: “Suggestions that as many as 11,000 jobs would be lost to Scotland if Trident were not replaced are inaccurate”. That reflects the STUC’s report on Trident, one of the authors of which was Claudia Beamish. We would do well to place that on the record.

The STUC’s report pointed out that it is far from the case that it would cost jobs if Trident was not replaced. It said: “Overall ... Scotland would economically be a net loser from any decision to replace Trident. There would be serious consequences for its public services and for employment of a prolonged period of time.” We should place that on the public record. We know that the SNP position is clear, because we agree with the STUC, but what do we hear from the Labour Party? We could refer to the leadership contest that recently took place. The Scottish Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament asked all the candidates for the leadership of the Scottish Labour Party what their position was on the renewal of Trident.

Indeed I will, Presiding Officer. Tom Harris said: “I believe that the UK should retain an independent nuclear deterrent, while other countries possess nuclear weapons.” Ken Macintosh MSP said: “I support the Government’s announcement to proceed to the initial stages of Trident’s renewal.” Johann Lamont MSP did not respond to the survey, which was sent by post and by e-mail twice. A message was also left on the answering machine in her office. If we are to talk about Scotland’s future, let us talk about Trident and let us find out what Johann Lamont thinks.

Will the member give way?

What Paul Martin today calls bluster, last week he called “barefaced lies”, although not in the chamber. He described himself as a “fair-minded person”. Does he stand by that accusation, and is he brave enough to repeat it in the chamber?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you advise us on whether it constitutes unparliamentary language if a member says in the chamber that they stand by a statement that they made outwith the chamber in which they accused another member of being “a barefaced liar”?

Will the member give way?

I will quote another Spaniard back to Mr Rennie. The vice-president of the European Commission, Joaquín Almunia, says that there is no mechanism by which to remove the rights that people in Scotland have acquired as European citizens.

I am the second person who is not a member of the Justice Committee to speak in the debate. I do not know whether Malcolm Chisholm and I are starting a bit of a run of speeches by non-committee members. We will see where that takes the debate. I welcome the introduction of the Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Bill. Unlike Lewis Macdonald, I do not particularly think that that is a mouthful; it is, indeed, a punchy title. The bill is important. We must be consistent in always being prepared to consider progressing reforms that will ensure that our country’s legal system is fit for the times. I congratulate the Justice Committee on its work so far in assessing the bill, and I thank it for its informative stage 1 report. I am sure that the committee—under the astute convenership of my colleague, Christine Grahame—will continue to contribute positively to scrutiny of the bill. I welcome the proposal to create the Scottish civil justice council, which comes from a recommendation in Lord Gill’s review. Any reform of that nature should be based on expert opinion; that can fairly be said to be the case with that proposal. The proposal is welcomed by much of civic society. As other members have, I received a large number of briefings in advance of the debate, which reflects the great deal of interest in the bill among stakeholders. The briefings show broad support for the creation of the Scottish civil justice council. I will cite some of the briefings. Citizens Advice Scotland said that it sees the council as being “an integral body to ensure the success of the reforms and then afterwards as a body to ensure these principles of coherence, accessibility and sustainability are upheld.” In particular, it welcomes “The intention that appointment to the council will be in line with the principles associated with public appointments process.” The Association of British Insurers “supports the civil justice provisions in the Bill” and “agrees that a body should be responsible for the implementation of the reforms proposed by Lord Gill.” It also “supports the creation of a Scottish Civil Justice Council”, as do the Forum of Scottish Claims Managers, the Law Society of Scotland and—this is interesting because we might not have expected it—Friends of the Earth Scotland. Friends of the Earth has an interest under the Aarhus convention, which recognises every person’s right to a healthy environment, and to which the European Union and the United Kingdom are signatories. That demonstrates a fair degree of support for creation of the council. Lest members accuse me of quoting selectively from the briefings—people have run into trouble of late by quoting selectively—I accept that there are—

I must say that Mr Macdonald did not need to intervene, because I was about to make exactly that point. I accept that concerns have been expressed—Mr Macdonald’s point about the composition of the council being the primary one. Christine Grahame also mentioned that the issue was raised when the Justice Committee took evidence. I am fully confident that, because we are only at stage 1 of the bill process, we can continue to consider that matter. I heard the cabinet secretary and the Justice Committee convener say that the bill contains powers that will ensure that the composition of the council could be considered again in the future. It is welcome that so many stakeholders are engaged in the process. I turn now to part 2, which will make changes to criminal legal aid. Incidentally, I am entirely relaxed that the bill deals with two different matters and I am sure that we are capable of dealing with any proposed legislation that does that. It is interesting to refer back to the consultation paper that the Scottish Government issued on that. It said that, “In a time of reduced expenditure it is essential to focus legal aid on those who need it most”. We can surely all unite behind that principle. I do not think that it would be contentious at all. It is clear that, in these straitened financial times, it makes sense to target support at those who need it most. Of course, contributions are already payable in civil legal aid and for advice and assistance, including in criminal cases that involve assistance by way of representation. Therefore, the cabinet secretary’s point that the changes are a matter of evolution rather than revolution was fair. It was also fair to point out that a similar, but less generous, scheme that operates in England seems to indicate that we cannot expect great problems with the operation of such a scheme in Scotland. I also welcome the fact that the system of contributions will be progressive, with the first £68 of disposable income not being assessable for contribution. I understand that some people feel that the figure should be higher. I return to the point that I made earlier that we are at stage 1 of the process, so I am sure that they can continue to make that case. The level could also be increased by regulation in the future. As the deputy convener of the Parliament’s Welfare Reform Committee, I hugely welcome the fact that DLA and its successor personal independence payments will not be considered in any assessment for contributions. The committee has seen plenty of evidence of the difficulties that recipients already face. Inclusion Scotland was right to say that classing those benefits as income could have led to unfair treatment of disabled people. It placed that comment firmly in the context of the UK Government’s welfare reform agenda. It is welcome that the Scottish Government has committed to not including those benefits in any assessment. It seems to be clear that the Scottish Government’s approach will be to work with the Justice Committee and interested stakeholders to finesse the bill. I think that that is the right approach and one that the Government should be commended for adopting. I am sure that it will lead to the development of the best possible bill, which is what we will see happening at stage 2 of the process.

The Deputy First Minister said that one of the aims of the Edinburgh agreement was to “deliver a fair test and a decisive expression of the views of the Scottish people” through the referendum. Does the Deputy First Minister have any information on the most recent indications of what the views of the Scottish people are likely to be in that referendum?

Following on from John Pentland’s question, Virgin had also suggested that if it had secured the franchise, it would have run a service to London that would have called at Cumbernauld station in my constituency. That would have been greatly welcomed by my constituents. Whoever ends up securing the franchise, will the Scottish Government work with them on whether such a service can be operated?

I very much welcome the debate. Given the reaction to Johann Lamont’s speech last week, not least in her party—I watched closely the reaction to her speech today and I cannot say that her back benchers universally welcomed it—I would have thought that the subject was best avoided. However, who am I to look a gift horse in the mouth? I am happy to speak in the debate. Jackie Baillie is absolutely right—people are suffering now, and we recognise that. It is interesting to hear the Labour Party and Jackie Baillie say that people cannot wait until the referendum in 2014 because they are suffering now. Given that, why will the commission that Labour has established to come up with all these solutions to help people who are suffering now not report until 2015, which is one year after the referendum?

I am sure that we all wait with bated breath for the findings of Labour’s economy committee and look forward to hearing what it says. I was surprised by Johann Lamont’s announcement last week, which seemed to be predicated on the idea of Scotland having a something-for-nothing culture. I reject such divisive terminology, which it is unfortunate to inject into public debate. More than that, I do not accept that there is a something-for-nothing culture; let us remember that people pay taxes into the system. Why can Johann Lamont not explain what she means by the something-for-nothing culture? On “Good Morning Scotland” yesterday, she was asked four times to explain what she meant by that, but not once could she explain it. I am happy to give way if she can tell me what she means by “something for nothing”.

I look forward to—

—Johann Lamont supporting independence in 2014, so that the Parliament has powers over taxation and we can instigate a proper system of progressive taxation.

Should I let her chunter on?

I did not hear the end of Johann Lamont’s intervention, but I was not particularly interested in hearing it anyway. I am surprised not only by the Labour Party’s terminology but by its change in position. Linda Fabiani rightly mentioned a number of pronouncements by Labour figures at the Labour Party conference. Yesterday, Ed Miliband referred to the Tory-Liberal Government as an “incompetent, hopeless, out of touch, U-turning, pledge-breaking, make it up as you go along, back of the envelope, miserable shower”. He is absolutely correct to refer to the Tories and the Liberals in that way. However, I suggest that he should look closer to home, at the Scottish Labour Party and Johann Lamont. Let us look at the 2011 Labour Party manifesto. Labour pledged that it would not instigate tuition fees and that it would not reintroduce charges for prescriptions in Scotland. It said that it would sustain the concessionary travel scheme and it talked about retaining the commitment to free personal care. Now, we have a cuts commission where nothing is off the table. So, when Ed Miliband refers to an “incompetent, hopeless, out of touch, U-turning, pledge-breaking, make it up as you go along, back of the envelope, miserable shower”, he could be talking about Johann Lamont and Scottish Labour. Johann Lamont has suggested that the volte-face is predicated on injecting honesty into the debate. Given that the commitments to which I have just referred were made in Labour’s election manifesto last year, is it not safe to say that Labour presented a dishonest prospectus before last year’s election?

More homes are being built by this Government than were ever built by the Labour Government—that is how we are dealing with that. I will talk about why what the Scottish Government is doing is important. It has been interesting to hear the council tax freeze criticised on the basis that the wealthiest are benefiting the most. Frankly, that is not the case. The figures for this year show the average impact of the council tax freeze by income decile: the percentage of net household income saved by the council tax freeze among the bottom 10 per cent is 0.8 per cent whereas among the top 10 per cent it is 0.3 per cent. The poorest in society are benefiting most from the council tax freeze. I finish on an important point about free prescriptions. I want Johann Lamont to explain to the 600,000 people earning under £16,000 who benefit from free prescriptions why they should not do so. I would not want to have to tell the 7,000 people in my constituency and the nearly 9,000 people in her constituency who are in that position why they should not benefit in that way.

She should know that it is 600,000 people because it was from an answer to a question lodged by Johann Lamont that we established that there are 600,000 people earning £16,000 or less who are benefiting from free prescriptions. I look forward to an honest debate continuing.

From Jackie Baillie.

To pick up on the point about the effect of policy changes, why is it that application rates to English universities have plummeted by 8.6 per cent, while in Scotland, where tuition is free, application rates have remained steady?

I am tempted to begin by saying that, unlike Ken Macintosh, I will not focus too closely on the division of labour in my household, because my wife sometimes watches debates and might pick me up on my interpretation of that division.

We can talk about the issue later, without Ms Fabiani’s sedentary interventions. I welcome the debate. It is widely recognised that the subject is serious and important and that it concerns all parties in the Parliament. That has been reflected in the speeches. The issue also concerns people outside the chamber. I will refer to a report—Ken Macintosh mentioned it—that was prepared by Save the Children and the women in Scotland’s economy research centre. The report is important because it highlights the link between increases in women’s employment between 1998 and 2008 and a reduction in the number of children who live in poverty. The report points out that women are more likely than men to be the money managers in poor households, as Ken Macintosh said. It is important that we reflect on that. When we focus on women’s employment, we must consider the impact not just on women but on their families. Save the Children has held a series of conversations with parents across the United Kingdom who highlighted concerns about the availability of childcare. That was reflected at the summit that we are debating. I welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to increase radically the number of hours of childcare for three and four-year-olds. I recognise that there is a sense that the Government should go further. We would all like the Government to go further. If concrete proposals are made to the Government, I have no doubt that it will be willing to consider them. I see that the minister for the early years has joined the debate, and I have no doubt that she would be willing to consider such proposals. Save the Children’s report highlighted concern about the severe cuts in welfare spending having a disproportionate impact on women’s incomes. That point was reflected in the briefing that the Scottish Trades Union Congress sent us and it was looked at during the summit. The Minister for Youth Employment made the important point that single parents cannot access college courses to gain new skills, because of welfare changes. That hardly strikes me as likely to improve the employment prospects of many women who are already struggling. I am a member of the Welfare Reform Committee, which is hearing plenty of evidence to suggest that the welfare reform changes that the UK Government is bringing in will be likely in some circumstances to force out of work people who are supported in employment. That is entirely counterproductive.

Do I have time, Presiding Officer?

I am trying to be as consensual as I can be, but I hasten to point out that Mr Macintosh’s party is involved in a campaign with another party to keep a funding system that would continue to reduce the money that is available to the Scottish Government. That would have an obvious impact on the services that are delivered through the devolved Administration. It is important to point out that local government today gets a higher proportion of the Scottish block grant than it did under the previous Administration. I close—as I see that the Presiding Officer is asking me to—by welcoming the debate—

I thank Hugh Henry for lodging his motion, because it is very important that we have this debate. I record my condolences to Mr Henry for his sad family loss. Neil Bibby did a very good job in speaking to the motion in Mr Henry’s place. I thank the NSPCC for the briefing that it has provided to me and other members. It has been very helpful in preparing for the debate. I record my thanks to the organisation for the work that it is doing. In that regard, I am sure that all of us in the chamber wish that we were in a world where children’s organisations such as the NSPCC, Save the Children, Children 1st and Barnardo’s did not have to exist. However, a cursory glance at the statistics on the prevalence and incidence of child abuse and neglect in Scotland and across the United Kingdom suggest that those organisations are, sadly, very much needed. The NSPCC carried out research into child abuse and neglect in the UK, which involved interviewing a large number of young people. Some of the figures are very stark and bleak. NSPCC says that “One in four young adults ... had been severely maltreated during childhood” and that “More than one in eight children aged 11-17 ... have experienced severe maltreatment by a parent or guardian.” Nearly a quarter of the young adults that the NSPCC questioned had “experienced sexual abuse ... by an adult or a peer during childhood” and “one in nine young adults ... had experienced severe physical violence during childhood at the hands of an adult.” As Neil Bibby pointed out, “neglect was the most prevalent type of maltreatment in the family” for all the age groups that the NSPCC spoke to when compiling its report. Those statistics are a stark demonstration of the need for children’s organisations such as the NSPCC. From my experience as a father, I can only be appalled by the incidence of abuse that the NSPCC has reported. I very much welcome the fact that the Scottish Government keeps the issue of child neglect under review—indeed, it published its latest review earlier this year. I see that I have the time to focus on some of the work that the NSPCC is doing in North Lanarkshire, in which my constituency is located. It is doing some good work to try to prevent non-accidental head injuries in babies. We know that “Abused babies are more likely to die from head injuries than any other cause” so I am very pleased to see that the NSPCC is working with the national health service in North Lanarkshire to educate new parents on the dangers of shaking babies. NSPCC estimates that one in nine mothers shakes her baby at some point. We would all accept that it is unlikely that they necessarily do that with any intent to cause physical damage to their child, but it can lead to such damage. The programme will build on the experience of the Women & Children’s Hospital of Buffalo’s programme in the United States of America. I understand that the NSPCC will share its learning from that programme with the Scottish Government, which I am sure will help us to achieve the Minister for Children and Young People’s well-stated and sincere ambition to make Scotland the best country in the world in which to grow up.

If that is the case, will the member explain why his party leader said yesterday that, in the budget, “spending on concessionary fares increased by 19%”?

I was trying to do it subtly, so that it would not show up on the telly, but I say to Marco Biagi—who is no longer here—that I was only too happy to fetch his speech for him. Maybe he can return the favour if I ever run into such trouble. I welcome the debate because I think that the Scottish Government has a very good story to tell about its investment in buses, not least through the green bus fund. Earlier this year the third funding round was announced by the minister, building on the investment that has already allowed nine bus operators to purchase 74 eco-friendly buses since 2010. We will see 40 buses join the green fleet as a result of the additional investment, joining the buses that are already serving communities throughout the country, including in my constituency. Early indications show that the vehicles are making substantial fuel savings for the companies involved, as well as reducing emissions. That is good news for the companies, which are saving money, and it is good for the environment. It is also good for the travelling public. We all get complaints about the poor-quality buses that some companies have been running, and it is good to see new buses coming into service. That demonstrates substantial support from the Scottish Government. There was a suggestion that only the biggest companies will benefit, but John Henderson of Henderson Travel is on record as saying how good the scheme is. His company, which could not be described as one of the large players in the bus industry, has benefited from the funding, and some of those new buses are serving my constituents. If we look at the successful bidders in the second round of green bus funding, we see that five companies benefited. National Express Dundee and Lothian Buses could be described as big players, but the other three—MacEwan’s Coach Services, Deveron Coaches and Henderson Travel—could not. I hope that those three companies do not mind my saying that. It is not, therefore, fair to say that only the big companies are benefiting. It is important to place the investment in a wider context, as it is part of an effort by the Scottish Government to invest in green technologies more generally. We have seen £30 million invested through the green investment package and £180 million has been announced for construction, skills and the green economy. The green bus fund fits well within that overall investment and with the ambition to make Scotland a greener place. As Colin Beattie said, the First Minister has talked about the green economy being the source of Scotland’s reindustrialisation. In that regard, we are all very glad to see Alexander Dennis Ltd, which is based not far from my constituency, in Michael Matheson’s constituency, benefiting through the green bus fund and building some of the new-generation hybrid buses. I hope—I am sure—that it will continue to do so. The Labour amendment focuses on the bus service operators grant. Like Alex Johnstone, I was delighted to see that issue introduced into the debate, as the Scottish Government has a good story to tell about that grant and about bus funding more generally. The Scottish Government is investing around £250 million each year in bus services throughout Scotland, but let us look specifically at the bus service operators grant. Whenever we hear criticism of it—we have heard it before—there is no recognition of the positive changes that have been made by the Scottish Government. David Connolly, technical director of the MVA Consultancy—

A brief one.

I will respond to that—I said I would take a brief intervention, Mr Johnstone, and I think that we get the message. We should focus on the changes. I accept that Mr Johnstone spoke somewhat positively about them but otherwise they have not been talked about or acknowledged. David Connolly, who gave evidence to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, said: “Operators should be encouraged and funded on the basis of the number of passenger kilometres.”—[Official Report, Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, 5 October 2011; c 177.] That is an example of the changes that we have seen. The old system was designed in such a bizarre way. It was about the amount of fuel that was expended, which does not encourage green or environmentally friendly bus use. It was ridiculous, and the Scottish Government should be congratulated on changing it. I will focus on the Labour Party, which always makes two big demands. The first is on regulation, and we heard it again from Iain Gray. I am quite relaxed to hear about more regulation for bus services, but what we never hear from the Labour Party is what it means by better regulation or where the funds would come from. The key point is that Labour never dealt with the matter when it was in government.

I look forward to considering that particular proposal—at last we are hearing about some meat on the bones. The other issue that we hear about from the Labour Party is that there should be more funding for the bus service operators grant. I have previously criticised the Labour Party because its members never say where the money for that should come from. However, yesterday, in Johann Lamont’s grand speech, we started to hear where the money might come from. What she said was interesting—this is the point that I quoted to Mr Findlay. In effect, she was criticising the increase in spend on concessionary fares. Just this morning, on “Call Kaye”, Kezia Dugdale said that Labour wants to change the nature of the concessionary travel scheme. It now seems clear—

Do I have time to give way to Ms Murray?

We keep hearing about that honest debate, and we ask the Labour Party what it wants to do with the scheme in the future. Kezia Dugdale—a front-bench spokesperson for the Labour Party—went on the record, but we hear that she gave her personal views. I say to Ms Murray that, frankly, I do not think that any of us buy that. Every time I have been out campaigning in the last few elections—

I have heard it said behind our backs that the SNP is going to cut the scheme. It is Ms Murray’s party that plans to cut the scheme. We now know the truth. We know that it is the SNP that can be trusted to take care of Scotland’s bus services.

I am sure that all members will congratulate Kevin Stewart on securing the debate and that I will be only the first to do so. I apologise to him, the Presiding Officer and other members, as I may have to leave before the end of the debate to get back to my constituency. Like Kevin Stewart, I am a member of the Welfare Reform Committee. It is clear that the committee is receiving evidence of the enormous damage that has been done to people’s lives through the United Kingdom Government’s wider welfare reform agenda. We have become particularly aware of the concern about work capability assessments; indeed, we received evidence about that last week. Mr Stewart referred to that, and I will try to pick up on it later. All of us will be aware of the concern that exists as a result of constituents who have brought cases to us. It is clear that campaigning organisations are similarly concerned. Citizens Advice Scotland provided a very good briefing for members in which it gave a number of instances in which its clients have reported concerns. It informed us: “A West of Scotland CAB reports of a client whose GP is ‘astonished’ that she has been declared fit for work in her work capability assessment. The client had spinal surgery which has led to chronic back pain and irritable bowel syndrome. The client is also asthmatic and has borderline personality disorder involving mood swings and considerable medication.” The briefing also states: “An East of Scotland CAB reports of a client who ... has long-term substance abuse issues and mental health problems ... The client’s GP states that the client is definitely not fit for work as she has been assessed as ‘psychotic’ and a danger to others.” That person was assessed as being fit for work. Kevin Stewart referred to the evidence that the committee has taken. I refer to the Official Report, as it is important that members hear some of the evidence. We have taken some very good evidence and, as Mr Stewart said, the witnesses were very brave to give it. One of those witnesses was Henry Sherlock, who became blind at 31. He told us about his work capability assessment: “I was asked whether I could pick up an empty cardboard box. In what job does someone pick up an empty cardboard box? That is not even work capability assessment. I said that physically, yes, I could pick up an empty cardboard box but that I would not know where the cardboard box was. I would have to have someone show me where the box was. Then, when I picked up the box, if I needed two hands I would become immobile—my mobility would be gone because I would not be able to use a cane or a dog to get around. I gave a full explanation of why that would be difficult, but I asked for the medical report to be sent to me and that was missing completely from the report.”—[Official Report, Welfare Reform Committee, 18 September 2012; c 253.] Janice Scott, whose husband was injured in a traffic accident, had a stroke and subsequently could not work any longer, made a similar point. She spoke about the evidence that her husband gave during his work capability assessment. She took down in shorthand everything that her husband said but, when they requested the report, they saw that it did not reflect what he said. That is a damning indictment of the work capability assessment process. We heard from the witnesses that it would often be noted in reports that they arrived at the interview on time and were well dressed. That is a completely anodyne point. How could a disabled person be assessed as being fit for work because they turned up at the appointment time and were well dressed? That might lead us to assume that it would have been better if they had adopted a more tardy and slovenly attitude, which highlights the ridiculous nature of much of the work capability assessment system, as do the wider experiences of people going through the system. It is absolutely right that the Scottish Parliament has a chance to report and highlight those concerns. Once again, I congratulate Kevin Stewart on providing us with that opportunity.

Will the member give way? [Interruption.]

My constituents in Cumbernauld are absolutely delighted to see that the line to their town will be electrified. The member suggests that it is impossible for rail connections between sovereign states to exist. Why then do we see such rail connections across Europe?

I welcome today’s debate and thank the Labour Party at least for introducing the subject, although I must say that I do not recognise the picture that Labour members have painted. I will come back to that in a second, but first I must say that it was interesting to hear from Alex Johnstone that the likely ambition of his party in government in England, whether through the prism of the UK or after independence, is that high-speed rail will only ever reach Leeds or Manchester. This might come as news to Mr Johnstone, but England actually extends much further than that. What about cities such as Carlisle or Newcastle? It is interesting to hear that only Scotland would benefit from cross-border high-speed rail. What about the people of England who want to come to Scotland by high-speed rail? The project will benefit Scotland and England.

It is amazing how a channel tunnel was managed to be built by the Governments of France and the United Kingdom. Cross-border relations will go on. It is almost as if the member is suggesting that the Scottish Government will not step up and pay for the construction of high-speed rail. Mr Johnstone should know that, even in a devolved context, it has already said that it is prepared to pay its share, so let us hear no more nonsense about high-speed rail. EGIP is a project that has great potential to deliver for my Cumbernauld and Kilsyth constituency as there are three stations in that area on the lines that stand to be electrified. That will lead to vastly improved transport times to Scotland’s two major cities. We will see the Cumbernauld line electrified by 2014—I do not know if that is soon enough for Dr Murray, but it is absolutely fantastic news for the people who I represent. I was disappointed that Jim Hume’s amendment was not taken for debate because he was trying to suggest somehow that only Edinburgh and Glasgow stand to benefit from the investment. I can tell him that the people in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth will benefit, too, so I do not recognise—and neither will my constituents—the picture of doom that has been painted about EGIP. It is good news.

Only if you are brief, Mr Smith.

We always need some good news in the summer, Mr Smith. I do not recognise the suggestion that the Government’s announcement is somehow the cancellation of the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme. The scheme was designed to be implemented in phases—that was clearly set out in the infrastructure investment plan. The announcement is the first phase of EGIP. Dr Murray picked up a point relating to a question that was answered by Keith Brown. The answer referred to the timing of further phases being predicated on wider capacity and affordability issues. That last point about affordability is important because, time and again, SNP members hear from all those around us in the chamber—although primarily from the Labour members—who demand extra additional expenditure without suggesting where that money should come from.

It still will—that is how the project is being funded. There is no recognition whatsoever from the member that it is not only capital budgets that are being slashed by the Tory-Liberal Administration—and would have been slashed by the Scottish Labour Party—but revenue budgets. When someone takes out a loan, they have to pay that back. Where would that money have come from? Neil Findlay rose— Presiding Officer, can I give way to Mr Findlay?

Mr Findlay, unfortunately I am unable to give way; I would have gladly done so. The project has been welcomed across the board in central Scotland. People who live there do not recognise the picture that the Labour Party has painted.

We hear it again. Clearly, the money would not have come directly out of the capital budget, but it would have to come out of the revenue budget, which has been cut as well. Does the Labour Party not recognise that?

Will the member give way?

Will Dr Simpson take an intervention?

Yes, you must.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am not sure that the end of the sentence was worth waiting for—

Earlier this week, the Royal College of Nursing launched a campaign called “This is nursing”, to challenge the negative publicity about patient neglect and poor conditions. One of the nurses featured in the campaign is Alan Cook, a registered nurse in the acute stroke department at Glasgow royal infirmary. He says: “My motto is to look after someone the way I would look after my own mum or dad.” That is a magnificent synopsis of what nursing and the NHS should be about. RCN Scotland director Theresa Fyffe says that the campaign is to inform and educate the public and celebrate the outstanding work that nurses do daily, often in extremely difficult situations. I am not suggesting that Jackie Baillie is not genuine when she says that she recognises that the work that NHS staff do is exceptional. However, although it is right to highlight issues of concern, I am concerned that by constantly highlighting issues we are undermining such praise. I place the debate—

It may be a surprise to Jackie Baillie, but we all have constituents who work in the NHS and we all hear issues of concern, which we rightly take forward. Let us compare the record of this Administration to that of the previous Labour Administration. [Interruption.] I am not surprised that Mr Smith does not want to hear this, but he should sit there and listen.

I would be delighted, as always, to speak to Ms MacDonald. If she does not mind, though, I will decide on the content of my speech. I heard Jackie Baillie say that this is not the case, but it is a fact that there are more nurses and midwives in post now than in nine of the 10 years when Labour was in government. I do not doubt that the NHS is under pressure now. We will turn to the Tory record in a minute, if Mr Carlaw does not mind, because I heard him say that he does not want that debated today either. I found it astonishing to hear Miss Baillie say, from a sedentary position, that Iain Gray did not say what the minister said he said on “Newsnight Scotland”. It beggars belief. We all heard him say that the Labour Party “wouldn’t ring fence the health budget.” The Labour Party cannot hide behind that fact either. I tried to intervene on Mr Carlaw earlier. I did not know that he was such a wallflower these days, but it seems he was a little upset by my precursory remark. I am astonished to hear the Tories say today that the Scottish Government is diverting money away from the NHS front line through free prescriptions. Prescriptions are part of the NHS front line. A report has been published about what the Tories are doing south of the border. They want to funnel £20 billion in private profit away from the NHS. That is the real agenda of the Tories, supported by the Labour Party through the better together campaign.

The minister might be aware of North Lanarkshire Council’s decision last week not to grant permission for the construction of a new store in Motherwell, which would have led to hundreds of new jobs and a diversification of retail opportunities. I realise that he cannot comment on the specific application, but can he tell us how sacrosanct local plans should be in a reformed planning system in the face of a specific application that would create hundreds of new long-term jobs and act as a precursor for further investment in any local authority area?

The chamber will be aware of the proposed merger between AG Barr, which is based in my constituency, and the Essex-based firm Britvic. Does the First Minister agree that, given the iconic Scottish brands that are involved, if any merger goes ahead, such a company should be headquartered in Scotland and that production should remain an on-going concern at the Cumbernauld site?

13. To ask the Scottish Government whether it has received clear information from the United Kingdom Government regarding its plans for public sector pension reform. (S4O-01258)

Is the cabinet secretary able to tell us the issues on which the UK Government has not provided the clarity that he is seeking, and how they might impact on the ability to negotiate?

I congratulate Clare Adamson on securing the debate and welcome members of the Scottish steelworkers memorial fund committee to the public gallery. I apologise for not being able to stay behind after the debate to meet them, and I apologise to the Presiding Officer and members, because I might miss the end of the debate—I must leave early to get back to my constituency. I am happy to speak in the debate, because the steel industry has been important to west central Scotland’s industrial past. I was pleased that Clare Adamson lodged the motion, because she has spoken eloquently many times about the industry’s importance to her family and how it motivated her to go into politics. We heard more eloquence from her this evening. I do not have the direct experience of steelworks that Clare Adamson and John Pentland have, because I did not grow up in the vicinity of a steelworks. I grew up in Glasgow, so it was the horn of the shipyard, not the steelyard, that I heard. Of course, the shipbuilding industry was served by the steel industry, which reflects steel’s importance to wider west central Scotland. I note with sadness the decline in the shipbuilding industry, which is similar to that in the steel industry. However, many of my constituents have direct experience of the steel industry. I have many constituents who worked in it and, of course, many more who worked in mining, which served the steelyards. Again, that emphasises the importance of the industry to the wider west central Scotland area. It is right and fitting that we ensure that those who have lost their lives in industries are marked with a memorial. That has happened in other industries. Earlier this year, the First Minister unveiled a memorial to the 73 people who died in the construction of the Forth rail bridge. A memorial of the Auchengeich disaster has also been created in recent years. That memorial, which the First Minister also unveiled, is not a million miles from my constituency. In the Condorrat area of Cumbernauld, there is a memorial that marks not only the war dead and the radicals of 1820 but the men who died in the Auchengeich disaster. It is therefore absolutely right that there should be a memorial to those who lost their lives in the steel industry, and it is fitting that Ravenscraig should be the location for such a memorial because of its iconic value. I am sure that Elaine Smith might have argued for Gartcosh, but it is right that Ravenscraig should be chosen as the site for the memorial. The memorial will not be a memorial only to those who died; in some ways, it will be a memorial to the industry. It will mark the sad loss of Scotland’s manufacturing capacity. I think that we all wish that it could have been built at an active steelworks in Motherwell but, sadly, that is not the case. I once again congratulate Clare Adamson and the committee that is taking forward the attempts to get the memorial created. If I can be of any assistance in that regard, I am happy to be.

Can Willie Rennie tell us whether he has managed to secure a commitment from his friends at Westminster that any revenues that would be accrued would stay in Scotland? No such commitment has been forthcoming thus far.

Will the member take an intervention?

I agree entirely with the member about the Tory Chancellor of the Exchequer’s onslaught. Can she therefore explain why her party is involved in the better together campaign with that party, which would allow him to continue to wreak havoc on the Scottish people?

Will Hanzala Malik reflect on the fact that a Scottish firm is part of the consortium? There are 306 Scottish firms benefiting from subcontracts arising, with 1,100 people employed on site now. When will the Labour Party stop perpetuating the myth that the Forth replacement crossing does not benefit the people of Scotland? We even heard Ken Macintosh say today that the crossing is not being built in Scotland. Where else is it being built?

Oh!

Will the member give way?

I do not think that you will.

Margaret McCulloch did not answer my question, because she did not let me ask it. If the UK Opposition has been calling for a stimulus package for years, why did Alistair Darling, the Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer, say that, under him, spending cuts would be “tougher and deeper” than those under Margaret Thatcher? On Ken Macintosh’s point about business confidence in the context of the coming independence referendum, Diageo, Stagecoach, the Institute of Directors in Scotland, Ceridian and Lloyds Banking Group all say that it does not undermine their confidence in Scotland. Should we listen to those leading voices in business, or to that clarion voice of sunshine, Ken Macintosh?

I imagine that Lloyds Banking Group is likely to be a member of the CBI, but I do not have the membership list in front of me right now. That is not a particularly relevant point—the point is that those business organisations are saying quite clearly that their confidence in Scotland is not undermined. Indeed, Philip Grant, the chair of the Scottish executive committee at Lloyds Banking Group, said of the fact that we are considering the constitutional question: “For people to be more aware of Scotland’s brand and our capabilities and opportunities ... is no bad thing in a global market”.—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 9 May 2012; c 1090.] There we have it: the referendum is increasing the confidence of those organisations in Scotland. I was intrigued by Ken Macintosh’s suggestion that the Scottish Government is not doing enough to promote economic recovery, which was as fanciful as the suggestion that the Forth replacement crossing will not be built in Scotland. I have to say to Mr Macintosh that the clue is in the name; it will be built in Scotland. Perhaps Mr Macintosh should spend less time watching the telly of an evening and more time looking at an atlas. Look at some of the things that the Scottish Government has been doing to promote economic recovery. In June, the finance secretary announced a further £105 million package of economic stimulus to create jobs and growth, such as the £22 million for renewables and low-carbon initiatives, accelerated investment of £15 million and an extra £20 million investment in housing. A point was made about the apparent social housing crisis, but we have recently seen being built in my constituency the most significant number of social houses for a considerable amount of time—certainly more than we saw being built under the Labour-Liberal Scottish Executive. That makes the concerns that are being expressed somewhat hollow. We are seeing other efforts as well, for example the £70 million in the national renewables infrastructure fund, which leverages private sector investment to develop the necessary infrastructure to support offshore renewables. There are more examples, but I want to move on. The idea that this Government is not doing all that it can within the limited confines of the devolved settlement is a nonsense.

Mr Macintosh knows that more social houses for rent are being built now than there were when his party was in Government, so the picture on housing that he paints is not accurate. I am not painting a picture that is entirely rosy. Look at what Westminster is doing for economic recovery. I was intrigued by Ken Macintosh’s suggestion that the Scottish Government was not doing enough—I was equally intrigued by Mary Scanlon’s suggestion that there is good news from Westminster. Look at what some of the world’s leading economists have to say about the UK Government’s approach. Joseph Stiglitz says: “Call off the mad austerity”. He says that it is “a certain recipe for exacerbating the recession and inflicting unnecessary pain on the economy”. Paul Krugman says: “If everyone tries to slash spending at the same time, that’s a recipe for what you’ve got: a depressed economy”.

I can only apologise to Mary Scanlon that our party’s briefings appear to be a lot better than the Conservative Party’s briefings. On Mary Scanlon’s point about the economic plan, those leading economists—Joseph Stiglitz, a former chief economist at the World Bank, and Paul Krugman from Princeton University—are saying that the strategy of Mary Scanlon’s party is not working. The Conservatives would do well to listen to that point.

I would like to take your intervention, Mr Findlay, but unfortunately I cannot. We need to see a different economic strategy emerging from Westminster. Murdo Fraser posed a question about whether that would result in more borrowing. Self-evidently, the answer is, “Yes, of course it would.” However, when he poses that question, Murdo Fraser is pretending that the UK Government is not currently borrowing billions of pounds more than was previously forecast. The difference is that it is borrowing to fill a black hole rather than borrowing to invest in order to close that black hole. The latter approach is the approach that we need—would that this Parliament had those powers.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Murdo Fraser could never be accused of loyalty to his leader. On the specific point, I wonder whether he can answer this question: is it better to borrow to invest, as the Scottish Government has called for, or to borrow to fill a black hole—as his Government is doing—that the borrowing could otherwise fill?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with North Lanarkshire Council regarding the condition and upkeep of schools. (S4O-01226)

The minister may be aware that there is before the Scottish Futures Trust an outstanding bid—which I whole-heartedly support—from North Lanarkshire Council for the next available tranche of funding for a new campus for the excellent Greenfaulds high school, which is the largest secondary school in the council’s area. What information is there about when the Scottish Futures Trust is likely to make a decision on the matter?

With all that talk about Scolympia, it is quite clear that Jackson Carlaw had been drinking Skol before he started to speak. I am not quite sure how to follow that performance, but I can say to my colleague Mark McDonald that it is quite clear that we can identify at least one shovel-ready project that Richard Baker is willing to support—I refer, of course, to Johann Lamont’s leadership of the Labour Party. I am delighted to be able to speak in the debate. Yesterday, it was interesting to hear criticism of the Government’s programme as being somewhat legislation light. My understanding is that in any given parliamentary year an average of 12 bills are passed, but the Government programme includes 15 bills. I found it interesting to read the 2011 debate on the programme for government. Jackie Baillie said, in criticism of the Government’s programme: “What about the bold measures that could have been brought forward to deliver a better integration of health and social care?” —[Official Report, 8 September 2011; c 1478.] Iain Gray said: “Why is there no reform of procurement?”—[Official Report, 7 September 2011; c 1384.] Murdo Fraser criticised the absence of an independence referendum bill and John Lamont talked of the absence of legislation on victims’ rights. What do we have this year? We have an adult health and social care integration bill, a procurement reform bill, a victims and witnesses bill and a referendum bill. I must have missed the welcoming of all those articles of legislation that were demanded last year and which were announced yesterday.

What can I say? I very much welcome that intervention by Jackie Baillie. I will consider in a little more detail some of what was said in yesterday’s debate, then—I hope that I have enough time—talk about some of the specific legislation that I particularly welcome. It was interesting to hear criticism yesterday that the NHS budget has been cut by £300 million. Of course, we know that the NHS revenue budget has in fact been protected and that by 2014-15 we will see a record £11.6 billion resource funding for health in Scotland, which is £826 million more than was provided last year. That might explain why more people now are satisfied with Scotland’s health service than in the 2005 Scottish social attitude survey under a previous Administration. It was also interesting to hear the leader of the Labour Party talk about the Scottish Government policy on physical education being a sham. We know that 84 per cent of primary schools provide two hours of PE per week to all pupils, which is up from the figure under the previous Labour-Liberal Administration. We also find that 92 per cent of secondary schools are providing two periods of PE in secondaries 1 to 4, which is double the figure of 46 per cent in 2004-05, when the survey was last carried out. It is important to place those facts on the record because, as far as I am concerned, some of what we heard yesterday was, frankly, a travesty of public debate. I turn to some of the specific pieces of proposed legislation in the programme for government, beginning with the proposed marriage and civil partnership bill. I very much support the principles behind that proposed bill. The comments yesterday from Patrick Harvie and Willie Rennie—I appreciated the first half of his speech, if not the latter part—and today from Marco Biagi that the issue is about freedom of religion were well made, and we should reflect on them. We need to see the final details of the bill, but I look forward to looking on it sympathetically and I hope to be able to support its passage into law. I also want to discuss the proposed children and young people bill because, during the recess, I became a father again. My experiences with my children make me all the more determined to support the ambition, which my friend Aileen Campbell has stated so often, to make Scotland the best country in the world to grow up in. That is a noble and well-stated ambition and surely one that we can all support. We should all unite around a bill that is designed to embed a new approach that is based on prevention, appropriate early intervention and child-centred service delivery. That proposed legislation is particularly welcome. The First Minister was right that the bill is all the more relevant in the context of the UK Government’s welfare reform agenda. This is not a specific part of the programme for government that was announced yesterday, but I also look forward to the regulations on passported benefits that the Scottish Government will introduce. Those will be important and I look forward to considering them as part of the Welfare Reform Committee. The welfare reform agenda is a huge reason why the referendum bill is so important. With independence, we would no longer be subject to the vagaries of an unelected Tory Government with its welfare reform agenda and austerity measures. It is interesting to see the Labour Party getting involved in the better together campaign with a party that is taking forward such an agenda. I am sure that Labour members will come to rue the day that they got involved in that and I hope that, when we become independent, they will apologise to the people of Scotland.

Will the member give way?

I will start with a little irreverence—if Alex Fergusson thought of veterans as being 80 or 90 years old when he was growing up, I wonder what 18th or 19th century war they must have been fighting in. Perhaps that is more a sign of how much cheekier I am prepared to be to Mr Fergusson now that he is no longer Presiding Officer. I congratulate Christina McKelvie on securing the debate. It is on an important issue and it is particularly useful to hold it in armed forces week—Alex Fergusson made that point well. I thank Poppyscotland and Citizens Advice Scotland for the information that they provided in advance of the debate. Like most members, I have never served in the military. Few of us—a notable exception is the minister who will speak later, Keith Brown—have served in the military. However, like almost every Scottish family, I have had family members who served in the military—my grandfather, for example, was a Seaforth Highlander during the second world war. That is not particularly unusual. I will repeat the statistic that was cited by Paul Wheelhouse and Margaret Burgess: about 1 million people make up the wider veteran community in Scotland. That is one in five of the population. That shows the reach of military families across the nation. It is right that service personnel are catered for and looked after during and after their military service. Christina McKelvie made the point well—we do not need to support any particular military action that those personnel may be involved in, but we should always support those serving. For a long time, the state has not done enough in that regard. Christina McKelvie told a sad story about the ex-serviceman who was deliberately seeking to be imprisoned—it sounds as though that individual has moved on and has the support that they need, but that story is a stark example of the lack of support. Various statistics are available. In 1994, Crisis estimated that approximately a quarter of all single homeless people had served in the UK armed forces. Glasgow Homeless Partnership surveyed the local single homeless population and found that 12 per cent reported that they had previously served in the armed forces. The Howard League for Penal Reform also set out that a disproportionately high percentage of the prison population are ex-service personnel. A survey by the probation officers’ union revealed that, in 2009, 10 per cent of the UK prison population were former military personnel—that is about 8,500 men in jail. Soldiers returning from combat report an 18 per cent increase in alcohol abuse and the rate of post-traumatic stress disorder among servicemen returning from Iraq and Afghanistan is 4.8 per cent, with other forms of mental illness reported at 27.2 per cent. That could be an underestimate, because some soldiers may not come forward. There are issues with this group of individuals, so I welcome the Citizens Advice Scotland report “Civvy Street: The New Frontline”. It is useful in assessing where we are in terms of meeting the needs of those who served and their families. The report’s conclusion sets out that, although assistance from the Government and local authorities is better now, there are still those who need that assistance. The armed services advice project is a good example of the support that can be given and I congratulate those who are involved. I hope that it is a project that can be rolled out further and that other areas can benefit beyond the pilot area—including my own area. I wish those involved well for the future and I congratulate Christina McKelvie on securing the debate.

Will the minister give way?

It is just so that I can put on the record that I enjoyed the confusion rather less.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the Indonesian Government. (S4O-01190)

The cabinet secretary will recall the tragedy in East Timor in which, under Indonesian occupation, between 100,000 and 200,000 people were killed. Less well known is the situation in West Papua, which has been occupied by Indonesia since 1962. There has been on-going repression there: people can be arrested for raising the West Papuan flag and it is reported that 400,000 West Papuans have been killed in the intervening years. There is currently a crackdown on those who are asserting West Papua’s right to sovereignty. Can the cabinet secretary assure me that the Scottish Government condemns human rights abuses wherever they occur?

At the outset of the Welfare Reform Committee’s consideration of these matters, its number 1 priority—and the priority for all the stakeholders who have given evidence—was the necessity for any regulations under the bill that we hope to pass today to be put in place very quickly so that no individual loses out on their passported benefits. Much has been made of the 40-day timeframe for both negative and affirmative procedures, which means that there should be no delay. However, that does not tell the entire story. As the process is led by the UK Government and is therefore not entirely in the Scottish Government’s hands, there will be occasions—as Alex Johnstone and Margaret Burgess outlined—on which the Scottish Government must react swiftly and put in place a procedure that is contingent on what the UK Government has done. That can be done only through negative procedure, otherwise there is a danger that people might miss out on their passported benefits. On that basis, I oppose amendments 1 and 2. On the issue of greater scrutiny, the Scottish Government has already written to the Welfare Reform Committee to set out its process for stakeholder involvement. Stakeholders certainly want to be involved in the process, but I do not get any sense that they have a burning desire for all instruments to be dealt with under negative procedure. On that basis, I hope that members will oppose amendments 1 and 2.

Will the member give way?

After the brief interlude of the previous amendment, it is good to see the Labour-Tory coalition once again. I oppose amendment 3. The issue was the focus of extensive discussion at the Welfare Reform Committee during consideration of its stage 1 report, and when a similar amendment was presented and rejected at stage 2. I recognise that there has been some movement in the drafting of amendment 3, but I am still concerned that including any such requirement for a policy statement on the face of the bill is overly prescriptive. The Welfare Reform Committee, of which I am a member, is well capable of assessing the Scottish Government’s policy intentions without any need for a policy statement, and that takes care of any concern that regulations might make matters worse, although I have heard no such concern expressed. If that were to happen, the Welfare Reform Committee would be well able to assess any such concern. That has been the majority position of the committee at stage 1 and stage 2. Drew Smith said that he had not heard any coherent argument against the amendment; frankly, I have not heard a coherent argument for it, and so we should reject it.

As a member of the Welfare Reform Committee, I can say that it is no problem to put up with Alex Johnstone, because he is far more consensual when in the committee than he has been in the chamber today. I note that we are losing Drew Smith as a member of the committee, so I wish him well in pastures new. The cabinet secretary suggested that there has been a steep learning curve for those of us on the committee, which is absolutely true. I thank the stakeholders who have engaged with the committee. I am sure that the steep learning curve will continue and that those stakeholders will assist us in the process. This process has not been instigated by the Scottish Government or the Scottish Parliament—it was begun by the UK Government—but we can be proud that the Parliament has acted swiftly to put in place a mechanism to ensure that those receiving passported benefits contingent on entitlement criteria through the former welfare system can continue to receive the support to which they are entitled. The bill is not large; it is enabling legislation. Given that, the debate so far has been technical and procedural in nature. However, I think that we need to move on from that. Yesterday, I met the SCVO and was interested to find that its main request was not that all secondary legislation be subject to affirmative procedure but that we move beyond debating the process to debating the substance of the issues. It is time that we do so. To begin that process, I will quote from Anne Johnstone’s column in today’s Herald, in which she poses the question “What is the welfare state for?” and goes on to say: “For William Beveridge, architect of the British welfare state, it was about eradicating ‘want, disease, ignorance, squalor and idleness’.” That is indeed the founding principle of the modern welfare state and I agree with it, but it is no exaggeration to say that it is now under assault from the UK Government. In recent days, the Prime Minister has suggested the removal of housing support from the under-25s, a move that he called challenging “the something-for-nothing culture”. In taking that view, he fundamentally fails to understand the number of people in employment who will be affected by such a policy and the message that is being sent out to them. That is not to mention the effect on housing policy which, although devolved, is already under pressure from some of the changes to the benefits system that have already been announced.

Very briefly.

Absolutely. It will have a devastating effect on anyone who is entitled to the benefit and certainly on veterans who are under 25. Although the UK Government uses deficit reduction as a mask, its welfare reforms, which have necessitated the action that has been taken in the bill, are ideologically driven. I do not have much time left, but I wish to point out that, although this Government and Parliament have acted to ensure that people continue to receive their devolved passported benefits, we should be able to act more comprehensively. The Parliament should have more comprehensive powers over welfare. I will close by quoting again from Anne Johnstone, who says: “nearly two-thirds of the poorest people in Britain are in work but can’t earn enough to live on. Cutting their housing benefit and tax credits, when rents are rising and nursery costs are astronomical, is more likely to drive them out of work than into it.” That is the reality of welfare policy in the Tories’ hands and gives the lie to any suggestion that we are better together. I commend the bill but look forward to the day we can act more comprehensively on this matter.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I support what Dr Simpson is saying, which is exactly what the Scottish Association for Mental Health has told the Welfare Reform Committee.

Without wishing to question the intent of the Labour Party, I wonder what Dr Simpson would say to the mother who wants to know whether her child will get a free school meal or the pensioner who wants to know whether they will get a bus pass if they had to wait until a Scottish Parliament committee had considered such matters. That is the danger that opens up if every instrument is required to be affirmative.

I welcome the debate and thank the Conservatives for bringing it to the chamber. Like many other members, I am concerned about the many empty shops in my constituency. It is a particular problem in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. In that regard, I welcome the fact that there has been Scottish Government support to help to revitalise the town centres in my constituency. There has been town centre regeneration fund support for Kilsyth, and other support such as the small business bonus scheme, which has seen 63 per cent of shops pay zero or reduced rates. That practical support for small businesses is keeping them alive and open, and it suggests that the inference in the Tory motion that the Scottish Government is anti-business is something of a nonsense. However, despite that support, there are still far too many empty properties. I see that clearly in my constituency. The much-maligned Cumbernauld town centre needs investment but, above all, it needs more amenities. I question where the incentive lies to achieve that in the current scheme for non-domestic rates relief. I question the logic of providing an incentive to keep business premises empty, and I question whether such a position is pro-enterprise or pro-business. We need to do more to try to bring such premises back into use. That is why I welcome the efforts that the Scottish Government is making. It is engaged in considering how to take the matter forward. As far as changes to the non-domestic rates relief scheme are concerned, we have seen support for those efforts. Andy Willox of the Federation of Small Businesses stated: “We also welcome the review of empty property rate relief and its effect on local high streets. We need a system which encourages vacant town centre business properties to be filled”. That organisation, which represents small businesses on the high street, is calling for the current scheme to be looked at.

The Federation of Small Businesses has said quite clearly that it supports our looking at the issue of empty property rates relief. However, I recognise that the proposal has not been welcomed across the business sector. That paragon of progressiveness, the CBI Scotland, has also come out and commented. It made a fair point, which was also made by Annabel Goldie. David Lonsdale said: “companies rarely leave premises empty by choice”. I accept that that is the case; I am sure that they do not choose to leave properties empty. However, I question whether enough is done to get properties filled again. How many businesses reassess the rent that they are looking to charge for such properties and how many wait it out on the current scheme of rates relief? All too often, businesses do the latter. I return to the fundamental point that I made earlier. I do not think that such a position is pro-enterprise or pro-business. I would have thought that the Conservative Party, as the pro-enterprise party that it says it is, would agree with that proposition, not least because the scheme that the Scottish Government is looking to take forward is largely similar to the scheme that is administered by the Conservatives in government south of the border. That point has been well made, so I will not reiterate it too much. To that end, I will not be supporting the Conservative position. I look forward to the Government taking the matter forward, and I will support the amendment in the name of the minister.

How will any new franchise arrangements facilitate additional passenger services where there is capacity for them, as there is at stations in my constituency?

I thank members who signed my motion to enable it to be debated this evening, and members who have remained in the chamber either to take part in the debate or to hear at least a bit of it. I thank Amnesty International, Oxfam and the Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund for the background information that they have provided in advance of tonight’s debate. I declare my membership of Amnesty International and that my wife works for that organisation. This Parliament does not, at this time, have any direct locus in the matter that we are debating this evening, but that does not make the debate any less important. I suspect that all of us, despite our differences, entered politics to make the communities that we directly represent, Scotland as a whole and the world, better places. Despite our different starting points, I am sure that that is true. We should make no mistake: a comprehensive, internationally agreed arms trade treaty is required to make our world a better place. I know that there is cross-party support for such a treaty. I was very pleased that my party agreed a resolution in favour of an arms trade treaty at its recent national council meeting just last Saturday, and I know that Labour, the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats have made statements in support of such a treaty. That is, of course, as it should be on an issue that must concern all decent-minded individuals. However, let me make it clear that an arms trade treaty is not in itself a criticism of the trade in arms per se; rather, it is recognition that such trade must be properly regulated, and that those who seek to violate the human rights of their own citizens should not be able to procure arms internationally to do so. I have concerns about the fact that, globally, annual military spending is of the order of $1.6 trillion and that it far outstrips our expenditure in supporting the developing world. It is perverse that, on a planet of 6 billion people, some 12 billion bullets are manufactured each year, as Oxfam has told me is the case. I think that those are legitimate concerns to raise in any debate about the international arms trade. However, I doubt that anyone in the chamber is so naive as to imagine that the arms trade will not endure. On that basis, it is important to secure, through the international negotiations that will take place next month, the arms trade treaty that we are debating. Amnesty International estimates that more than 1,500 people die every day from armed violence, while Oxfam estimates the figure to be more than 2,000. Eighty-five per cent of all killings that are documented by Amnesty International involve guns and 60 per cent of all the human rights abuses that the organisation reports involve arms. It also says that two out of three people who are killed as a result of armed violence die in countries that are not at war. Who, then, can disagree with the words of the then United Nations High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Sergio de Queiroz Duarte, who in December 2010 said: “In all parts of the world, the ready availability of conventional weapons and ammunition has led to human suffering, repression, crime and terror among civilian populations”? We see that today. My colleague Jim Eadie secured an extremely important debate on the appalling situation in Syria, where the regime is responsible for violating the human rights of so many of its citizens using arms that have been bought through the international arms trade. We were given a salient reminder of that just the other day, when arms from Russia that were bound for Syria were embargoed off our own shores. The fact that there is currently no international arms trade treaty may come as a surprise to many, but even more surprising is the fact that there are international treaties to regulate the trade in dinosaur bones, postage stamps and bananas. How can it be that we, as human society, properly regulate such trade but not the trade in arms? In that regard, SCIAF told me that the Vatican’s permanent observer to the United Nations, Archbishop Francis Chullikatt, made the highly pertinent observation that “arms cannot simply be compared with other goods exchanged in global or domestic markets.” It is right that we should have an effective arms trade treaty, which would be based on the simple principle that there should be no transfers of weapons that are likely to be used for violations of international law, including human rights law. The treaty should establish common binding standards to assess international weapons transfers, which would be based on existing international law, including international human rights and humanitarian law, and the UN charter. An effective arms trade treaty is not in itself a weapons-ban treaty, but it must ensure that states rigorously control the export, import and international transfer of all types of conventional arms that have been designed, modified or adapted for the deployment of potentially lethal force. That is what Amnesty International is calling for, and I think that it is absolutely right. It is essential that we prevent such transfers from being used for serious human rights violations or from being diverted to the illicit trade, the illegal market or end users who would use the weapons to commit atrocities. It is important that I welcome David Grimason to the public gallery. Members will recall that he tragically lost his son Alistair when he was shot and killed during a family holiday in Turkey. He is here with representatives from Amnesty International. David Grimason, along with Dr Mick North, who lost his daughter Sophie in the Dunblane tragedy, have been working with Oxfam and Amnesty International to demand global action on the arms trade. As a father, I cannot begin to imagine how, after the tragedies that befell them, they have gathered the strength to go on, let alone to campaign in this fashion. I think that we owe it to the memory of their children, and to all the men, women and children who can be saved, to see that an international arms trade treaty is secured.

It is with a little trepidation that I rise to speak in the debate from my somewhat limited male perspective on such matters. I am glad that, as John Park has already spoken, I am not the first male speaker in the debate. I admit—also with some trepidation—that I had not been aware that this year is the UN year of empowering women. It is therefore apt that we are having the debate and, on that basis, I congratulate Jenny Marra on securing it. It is right that the Parliament considers such matters. That said—I say this as gently as I can, not because I want to be patronising, but because I think that it is important that the debate has the right tone—I think that the manner in which Jenny Marra set out the case for more equal representation on boards was unfortunate. I do not think that the case is well served by partisan point scoring. [Interruption.] Jenny Marra suggests that I am often the first to engage in that sport, but perhaps we need to reflect on how we can best pursue the legitimate concerns that exist about the underrepresentation of women in public life. Is more equal representation best secured by suggesting that some parties have a better record than others on the representation of women in local government? The extent to which one party’s record is better than another’s is perhaps a moot point. We must consider how best we can make progress on the issue and how best we can come together and find some common ground. After all, this is an issue on which there must surely be some common ground. I mentioned my limited male perspective. I will say a bit more about that and will explain why I wanted to speak in the debate. Alison McInnes touched on the issue. I am the father of a young daughter—she is two and a half years of age. My wife will give birth to her second child this summer. It is possible that I will be the father of two young daughters. I do not want the life chances of my daughter to be limited because of her gender, as the evidence suggests happens. I accept entirely that it is possible for women to reach the top of their chosen profession. There are many examples of that in the Parliament—my esteemed colleague in the Presiding Officer’s chair is one such example. We have heard about other examples. In recent times, we have had a female Lord Advocate and we now have a female Solicitor General for Scotland. However, to use such examples to prove the rule would not be to tell the true story.

Yes, I accept that entirely, and I will come on to that point. However, it is important to ensure that women can rise to the top of their chosen profession. I was making the point that that can happen, but that, equally, that does not tell the entire story. Despite women having so many advantages—they form a slight majority of the population and are better educated than their male counterparts—I entirely accept that they are underrepresented in both the corporate world and public life. Figures from the Commission for Ethical Standards in Public Life that show that 37.1 per cent of those appointed to public bodies in 2011 were female. That is close to the 40 per cent target, but I readily question whether it is good enough. It is incumbent on us to consider initiatives to advance women’s representation, which should include consideration of whether the use of quotas or a fixed mechanism is a proper way to do that. Some people have spoken of their opposition to the proposal. I am not instinctively opposed to it. I am quite willing to hear the case, and I think that the minister said that she is equally willing to hear it. On that basis, I will support her amendment, and I look forward to the discussion continuing.

The debate is a very important one. We should recognise that we are all concerned about any young person who is unemployed and is not getting the opportunities that we would want them to have. I am sure that at this time of year other members will have been invited, as I have been, to a number of school award ceremonies. I was at one last Tuesday at Abronhill high school, at which I saw an array of fine, talented young people receiving awards for real achievement. The idea that those young people might not be afforded the opportunities that we all want to see them get and the opportunities that I have had terrifies me. If there is any suggestion that concern about the issue is not shared across the board, I hope that it is not taken seriously. I think that it is viewed as a serious issue across the chamber. Iain Gray was right to say that the issue should unite us rather than divide us. We are all aware that we are in difficult economic times. We should also be aware that the youngest are among those who are the most vulnerable to the effects of the economic downturn. We see how grave the situation is for young people in some other countries. For example, youth unemployment is running at over 50 per cent in Greece and Spain. There are obviously problems here, but we do not have as severe a problem as there is in those other countries. Of course, that is not to take a complacent attitude. I am glad to see that the Scottish Government is doing what it can with the powers and resources that it has at its disposal to try to ensure that it provides opportunities for young people. The creation for the first time of a dedicated post of Minister for Youth Employment was a signal in that direction, and I think that the creation of that post was welcomed across the board. I will talk a little about what the Scottish Government is trying to do. Mark McDonald made the very good point that the debate should be about more than modern apprenticeships, but a lot has been said about them in the past few days and I want to pick up on what has been said. Let us focus on the facts. Last year, the Scottish Government invested £72 million to support more than 26,000 modern apprenticeship starts—a figure that exceeded the target of 25,000. John Park made a very good speech, as he usually does, but he repeated the criticism, which Kezia Dugdale made more explicitly, of the modern apprenticeship scheme being target driven. Call me cynical, but if this Scottish Government was not to meet the target, I wonder who might be the first person to criticise it for not having met the target. Perhaps that is too cynical a perspective to put forward in this debate. The point has been made, rightly, that the modern apprenticeship scheme runs as it always has done, but there is one important key difference. The difference is that, under this Government, nearly double the amount is being invested in the modern apprenticeship scheme than was the case under the Labour-Liberal Executive. That should surely be welcomed. I understand the point that Iain Gray was trying to make, but I was concerned to hear him suggest that we should not just be counting the number of apprenticeships. He went on to say that we should ensure that the apprenticeships are meaningful. He must be careful about the language that he employs. I think that every young person who is engaged in a modern apprenticeship is doing something meaningful. Iain Gray rose— I am sure that Iain Gray will want to put on the record that he thinks so, too.

I am glad that Mr Gray has had the opportunity to clarify his remarks and that he accepts, as we all do, that modern apprenticeships are meaningful. That is probably enough about modern apprenticeships. Mark McDonald and I have made the point that there are other things happening as well. I want to pick up on the £9 million that the Scottish Government has invested in six local authority areas that face particular challenges with youth unemployment, some of which are historic challenges. I was very glad that North Lanarkshire was the second largest beneficiary of that investment, and was very happy to join the minister at an event at Cumbernauld airport to announce the £9 million investment. The minister and I were able to speak to young people who were actively engaged in the programme that North Lanarkshire Council was taking forward. They are being supported in their employment by the local authority, and it was clear that they were benefiting from that investment and the investment that has been built on by the Scottish Government. It was also useful to speak to the manager of the airport, who frankly stated that he was a bit cynical about the idea at first but went on to recognise the benefit of investing in young people. That should be the basis on which we all proceed. We should all recognise the benefit of investing in young people at all times, but particularly in these difficult economic times.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the debate. There have been a number of considered contributions, which demonstrates the broad consensus on the issue. In many criminal cases, there is a lot of attention on the perpetrator of the crime; all too often, the victims of crime are forgotten. I am sure that we all have stories of constituents who have felt a little let down by the system. Mark McDonald and Duncan McNeil testified to that in their speeches. However, although they do not speak of a justice system that is broken, perhaps it is not quite perfect. David Stewart had a good turn of phrase—I hope that I caught it correctly—when he spoke of the system as sometimes being unintentionally hurtful. That is probably a fair description. The system is not broken but maybe it is not perfect and requires some attention. For that reason, I welcome the Government’s consultation on victims and witnesses. As Mary Fee did, I refer to the foreword to the consultation paper. I welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary says that victims are “not merely passive spectators but people with legitimate interests and needs”. We would all recognise that. It is important to remember those affected by crime and to emphasise the support that we can give to those who witness crime. I look forward to the consultation and the proposals that emerge from the responses to the consultation. Of course, it is important that the Government sets out its stall, which it has done in identifying the key principles for the consultation. I welcome those, the first of which is: “Victims and witnesses should know what is going on in cases which affect them”. That is important because, all too often, people feel passive in the face of the justice system. It is therefore vital that victims or witnesses know what to expect from proceedings, which includes hearings going ahead when scheduled. A number of studies and surveys have been undertaken that indicate that victims and witnesses do not feel particularly valued within the court process, which is somewhat understandable if they do not feel that they are getting the information that they require to better understand the process that they are involved in. The next principle is: “Victims and witnesses should feel confident in coming forward and that their personal safety will be protected”. It is perfectly understandable that many people, particularly those who witness crime, are sometimes a little reticent about coming forward because they fear for their safety. Again, in the ministerial foreword, the cabinet secretary made the important point that “Being a witness is an important civic duty and one which should be recognised and treated as such by both the public and those within the justice system.” He went on to make the point that it would be hard to prosecute any cases without witnesses coming forward, so we must have that as a key principle. I do not want to refer to all the key principles, but the last one that I want to speak a little more about, which many members have touched on, is: “Offenders should pay for the injury, loss or distress that they have caused”. That builds a little on the work that we have seen done, because criminals already pay back to wider society through the cashback for communities scheme, which I think all members’ constituencies have benefited from—I certainly know that my constituency has. It extends beyond societal recompense—which is important—to recompensing the individual victim. Victim Support Scotland has called for that approach in the past and I am sure that it will welcome the fact that the Government is acting in that regard. Points were made about the issues involved in taking forward such a scheme—Christine Grahame raised a few—but that approach is a good idea and I certainly support it. I have spoken about the broad consensus in the debate. However, it is unfortunate that the Tories—through Annabel Goldie’s amendment—have sought to use a debate on better supporting victims and witnesses as a Trojan horse for opposition to automatic early release. I do not want to break the consensus, but the subject has been raised and it merits some attention. The first point is that, contrary to what has been said, the Scottish Government has taken steps through the Criminal Justice and Licensing Act 2010 to act in the area of automatic early release. Indeed, the Scottish Government has a manifesto commitment that it is working towards, seeking to meet the criteria set out by the McLeish commission and reduce the short-sentence prison population before moving to act on the issue further. Annabel Goldie spoke about a survey undertaken by the Tories. Clearly, members of the public will respond that they do not like automatic early release—I understand that. I just wonder whether, when the Tories undertook the survey, they prefaced the question by pointing out that it was the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993, which was introduced when they were in government, that first raised the issue of early release. I somewhat doubt that they went to the public and pointed out that they created the issue in the first place. I will not talk about that further for fear of breaking the consensus that has been struck today. Those minor differences should not mask the shared concern that we have across the chamber. We all broadly support the Government’s consultation and I look forward to seeing what concrete proposals emerge.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the possibility of waste material being transported from Dounreay to Sellafield. (S4O-01090)

The nuclear decommissioning authority proposes the transport of what it euphemistically calls exotic fuels nuclear waste from Dounreay to Sellafield, which raises the prospect of such materials being transported through my constituency. Although the proposals have been consulted on, it is not clear that it has been done widely. Does the cabinet secretary agree that it is incumbent on the nuclear decommissioing authority to engage with all communities to be affected by its proposals, including those along the route that will be used?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I join Claire Baker in congratulating Aileen McLeod on securing the debate. I apologise for not attending last night’s reception but, unfortunately, I was not in Edinburgh until this morning. There is often public cynicism about the type of event that is represented by the Rio+20 summit. In some ways, I can understand why that might be, but Aileen McLeod did a good job of spelling out why such events are important, which is that they can change mindsets and achieve certain goals. We probably do not believe that everything that needs to be achieved has been achieved through such events in the past, but that is not to say that they are not without import. Next month’s summit is important on a number of fronts, prime amongst which is the aim of getting the world to face up to the challenge of tackling the obscenity of poverty in the 21st century. I think that we would all agree that poverty, in any of its forms, is offensive. Too many people here at home in Scotland struggle to make ends meet. I am sure that all members will see, probably all too regularly, individual constituents come to them facing such struggles. Of course, poverty is a global phenomenon. Too many people in the developing world face the struggle of absolute poverty; too many mothers struggle to feed their children; too many children fail to meet basic standards of literacy and numeracy, because they are being forced to work rather than learn; too many children fail to live to see their fifth birthday; and too many families—men, women and children—face the extremities begotten of poverty. Aileen McLeod did us a service by reminding us that the people who will be affected, I hope beneficially, by the outcomes of the summit—the people to whom I have just referred—are not faceless people. They are mothers, fathers, brothers, sisters, sons and daughters. They are real people who have other people who love them and we must do all that we can to ensure that they have a decent standard of living. The most fundamental challenge before the Rio+20 summit lies in the part of Aileen McLeod’s motion that refers to those in attendance coming together to reduce poverty and advance social equity. I hope that concrete solutions can be put in place and thereafter acted upon. Another issue that is of fundamental importance is environmental protection, which is inextricably linked to the issue of poverty. I will touch on that shortly, but of particular importance at the Rio+20 summit will be the discussions on how to contribute to protecting biodiversity and ecosystems. A number of briefings that members have received in advance of the debate highlight why that is important. WWF states in its briefing that it published a “Living Planet Report”. The report reveals that biodiversity continues to decline and sets out why it is important that that issue is addressed. It also points out that the world’s ecological footprint outstrips its natural biocapacity. The summit must face up to those issues. RSPB Scotland also provided a briefing about the summit. It states that it “hopes that the summit will be an opportunity for the international community to work towards the creation of a green economy that will benefit the world’s poorest people.” Of course, those who are most adversely affected by climate change are the world’s poorest people. That is why the two issues are inextricably linked to one another. I see that I am running out of time, Presiding Officer. I had hoped to refer to some projects in my own constituency that demonstrate the protection of biodiversity, that could be learned from and could contribute to a positive outcome at the Rio+20 summit. It is right to have this debate and I congratulate Aileen McLeod on securing it. It is right that Scotland can contribute positively to the Rio+20 summit. I am sure that we all hope that it will be a successful summit with some concrete, practical outcomes thereafter.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made in implementing “Scotland’s Digital Future—Infrastructure Action Plan”. (S4O-01043)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that comprehensive answer. He has previously said that a key criterion in deciding where the broadband strategy will be rolled out first will be which areas are ready for it to be rolled out in. He has suggested that North Lanarkshire Council could not be described as being ahead of the game in that respect. Many constituents have complained to me about poor broadband access, and I have written to North Lanarkshire Council, urging it to get involved with the Scottish Government’s broadband strategy. Has North Lanarkshire Council made any formal approach for support from the Scottish Government?

The debate is welcome across the chamber, perhaps with the notable exception of the Liberal Democrats, who have not bothered to show up. The party started the process with its welfare reforms but it is not represented in the chamber. At least the Conservatives had the grace to come and contribute to the debate. I am not speaking on behalf of the Welfare Reform Committee, but as I am its deputy convener it would be remiss of me not to thank fellow committee members, the clerks to the committee for their support and advice, and those who gave evidence to the committee. We received a huge amount of very useful information that served to inform not only the report but our work going forward. As has been said, those who gave evidence are uniformly in favour of the bill. The committee has, by and large, worked very well together to produce a good report. Based on the speeches so far, members might not feel that we worked well together but I think that, by and large, we did so. Indeed, the report urges the Parliament to back the principles of the Scottish Government’s Welfare Reform (Further Provision) (Scotland) Bill. We had to do our work in a condensed timescale due to circumstances that were outwith the control of either the Scottish Government or the Scottish Parliament. Members might not believe it from what we have heard thus far but, as the convener said, only a small number of paragraphs in the report were not agreed unanimously. That shows that, by and large, there is a strong level of agreement across the committee on the way forward. It was somewhat disappointing that Jackie Baillie suggested last week, by way of a press release, that the report had been “butchered”. She repeated the point today—I see that she concurs—so that is still her position. Although she did not use quite such trenchant terms as she did in last week’s press release, she repeated the point to some extent. As far as I can recall, only four paragraphs out of 118 were not agreed unanimously, and Jackie Baillie herself dissented from only two of those. Even if I do not have the figures quite correct, members will get the message that not a lot of paragraphs were not unanimously agreed. That hardly strikes me as a report that has had the proverbial meat cleaver taken to it.

Not at all. I, and I hope all committee members, have reflected on the evidence before us. Let me come to some of the areas of contention. Jackie Baillie suggested clearly in the debate—I do not know whether she deliberately tried to mislead Parliament; I am sure that that is not the case—that SNP members of the committee backed away from the suggestion that the Scottish Government should undertake modelling along the lines of that which the Welsh Government has undertaken. I note that she continues to make that suggestion from a sedentary position. Let me read paragraph 49 for Jackie Baillie. It states: “The Committee believes that it would be useful for the Scottish Government to continue its analytical work on welfare reform, to also look at the wider economic and social impacts of welfare reform, as the Welsh Government has been doing.” That is a fairly clear and concise statement that the committee is in favour of the position that Ms Baillie espoused. It may not have been Jackie Baillie’s preferred wording, but perhaps she needs to reflect on the fact that, although she is a substitute member of the committee, she is not the committee.

Far be it from me to say that I found that intervention somewhat pathetic. I thought that my reading out paragraph 49 might have been enlightening for Ms Baillie rather than pathetic. It is a shame that she will not reflect on the reality of the situation. Jackie Baillie spoke at length about the fact that she wanted a substantial number of statutory instruments to be dealt with under the affirmative procedure. Again, the majority of the committee did not agree that such a specific provision was necessary. I did not get the sense, through the evidence, that such a position was necessary. Jackie Baillie suggested that the committee had rejected the findings of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. That is not the case. We noted the Subordinate Legislation Committee’s recommendations; we did not reject them. It does well for us to report the facts as they are. It would be a shame if we got caught up in the process—although I have done so myself a little bit today—because this debate should not be about process. There was not an overwhelming amount of time taken up by evidence on that. People are interested in the outcomes that the bill can achieve, rather than in an anorakish argument over process. There was a clear desire to see mitigation of the effects of the UK Government’s welfare reform agenda. Indeed, the committee agreed that that should be part of the work taken forward by the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament. Although we agreed on that, we did so on the understanding that there has to be a realistic expectation, as the work has to be done within the limited powers of a devolved legislature that does not have full power over welfare. I see that my colleague Kevin Stewart is here. He was the first person to raise that point, and it was an important point to make. Do I have much longer, Presiding Officer?

Thank you. I will touch on what is actually happening—the effects that have to be mitigated. These are well-rehearsed arguments in this chamber; we have debated these matters at some length. We are seeing quite clearly that the people who are already the most vulnerable in our society—groups who are the most likely to be negatively impacted upon by any welfare reforms—are the people who will be most adversely affected by these welfare reforms. Consequently, I hope that the Parliament will resoundingly pass the Scottish Government’s Welfare Reform (Further Provision) (Scotland) Bill on the basis that we can do what we can to mitigate the worst effects of the UK Government’s welfare reform agenda. As part of the Welfare Reform Committee, I look forward to further scrutinising the bill at stage 2, along with Jackie Baillie, no doubt.

Does the member agree that not only do we lack the range of housing but, more often than not, the commercial landlords will charge more, which could result in a net increase to the public purse?

Will the member give way?

Does the member therefore share the Welfare Reform Committee’s frustration that, although it wrote to Lord Freud to seek information, he responded very late in the day, just before the stage 1 report was published, and he did not really provide the information?

I sense that there is disappointment on the Tory benches that the report has not been as critical as it might have been of the UK Government’s welfare reform agenda. I suggest that the member looks forward to the committee’s future reports.

I welcome today’s debate. I understand that police support staff play an important role in ensuring an effective police force. The cabinet secretary clearly set out his admiration for their work. The debate is set against the backdrop of a direction of travel in policing in Scotland that is clearly different from that south of the border. The Scottish Government is ensuring that the front line is protected. As of the end of last year, there are 17,343 full-time-equivalent officers in Scotland—an increase of 1,109 from the position that we inherited in March 2007. It has been interesting to hear, as members have just heard, Michael McMahon suggest that that is populism, and Graeme Pearson question whether it is a good thing. The question that Labour members have to answer is whether they want to cut police numbers. The inference to be taken from their suggestions is that they do. I look forward to hearing Mr Macdonald or Ms Marra respond to that later. Lewis Macdonald rose— Mr Macdonald can respond now.

So it is populism when the SNP increases police numbers, but it is sound policy when the Labour Party wants to protect those numbers. That is an interesting perspective. Let us face it: the 1,000 additional police officers have directly contributed to a 35-year low in recorded crime. I accept that Graeme Pearson has long experience in policing matters, but it was a little mean-spirited of him to suggest, just because there has been a recorded drop in levels of crime in other countries, that the police here have somehow not contributed to the reduced rate of crime in this country. I wonder how his former colleagues would respond to that.

That was a restatement of the position: a mean-spirited approach that suggests there is no recognition that the police have played a role—as indeed those who support them have played a role—in the reduction in the level of crime. I do not have the time to compare front-line police numbers in England and Wales with the situation in Scotland, but there is clearly a different direction of travel south of the border. It is important to place in context the specific matter of the number of police support staff employed in Scotland. In the first instance, the numbers are reducing mainly because people are retiring and there have been voluntary severance schemes. That is clearly different from what is happening in England. Alison McInnes was reticent about wanting to discuss what her party is doing in government with compulsory redundancies. Of course, such issues are operational matters for the chief constables of the various police forces. If the Government sought to intervene directly we would probably be having a debate about the political direction of police forces— Jenny Marra rose— I doubt that I have time, Ms Marra. I apologise. I wonder if that is the debate that we would be having—although perhaps that is mean-spirited of me. It is clear that the number of police support staff has gone down a little. There are, as at the end of 2011, 6,957 police support staff. However, that figure is higher than it was in nine of the 16 quarters from 2003 to 2007, so if it is a problem now, it must have been a problem then. I do not remember Lewis Macdonald saying so at the time, though.

Will the member give way?

6. To ask the First Minister what impact the recent increase in the cost of postage will have on the Scottish economy. (S4F-00661)

The Royal Mail’s operating profit in the first half of the last financial year alone was £67 million. Does the First Minister agree that that level of profit indicates that the increase in the cost of postage was unnecessary and is part of the long-held Tory plans to undermine the Royal Mail and the Post Office as publicly owned institutions? Would this Parliament not do a better job of running Scotland’s postal services?

The cabinet secretary talked about the positive impact of structural funds in Scotland. What lessons have been learned from the current application of funds that can be applied to future programmes?

Before addressing the crux of the debate, I thank the Finance Committee for the debate. It is useful that the Parliament can hold debates that are on not a committee report but the evidence that has been presented to a committee. The Education and Culture Committee has held a similar debate. Such debates are useful in allowing committees to take a better-informed approach to their work programmes, having heard what the Parliament has to say. I look forward to the Finance Committee looking at fiscal sustainability in more detail, and I hope that other committees will follow its approach in bringing to the chamber subjects for debate. Today’s debate is about an important issue. It is self-evident that we must ensure the sustainability of public expenditure. However, the term “fiscal sustainability” could be thought to be loaded, as Ken Macintosh said, and could mean different things to different people. I say clearly from the outset that I do not share the UK Government’s perspective on fiscal sustainability. Its hawkish approach to deficit reduction is harming the economy. Mr Macintosh referred to the fact that the UK economy has re-entered recession. It is evident that the UK Government’s approach has contributed to that. Indeed, Paul Krugman has referred to the “death spiral of self-defeating austerity.” As the Scottish Government has said, there is a clear need to inject capital spend to get the economy moving. However, we cannot act in a long-term spendthrift manner. It is clear that any public expenditure must be sustainable in the long term. That applies particularly in the devolved context, where we have a fixed budget and our fundraising capability is legally constrained—John Swinney set that out usefully in his response to an intervention from Ken Macintosh. Thankfully, I do not think that that will be a long-term problem for us. I share the perspective of my colleagues Paul Wheelhouse and Margaret Burgess that independence is the solution to that issue. We must look at the sustainability of public expenditure—fiscal sustainability—in the context of the society that we are in and the current spread of public expenditure. The Finance Committee took a useful approach by focusing on four overarching issues: demographic changes; inequality and socioeconomic deprivation; universal services; and additional models of finance. It was useful to hear that the Scottish Government always considers those aspects. If time allows, I will look at the first three aspects in more detail. On demographic changes, the Office for Budget Responsibility has said that “the public finances are likely to come under pressure over the longer term, primarily as a result of an ageing population.” A Scottish Government report said that the population that is aged 65 or over “is estimated to increase by 21% between 2006 and 2016 and will be 62% bigger by 2031.” An acute increase will also occur in the number of people who are aged 85 or over. It would be unfortunate if people who were listening to us felt that we felt that that section of the population was in some way a burden. It is self-evidently a good thing that people are living longer and healthier lives—how can it be anything other than that? People should not feel that they are a burden. Free personal care is rather important to fiscal sustainability. Some might conclude that free personal care should be cut, because it could create an increased burden on the public purse, but Margaret Burgess and Paul Wheelhouse made the point well—this picks up on evidence to the committee—that we should look at that as preventative spend, because emergency admissions cost about four times more than the entire free personal and nursing care budget. Free personal care should be seen as preventative spend that contributes to fiscal sustainability. The statistics on inequality and socioeconomic deprivation are well known and have been well rehearsed. I do not think that anyone in the Parliament is proud of our statistics on deprivation. With declining budgets and the need for fiscal sustainability, tackling inequalities will be a greater challenge. The Christie commission noted that point and said that “Part of the problem has been a failure to prioritise preventative measures”. Again, the issue of preventative spend is highlighted as being important. I want to touch on universal services, as much as time will allow, because they are important. Indeed, the Finance Committee’s summary of evidence states that “Audit Scotland has estimated a combined annual ... cost for free personal and nursing care, concessionary travel, free eye tests, and free prescriptions of £870 million.” I have already touched on free personal care, but I want to touch on two of the other issues, too. There could be a quiet—in some cases, not so quiet—assumption that we should try to bring down expenditure on all those areas. However, the national concessionary travel scheme, for instance, contributes positively to the physical and mental wellbeing of the people who benefit from it. It also allows them to get out and about and make an economic contribution. On free prescriptions, the evidence was clear—stopping the policy could be a case of throwing the baby out with the bathwater, because cutting back on universal prescriptions will not make the savings that people think will be made. That perhaps challenges some of our assumptions about fiscal sustainability. It is clear that preventative spend is going to be important. I look forward to hearing what the cabinet secretary has to say at the end of the debate.

Will the member give way?

I, too, congratulate Elaine Smith on securing tonight’s debate and welcome the Cuban representatives who have travelled to watch the debate—particularly the family members of those who are imprisoned. As a confirmed philistine, I hope that I will be forgiven for not focusing on the beyond the frame exhibition so much as on the campaign behind it and other matters that are referred to in the motion. I wish those who are organising the exhibition well and hope that many people visit it in Glasgow. I hope that it will be successful in raising awareness of the Miami five and will contribute positively to securing their release after 13 long years in captivity as what any reasonable person would define as, in essence, political prisoners. I suspect that the perspective of some on the imprisonment of these men is bound up with their wider political views and stance on Cuba more generally. I am not entirely uncritical of Cuba and the Cuban revolution. Huge social and economic achievements were made, but Cuba needs to do rather more to liberalise its political process—I say that as someone who admires many of Cuba’s achievements. It would be unfortunate if the issue were to be viewed through a political prism because, although it is bound up in politics, it should be viewed more specifically as a lack of justice. Elaine Smith reasonably set out what the Miami five have been imprisoned for. They were charged with being unregistered agents of a foreign Government and with conspiracy to gather and transmit national defence information. They were sentenced in December 2001 to prison terms ranging from 15 years to life for those charges. Amnesty International has pointed out that no evidence was presented against them at trial to show that the accused had handled or transmitted a single classified document or piece of information. It has since emerged—this is part of an on-going appeal for one of those who is imprisoned—that the United States Government secretly paid journalists to write prejudicial articles in the media at the time of the trial, thereby undermining the defendants’ due process rights. Amnesty International has also set out its concerns about the location of the trial—Miami—not being conducive to a fair trial and about the fact that the defence attorneys were not allowed proper access to their clients or all the evidence that was to be presented. As far as I am aware, the Miami five do not deny that they were unregistered agents of the Cuban Government, but one would have expected that to have resulted in their expulsion from America, not their imprisonment. They vehemently deny the other serious charges against them of which they were—dubiously, I think—found guilty. They contend that they were in the United States to monitor hostile Cuban groups that were complicit in acts of terrorism against Cuba. That raises the question of what evidence there is of terrorism against Cuba. Sadly, in the years leading up to the men’s imprisonment, particularly in the year before their arrest, there was plenty of evidence of attempts at terrorism. The US authorities were involved in seizing that evidence, but that did not result in any charges or imprisonment for those who were involved. Indeed, in the year before, there had been explosions on Cuban soil. There is plenty of evidence to suggest that the Cuban Government had reason to be concerned about acts of terrorism being perpetrated against it, and it is clear that any claim by the Miami five that they had been monitoring terrorist activities should have been taken seriously. Undoubtedly, the fact that it was not taken seriously was born of the unfortunate continuing American suspicion of Cuba, to which other members have referred. I hope that, one day soon, that suspicion will be consigned to the dustbin of history.

The cabinet secretary mentioned that the DWP has not yet provided all the information to the Scottish Government. Does he agree that it is a disgrace that the DWP is not providing all the information that is necessary, given that the Scottish Government has to get on with the job of undoing some of the damage that the UK Government’s welfare reforms will inflict?

The member said that there is an acceptance of mediocrity in too many schools. That is a scandalous accusation. Can the member name one school in which the headteacher accepts mediocrity?

I could not help but notice that, in setting out his concern that Alex Salmond seems to be prominent on some SNP literature, Neil Bibby singularly failed to explain why Johann Lamont does not feature on any of the Labour Party literature that is going out in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. I can only imagine why that might be the case. In case Jackson Carlaw seeks to intervene on me, although I see that he is leaving the chamber, I state clearly for the record that I was never a Tory in my youth and I do not plan on being one in the future—

—despite Mr Johnstone asking me to join now. I thank the Tories for bringing this debate on the concepts of localism to the chamber. It promised to be interesting, but I think that it has failed to live up to that promise, which is a shame. It has been characterised by the Tory party’s total and utter failure to define what it means by localism. Jackson Carlaw stated at the outset that he would not take up his entire allocated time. He spent the first two minutes giving us an admittedly entertaining pontification on a hypothetical leadership contest for the SNP. He even found time to refer to French history, which I thought was remarkably brave for a member of a party that has always adopted a let-them-eat-cake attitude where the Scottish people are concerned. However, it is just as well that he used his time in that fashion, as he had little to say on what the Tories mean by localism. It is a little rich for the Conservative and Unionist party to come to the chamber and masquerade as the party of real devolution, given that it opposed the creation of this place and devolution for Scotland. Its approach is also rich in another sense, in that the Tory motion refers to the SNP’s “rhetoric” regarding centralisation, yet the Tory talk of localism seems to be merely empty rhetoric. I have looked over some debates from years gone by in the Official Report, and I note that on 15 September 2011 Mary Scanlon was concerned about “The postcode lottery with regard to care”. On the same day, Ruth Davidson was concerned about college bursaries and their “first-come, first-served postcode-lottery nature.”—[Official Report, 15 September 2011; c 1762, 1814.] On 28 October 2010, Margaret Mitchell was concerned about the “postcode lottery” in relation to the young carers strategy. It is not illegitimate to raise such concerns, but what is meant by the term “postcode lottery”? It is used to criticise different levels of service provision on an area-by-area basis, but is that not in itself localism? I suggest that, at best, the Conservative Party is muddled on the issue.

The member fails to understand the point that I have made. That would still allow for the postcode lottery. On that basis, I hope that we will never again hear the term from the Tory benches. Let us talk about the facts of the matter. This is not a centralising SNP Administration. The Government has worked with local government to empower it through the ending of ring fencing. The concordat may be scoffed at and traduced from all other sides, but it is an entirely new approach to dealing with local government. It is a partnership approach that we have not seen before. We saw the process of diktat from the Scottish Executive to local government before the SNP created the local government concordat in tandem with local authorities. We saw an example of that collaborative approach in recent days, as the Scottish Government and COSLA came together to breach the gap in council tax benefit that the Westminster Government is handing to the Scottish Government. It is a shame that Labour members cannot bring themselves to welcome that protection for some of our most vulnerable citizens. I also disagree that the reforms to the police and fire services are a centralising move. Paul Wheelhouse did well to remind us that the Labour Party supported the creation of a single police force and a single fire service.

I believe that there will be increased local accountability. It is clear that operational issues will remain a matter for senior police officers. At the moment in Strathclyde, for example, many local issues of concern are not really being dealt with by a large police board and a large fire board. With the creation of local police and fire committees on a local authority to local authority basis, there could be increased local accountability. I refer briefly to concerns about compulsory redundancies that Labour raised. It is interesting that John Pentland referred to North Lanarkshire Labour’s position of creating 5,000 jobs for North Lanarkshire. What Mr Pentland and Ms Boyack did not mention, of course, is that there have been redundancies for low-paid workers and bonuses have been handed to senior executives in Labour-controlled North Lanarkshire. Mr Bibby would do well to take that point on board. We have an SNP Government that has not undertaken compulsory redundancies and, in going forward to the local government election, the SNP is promising not to have compulsory redundancies where it takes control of councils. Members should rest assured that the SNP will take control of more councils next Thursday.

Will the member take an intervention?

I must correct the member. This is not the advent of majority government. There was majority government from 1999 to 2007. The member would do well to reflect on that fact.

I welcome today’s debate. I congratulate the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, in particular Rob Gibson as the convener of the committee, on the committee’s work on the bill. As a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee in session 3, I can say to Alex Fergusson that I feel no comparative advantage. It was not an issue that we looked at in my time as a member, so I cannot claim detailed knowledge of each of the provisions of the bill. I welcome its broad thrust, however. It is worth remembering that the legislation was not created out of a vacuum but out of the Scottish Law Commission’s revision and updating of property law more generally to ensure that it is fit for the 21st century. Alex Fergusson was right to point out that the bill builds on the Parliament’s work on updating Scotland’s feudal laws and, in its report, the SLC makes the point that the principle of conversion already applies to feus because of previous legislation, which is essentially the same as what will come about under the bill. As the minister said, the Scottish Law Commission says that a pseudo-feu should be treated in the same way as the real thing. I have to say that the word “pseudo-feu” is not something that I thought that I would ever say in the chamber or, indeed, outwith it. There is probably a first and last time for everything. The bill also builds on work done in the previous parliamentary session. The session 3 Justice Committee looked at the proposals fairly favourably and I note that the Government has proposed amendments following Justice Committee recommendations; that is welcome. As Marco Biagi said, legislation should develop as it goes through the parliamentary process. That has happened in this case and it demonstrates the Government’s willingness to work with others on the proposals. Of course, the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee has scrutinised the bill and concluded that ultra-long leases should no longer exist in Scotland. We should also refer to the fact that the bill has widespread popular support outwith the Parliament, as demonstrated in the consultations undertaken by the Scottish Government and the Scottish Law Commission. We broadly accept that the bill is necessary because of the difficulties associated with ultra-long leases. The bill will simplify Scotland’s land tenure system. The point has also been made that, in effect, ultra-long leases are ownership in all but name, so it makes sense that we consider the matter now. We should also reflect the fact that owners will, rightly, be compensated, which is all well and good. Mr Hume also made the point that the bill contains no element of compulsion. Any tenant can opt out; tenants are not compelled to become owners. I do not know in what circumstances that would happen, but it is right that there should be no element of compulsion. Throughout the debate, extensive reference has been made to Waverley market; Marco Biagi was right to say that that issue has dominated the headlines on the bill. I do not have Marco Biagi’s constituency interest, nor do I have the benefit of the experience of looking at the matter in the way in which the committee has, but I note that the committee concluded that the case for exempting the Waverley market has not been made. It sounds as if the evidence is just not there. That said, I understand the concerns that have been expressed. Any one of us would be concerned that a wealthy developer could acquire a site for peanuts and make a great profit out of it. I therefore welcome the minister’s commitment to look at the matter again and, on that basis, I look forward to the bill proceeding to stage 2 and beyond.

I thank the Labour Party for bringing forward the motion for debate, because it is always useful to debate the provision of bus services—although I do not consider that the content of the motion bears much relation to reality. The provision of good, reliable bus services is an issue that all members are concerned about. It is an issue of importance to many of the people whom members represent—many people who are without access to a private vehicle rely absolutely on bus services. When there are changes, alterations or cuts to bus services in any of our constituencies, that is rightly an issue of concern for us all. The human aspect that has been referred to is one that we would do well to remember. Much has been said, today and previously, about the funding and the support that are provided for the bus industry in Scotland. Let us consider the facts and the reality of the situation for a little minute. We have a Government that is committed to supporting the bus industry, despite what members have heard today. In the motion, we have an extraordinary claim from the Labour Party that the concessionary fares scheme is underfunded. That is an interesting proposition when we consider the fact that the budget for the scheme this financial year is increased from the same budget line the previous financial year. It seems a little disingenuous of Ms Murray to claim that the scheme is underfunded.

With due respect, Ms Murray, it is you who says it; you make the claim in your motion. We will always hear special pleading from industries and representative bodies; I understand that—that is their job. However, you—I beg your pardon, Presiding Officer, not you—the Labour Party is in Parliament and it has a duty to make its case responsibly. To be frank, Ms Murray, it is clear that you do not even know your own motion, because you—I beg your pardon, Presiding Officer, not you—the Labour Party makes the claim that the scheme is underfunded.

I refer you to the budget documents. It is exactly the other way round: the budget is going up to £192 million from £185 million. We will leave the matter at me referring you, Ms Murray, to your motion. You need to read it again. I have dealt enough with that subject. Suffice it to say that it is interesting to hear Elaine Murray singularly fail to reply to my colleague Christine Grahame’s well-made point about the reason for quoting the Auditor General. It is all well and good for Ms Murray to say that she is quoting someone else, as she just tried valiantly to do again, but she is the one who is raising the issue in Parliament. It is interesting to hear the blame for cuts to bus services being laid entirely at the door of the Scottish Government. Let us take the case of First in the Lothians. We are, understandably, concerned about the cuts to those services, the effect on the people who use them and the potential for job losses. First has confirmed that the decision “comes after years of poor trading and rising fuel prices”. That reflects the situation in many other areas of Scotland. I understand that Transport Scotland is discussing the matter with First and trying to assist it to implement a solution to the situation in which the company finds itself in the Lothians. Previously, the Labour Party has failed even to refer to fuel costs. At least there is a slight improvement, in that the motion takes some cognisance of the matter. I remind Elaine Murray of that, because she does not seem to know what is in her motion. It refers to fuel costs, but she barely mentioned them in her speech. It is clear that fuel costs are the main driver in the problem. No one could fail to notice the increased cost of fuel. The SNP at Westminster has proposed a solution—the fuel duty regulator—but other parties have failed to support that measure. It is time for this Parliament to have control over that policy area so that we can assist bus companies. I commend the Government amendment.

Will the member give way?

I have a lot that you don’t, Mr McDonald. Thank you for throwing me. [Laughter.] The term “regulation” has been used a lot this morning in a rather euphemistic way. What does the member actually mean by it?

The allegation that the concessionary travel scheme is underfunded has been made again, but does the Labour Party not realise that funding for it has increased from the past financial year to this financial year?

Will the member take an intervention?

Mr Rennie seems to be traducing the Scottish Government for demanding things that we understand the Liberal Democrats want. He has referred to the Scotland Bill as being a step forward. What other steps does he want to take? Why is he not arguing for the secretary of state to devolve control of those matters now?

In welcoming the debate, I have noticed that there is concern from the sidelines, on the Tory benches, about the use of the term “anti-independence parties”. I look forward to the day when I can describe Mr Johnstone and all members of the Scottish Parliament as pro-independence. Many members—SNP members at least—have correctly said that they consider that the Scotland Bill is a missed opportunity. I concur with that position, and I will return to that point later. It is useful to recall how we got to the position of having a Scotland Bill. Iain Gray is quite right—the Scotland Bill came about through the Calman commission. He referred to Wendy Alexander’s announcement about the process in October 2007—he is right, I was not there, but he was. What he failed to mention, of course, was that the only reason that Wendy Alexander made that announcement was in response to the election of an SNP minority Administration in 2007. That is proof—

I will let Mr Gray in in a minute. That is proof—if any more proof was needed—that the SNP is the driver of constitutional change.

Well, Mr Gray can say that—perhaps he thinks that it is just a coincidence that an SNP minority Administration had been elected. Maybe that is the best position that he can come to. The Scotland Bill has largely been overtaken by events. I referred to the election of an SNP minority Administration, but last year we had the election of an SNP majority Administration, and in 2014 we will have a referendum that will allow our country to move forward to independence. Indeed, many of the provisions in the Scotland Bill will not even come into effect until after that referendum, by which time they will definitely have been truly overtaken by events. James Kelly suggested that the bill represents a substantial transfer of powers to this Parliament. That is a matter of opinion, but I cannot help but note that Mr Kelly said that the bill should have gone further: even he believes that there should be a more substantial transfer of powers. The cabinet secretary said early on that the bill, as it was initially proposed, was damaging. There has been some movement in that regard, which I welcome, particularly in relation to the agreement that the Scottish Government will be involved in agreeing any changes to the Scottish block grant with the Westminster Government. Any such changes will be brought to this Parliament, which is as it should be. There have been a number of changes that should be welcomed; they have been set out by members and would not benefit from repetition.

That was an utterly pointless intervention, Mr Kelly—thank you for wasting our time. I have already stated, as other members have done, that overall the bill is an opportunity missed. Stuart McMillan mentioned the Crown estate, so I will not go into much detail on that, but it could usefully have been more fully devolved. There should have been higher limits for revenue and capital borrowing and earlier capital borrowing on a prudential basis without the need for Treasury consent, and—reflecting Labour’s position—borrowing powers should have been more substantial. I would have thought that James Kelly would have agreed with that. It is a little odd that speed limits and drink-driving restrictions have been somewhat but not entirely devolved; Dave Thompson eloquently set out why those areas should be fully devolved. The area of benefits is another opportunity missed. The Calman commission recommended that the Scottish Parliament should have a role in welfare provision. Recommendation 45 of the Scotland Bill Committee—I congratulate the committee, particularly the convener, Linda Fabiani, on its work—states: “We recommend that the Bill be amended to provide full fiscal autonomy for the Scottish Parliament and enable the devolution of welfare and benefits.” The Scottish Federation of Housing Associations also stated its view that the matter should be devolved. There is a substantial body of opinion that those areas should be devolved. The cabinet secretary correctly stated that the current UK Welfare Reform Bill demonstrates absolutely the necessity of the devolution of those powers. As a member of the Parliament’s Welfare Reform Committee I readily agree, because we are seeing the evidence on the damaging effects of the UK welfare reform agenda. In its submission to the Welfare Reform Committee, Citizens Advice Scotland estimated that the change from disability living allowance to personal independence payments would mean that “75,000 people of the 225,000 to be assessed and migrated from DLA to PIP will no longer be entitled to their previous benefit” and that it would disenfranchise “one in three working age DLA clients in Scotland from their current DLA entitlement.” In yesterday’s evidence to the Welfare Reform Committee, the Child Poverty Action Group said that the UK Government’s welfare reform agenda would leave 100,000 more children in poverty by the end of this decade. The Scottish Federation of Housing Associations has set out clearly the damage that will be done to its sector by that agenda, and a substantial body of evidence on that area was presented to the Scotland Bill Committee. I believe that we could constitute a welfare system in Scotland that better interacts with the policy direction that the Parliament chooses if we had the relevant powers. I think that we should have those powers. The Scotland Bill was an opportunity to provide them, but the opportunity was missed. Willie Rennie suggested that the SNP is not interested in serious constitutional change but, despite saying that the bill was a step forward, he singularly failed to say what, in his view, the next steps should be. Mr Rennie would do well to recognise that serious constitutional change will be on offer in 2014. That is not an opportunity that will be missed.

The member is clearly unaware of the Sovereign Grant Act 2011, which fundamentally altered the nature of the Crown estate. Mr Brodie was entirely correct and I am afraid to say that Mr Fergusson is entirely wrong.

I, too, thank David Stewart for securing the debate. I must confess that, at the beginning of the debate, I could not recall whether I had signed his motion. Thankfully, Mr Thompson, who is sitting behind me, was able to enlighten me—I did not sign the motion, but I signed an amendment in the name of Rob Gibson, which did not change the sentiment of Mr Stewart’s motion. I am glad that he has brought it forward for debate. The devolution of the Crown estate is clearly an important matter for Scotland. The Crown Estate is a significant land and property owner in Scotland. It holds 103,000 acres of land, approximately 50 per cent of the foreshore and beds of tidal rivers, and the sea bed out to 12 nautical miles, which have a combined property value of more than £200 million. The Crown Estate is a contributor to the UK Treasury. Even in its current guise, it is clearly a useful source of revenue, and I imagine that that will be the case to an even greater extent as we seek to bring forward a new generation of renewables technologies, which will provide a greater opportunity to accrue benefits. It is not often that I congratulate Westminster’s Scottish Affairs Committee, but the recommendation that communities with Crown Estate properties should benefit from them is a useful and interesting suggestion. Like Chic Brodie, I agree that communities should benefit from the opportunities that their land affords them. Indeed, Shetland’s oil fund is a useful example of that. It is a shame that other local funds have not been established. This is an important point—I say to Jamie McGrigor that it illustrates why we want devolution in this area. The fact is that, all too often, the communities with Crown Estate property do not feel that they see the benefit of having it. The Scottish Affairs Committee’s suggestion is, therefore, a useful contribution to the debate about the future of the Crown estate in Scotland. In order to devolve power over the Crown estate to communities, power over the Crown estate must first be devolved to the Scottish Parliament. I say that in spite of Tavish Scott’s point, even though I take it on board and believe that it was genuinely made. The Scottish Affairs Committee recognises that that is the position of the Scottish Government, the SNP, the Calman commission and two Scotland Bill Committees. Indeed, as Tavish Scott said, it is the position of the Liberal Democrats. I do not want to make this an overly political issue, but I think that it was disappointing, given that that is the case, that a Liberal Democrat Secretary of State for Scotland explicitly ruled out the devolution of the Crown estate. However, I hope that Tavish Scott will be on the phone to Mr Moore soon. I want to talk about the Sovereign Grant Act 2011, which is an issue that I did not think would come up and which has not had enough attention. Given Mr Fergusson’s speech, it is clearly not an issue that he has paid enough attention to. The act was passed by Westminster on 18 October 2011.

I will let Mr Fergusson in, as his position seemed to be that that act was a figment of people’s imaginations. It is interesting that both Mr Brodie and I have imagined it separately. Mr Fergusson’s perspective would therefore be appreciated.

I beg to differ. That is very much a case of splitting hairs—I say to Tavish Scott that no pun is intended. The Treasury acts very much as the middle man. I am concerned that the act changes the nature of the Crown Estate. Roger Bright, the chair of the Crown Estate Commissioners, stated that the monarch holds Crown Estate properties “in trust for the nation.” The 2011 act’s ending of the system of the civil list and its replacement with a sovereign grant not only alters the system, but alters the principle that Roger Bright set out. Clearly, that is not necessarily a matter that is contained in Mr Stewart’s motion, but it is something that the Scottish Parliament has to grasp as it considers the devolution of the Crown estate.

I, too, thank Patrick Harvie for bringing the issue of local energy companies to the chamber for an important debate. We should remind ourselves of the Government’s ambition to increase dramatically the amount of energy that is sourced from renewables by 2020. It is clear that local energy companies have their merits in contributing towards meeting that aim. The Government says that it wishes to maximise the benefits for communities from renewable energy. In that regard, it is interesting that Patrick Harvie suggested that the debate might be confrontational. It has not been particularly confrontational, and it does not need to be, as there is a lot of common ground on the issue. Indeed, that was highlighted in his questioning of the minister after a statement on the renewable energy investment fund. Mr Harvie invited the minister to ensure that a wide range of bodies would be considered to be eligible to benefit from that fund, and the minister readily did that. There is a lot of common ground in our starting positions on the contribution of local energy companies to the renewables agenda. That has been demonstrated by the Government’s actions in the past and during the debate. The Government’s willingness to agree to the Labour amendment will ensure that the Parliament is kept abreast of work to foster local energy companies. I look forward to hearing more about the matter. The motion says that there is a perception that the renewables agenda benefits only big business. I probably agree; that is an unfortunate perception. Many large companies are investing considerably in renewables infrastructure and Patrick Harvie was right to say that much of that work is good, although there are perhaps some issues in that regard. However, it would be wrong of anyone to believe that the renewables agenda is benefiting only big business. The Government’s ambition to fund and support the development of 500MW of community and locally owned renewables by 2020 will benefit communities. I was interested to hear about the community and renewable energy scheme, which is making a positive contribution by providing loans for the development of infrastructure. Of the 42 projects for which funding was announced in October 2011, 29 are community owned. I instinctively have much sympathy with Patrick Harvie’s position on publicly owned companies, but we should reflect on two issues. First, it needs to be demonstrated that local authorities want to enter the market. A criticism that is often made of this Parliament, rightly or wrongly, is that we encumber local authorities with a burden of responsibilities that they do not want. Secondly, I take on board the minister’s comments about the limitations—fiscal, rather than legal. We can perhaps return to the issue in the future. I support the Government amendment.

Will the member give way?

Is Mr Rennie proud of the fact that the Institute for Fiscal Studies estimates that, in Scotland, those in the bottom 20 per cent of income distribution will lose the most as a proportion of their income on average as a result of the budget?

Gavin Brown is upset that SNP members seem reluctant to welcome any measure in the UK budget, but some of those measures have been welcomed. I will reiterate what could be described as the positive aspects of the budget. There was an acceptance of the Scottish Government’s case for enhanced capital allowances for enterprise areas in Nigg, Dundee and Irvine. The increase in the threshold for personal income tax allowance, which one might have thought went along with the UK Government’s stated objective to reward those on low and middle incomes and to reward work, could have been a positive aspect. However, it was undermined by the removal of tax credits for many of those families. That strikes me as giving with one hand and taking away with the other. There were many negatives in the budget, and I will list a few of them. There has been no action in response to the Scottish Government’s request for help in supporting the shovel-ready projects of which it has provided a list to the UK Government. The change to the regional pay policy is squeezing the incomes of those who can least afford it and is creating a false dichotomy between the private and public sectors. There has also been a freeze in state pension age-related allowances from April 2013 and a change to the 50p tax rate, which I will come to a little later. It was a mixed budget, but it had more negatives than positives in it. Let us look at some of the impacts of the UK Government’s budget agenda. As I said to Willie Rennie, the IFS estimates that those in the bottom 20 per cent of the income distribution in Scotland will, on average, lose the most as a proportion of their income. Willie Rennie suggested that that ignores the benefits of the change to taxation for one-income families, but I suggest that he is ignoring the evidence of the IFS to the contrary. It is also estimated that families with children will lose £530 a year, on average, as a result of the tax and benefits reforms that will be introduced in 2012-13. Those are the practical effects on people up and down Scotland in the communities that we represent, and Mr Rennie would do well to reflect on that. All of that stands in stark contrast to the Scottish Government’s agenda of doing what it can to support hard-pressed families at this time through the council tax freeze, the freeze on household water charges and its prescription charges policy. I turn to the change in the 50p tax rate. It is interesting that the change was predicated on the basis that the tax was not bringing in as much money as had been forecast when it was still an income generator that was bringing in revenue for the public purse. On that basis, we cannot justify getting rid of the 50p rate.

I will let Mr Rennie in after I have made my point. The 50p tax rate sent the important signal that people who can afford to pay more towards the public finances do so. It was interesting that Mr Rennie suggested that people who express concern about the budget are in cloud-cuckoo-land. Danny Alexander himself said that the idea of cutting the 50p rate was “in cloud-cuckoo-land”. We know who is living in cloud-cuckoo-land.

That remains to be seen. Mr Rennie does not recognise the impact on the poorest in society, as is forecast by the IFS. As Ken Macintosh said, there is much common ground between the SNP and the Labour Party on the UK Government’s budget. I was disappointed that when Labour members had a chance to vote against the change to the 50p tax rate, they were posted absent, as John Swinney noted. We can ask where they were. Willie Bain MP said on Twitter: “There is a long-standing PLP convention that we do not support SNP motions”. That is unfortunate in two regards. First, the vote was on not an SNP motion but a procedural motion of the UK Government. Secondly, even if there had been an SNP motion, so what? Surely doing what is right for the people whom we represent is better than base partisanship. The Labour Party needs to do more to explain its position. I hope that there is no Labour convention against voting for SNP motions in the Scottish Parliament and I hope that Labour will back the Government’s motion in this debate.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

To clarify for Mr Brown, I do not accept that the rate raised a small amount—it raised revenue. However, I was intrigued to hear him say that the changes will cost £100 million, whereas Mr Rennie tells us that they will raise revenue. Both cannot be right, so which is it?

Will Kezia Dugdale give way? Mark McDonald rose—

It is good to get an ovation from Labour members before I have even started. I hope that this is an important issue for all of us, whether or not we are parents, as I happen to be. Mark McDonald’s comments about the language that we employ when we discuss the issue of children in a political debate were well made. We should not question the genuine interest in the issue of anyone participating in the debate. I use the phrase “participating in the debate” advisedly because, like Mark McDonald, I could not help but be struck by the absence of the Liberal Democrats, who were perfectly entitled to bring forward a debate on this issue last week. When I hosted a members’ business debate on a similar issue in December, not a single Liberal Democrat took part. Without questioning the Liberal Democrats’ genuine interest in the issue, I note that a clear pattern of absence is emerging. I will place the debate in the context of what the Scottish Government has done on childcare provision. Progress has been made over the past four years, so let us not pretend that it has not. There has been an increase in the amount of free nursery provision of the order of 20 per cent, which has benefited some 100,000 children. The Scottish Government is focusing on preventative spend in the early years to help children and is working on a non-partisan, cross-party basis with the early years task force, as the minister outlined, and with the early years change fund to strengthen support for children and their families. Of course, there is another context at this time. We can see what the Scottish Government is doing to help families, but we hear a lot about what is emanating from Westminster and about the positive work that is being done south of the border. Let us remind ourselves of what is emerging from Westminster through the welfare reform agenda: 84,900 households in Scotland will no longer be eligible for tax credits from April, which means that 118,700 children in Scotland will be affected, potentially pushing thousands more into living in poverty. Research by Save the Children found that 150,000 of the UK’s poorest working mums could lose up to £68 a week under the UK Government’s new universal tax credit system. I question how that is likely to assist in the affordability of childcare. Last week, we debated “The Scottish Childcare Lottery”, which was published on 27 February. The First Minister announced the additional support for childcare—which Save the Children welcomed—just a few days later on 10 March, and the minister has said that she is committed to making progress on the issue. It is clear that action has been taken and that the Government is moving quickly to improve the situation. On the issue of primary legislation, there is a great deal of focus on the commitment to increase the hours of provision. I understand why that is important, but we are perhaps forgetting the other side of the equation, which is the flexibility of childcare provision. That issue was raised by Save the Children, and it featured in the members’ business debate that I brought to the chamber last year. It will take a little longer to get more flexible childcare provision, which is why we need primary legislation. Members might call me cynical, but I wonder whether, if the commitment was not being put into primary legislation, Johann Lamont would stand up today and say that it was an outrage that it was not and that members were not getting a chance to have their say on the legislation. Claire Baker rightly raised a number of genuine issues to do with childcare provision, which demonstrate why we must take just a little bit longer to get the legislation right.

Will the member give way?

I thank Hugh Henry for giving way. He said clearly that the debate is predicated on the First Minister’s remarks at my party’s conference. Does that mean that if the First Minister had not made those remarks Labour would not have brought the subject forward for debate? Does that mean that Labour does not care about the issue?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. May I ask you to reflect on the Official Report? I did not at any stage refer to Mr Henry as “Henry”.

I welcome this debate and hope in my remarks to draw on my experience as a former member of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee and as deputy convener of the Welfare Reform Committee. There is much concern about welfare reform—indeed, members have already highlighted some of that—and stakeholders have expressed to both of the committees that I have mentioned concerns about, for example, the effect on the disabled; the effect on those in poverty, particularly children; and what will certainly be a negative impact on housing policy in Scotland. I cannot recall who gave this evidence—members will have to forgive me—but the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee was told that there was no sense that housing policy, devolved or otherwise, was a consideration for the UK Government in its welfare reform agenda. That quite damning comment suggests the reason why it would be better for housing policy to be in the Scottish Parliament’s hands—and, in saying so, I very gently point out to Elaine Murray that I am not seeking to use the debate as an SNP Trojan horse with regard to the constitution; I am simply reflecting what the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations itself has said. Citizens Advice Scotland estimates that, as a result of changes to housing benefit, around 60,000 tenants in Scotland will lose an average of £40 a month and that 97 per cent of those who claim local housing allowance will be affected. That will have a major impact on some people’s ability to meet their rent costs. As for specific changes that are being made to housing benefit as part of the welfare reform agenda , I have to say that, in its underoccupancy changes, the UK Government is using the term “underoccupancy” in a way that I do not recognise—or, at least, that I do not recognise as being fair. How can an individual who has lived in a house for a long time—and, indeed, who might well have raised a family there—be said to be underoccupying their home? Such a view treats a person’s house as an asset rather than as a home. That not only represents a cultural shift but is bad policy in two ways. When he gave evidence to the Welfare Reform Committee, David Ogilvie of the SFHA made it quite clear that there are not enough one-bedroom properties in Scotland to meet demand if this agenda is forced through. The other way in which it is bad policy is one that I had not considered until I met the chief executive of the local housing association in Cumbernauld and visited some new flats that have been built with help from the Scottish Government. He told me that the rent for those two-bedroom flats was £65 a week, but if someone is suddenly found to be underoccupying a flat, they will have to find a one-bedroom property elsewhere in the private sector that is likely to cost more. It is a ludicrous proposition that will have a net cost to the taxpayer. Although I realise that time will get the better of me, I want to mention a number of other issues. Kevin Stewart set out the direct payments issue quite clearly in his intervention, and his comments do not need to be repeated. Concern about the impact on this Parliament’s world-leading homelessness legislation reflects the fact that the welfare reform agenda does not take cognisance of our housing policy or, indeed, the effect on social housing providers in bringing forward houses in future. Such negative changes suggest that we are absolutely right to be concerned about the changes to housing benefit, and I say to Mr Johnstone that the approach does not strike me as the Tories standing up for working people.

I look forward to assessing the changes in the Welfare Reform Committee and commend the Government motion to the chamber.

In welcoming today’s debate, I declare an interest, in that I am a father of a pre-school-age daughter. I thank the Liberal Democrats for bringing the debate to the chamber. I can tell them that ensuring more affordable childcare is an issue of cross-party concern. I secured a members’ business debate on the subject last year, to which Neil Bibby referred earlier. It would be churlish of me to begin my speech by pointing out that no Liberal Democrat members took the time to take part in that debate. People might conclude from that that their interest is not as sincere as they claim. However, in the interests of consensus, I will not make that point. Mark McDonald made a point that I want to reiterate. The record of the SNP Administration is a good one. We heard the announcement at the weekend about the increase in nursery provision for three and four-year-olds and looked-after two-year-olds. That builds on the increases that there have been in free nursery provision over the past few years. We have an Administration that is determined to focus on the very early years. Through the early years change fund, which is overseen by the early years task force, the Scottish Government will contribute £50 million to a total fund of £270 million over the next four years, which will strengthen support for children and their families. The record of the SNP in government is a good one.

That is not the case. There has been an increase in nursery provision over the past four years of this SNP Government. Free nursery provision has risen by 20 per cent, benefiting 100,000 children. Perhaps Mr McArthur would like to get his facts correct. I welcome the publication of “The Scottish Childcare Lottery”, to which the motion refers. It is always useful to have that type of inquiry casting more light on to the circumstances around childcare. I know that some concern has been expressed about the higher cost of childcare in Scotland, and I accept that there is legitimate concern. I know the difficulties that many families face when trying to bear the burden of childcare—I can speak to that from my own experience, and I can only imagine the difficulty that some other families have. However, saying that childcare costs are higher in Scotland than they are elsewhere in the UK is not telling the whole story. I am sure that Liam McArthur has read “The Scottish Childcare Lottery” carefully and has noticed that table 1 says that nursery costs are lower in Scotland than they are in England. Table 2 shows that, in the past year, the average cost of nursery provision for under-twos in England went up by 6.7 per cent while, in Scotland, it went up by only 1.9 per cent and that the average cost for nursery care for over-twos went down in Scotland while it rose 5.1 per cent in England. It is important to put that on the record, as that tells more of the story about childcare costs.

Do I have time to give way, Presiding Officer?

I would have gladly done so otherwise. It is a bit rich of the Liberal Democrats to bring this debate to the chamber. I am glad that they have done so, as it enables us to put some facts on the record. However, in my constituency, Cumbernauld and Kilsyth, which is in North Lanarkshire, HM Revenue and Customs has sent out notices informing 6,000 families that they are losing child tax credits. How will that make childcare more affordable?

4. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government will provide further information on its plans to improve childcare for pre-school children. (S4F-00539)

I thank the First Minister for his response and—not least as the father of a pre-school-age child—I welcome the Government’s commitment to extending free nursery provision. Does the First Minister share not only Save the Children’s concern that the introduction of universal credit will make childcare costs more difficult for many families, but the concern of many organisations that the UK Government has reduced the cap for the childcare element of working tax credit from 80 per cent to 70 per cent, which is adding an average £546 to childcare costs for thousands of Scottish households? Is not it time that this Parliament had control over tax and benefits so that Scottish families are not left to the vagaries of the Tories and their Liberal friends?

13. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions the Minister for Local Government and Planning has had with local government about the issue of youth employment. (S4O-00811)

I am sure that all members welcome the Government’s focus on youth employment. Clearly, the strategy will have to work on the ground on an area-by-area basis. If I can be parochial, I would like to ask how the strategy will affect North Lanarkshire, which has its own unemployment issues.

I welcome the debate. Where we lead, I hope that other legislatures throughout the world will follow by having such debates. It is clear that those of us in the developed world have a role to play in that regard. There is great consensus among members on all sides of the chamber this morning. That is as it should be, because the climate change agenda is shared by all. Patrick Harvie made that point with regard to the way in which the Parliament passed the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. I welcome the announcement of the climate justice fund, and I look forward to the details emerging in the coming months. A good starting point for any contribution to the debate might be to ask what is meant by climate justice. We can probably come to an answer by focusing on the flip side, and looking at the effects of what could be termed climate injustice. A number of briefings were sent to members in advance of the debate. SCIAF sent us a particularly good briefing that set out some of the facts and figures on the impact of climate change. It stated: “The food security of an estimated 2.5 billion people dependent on agriculture in the developing world is threatened by changing climate systems” and “150,000 deaths per year are already attributed to climate change globally.” It also stated: “Between 75 and 250 million people in Africa alone are projected to be exposed to increased water stress due to climate change over the next decade” and “Many millions will be displaced by the end of the century.” Oxfam made many of the same points, and stated: “The UN estimates that climate change could increase the number of people facing water scarcity by 1.8 billion and increase those facing coastal flooding by many millions.” Those are some of the statistics on the effects of climate change and what could be termed climate injustice. We should remember that behind those words are real people living real lives. Many people are already living a fragile existence, which is being made more fragile still by the effects of climate change. In that regard, it is absolutely right that we seek to make this year a year of climate justice, as the First Minister has suggested ahead of the UN conference on sustainable development. I will focus on the efforts that the Scottish Government has made so far on the climate change agenda elsewhere in the world. It is engaged in Malawi and the Maldives in particular, where it is encouraging knowledge sharing and the creation of partnerships between academic institutions in those countries and in Scotland. Scotland has been assisting the efforts of the Maldives in its ambition to become the first carbon-neutral state. In August 2010, a report was published on developing the Maldives’ potential for marine energy, with which Robert Gordon University assisted. The Scottish Government has awarded approximately £1.7 million to Malawi as part of the climate justice agenda, to help its renewable energy acceleration programme. It is important, as the motion states, that the issue of climate justice is rooted firmly in the human rights agenda. I see Professor Alan Miller, the chair of the Scottish Human Rights Commission, in the public gallery. He has said: “climate justice places human rights at the centre of economic decision making and seeks to redress the unfairness of people in developing countries feeling the impact of climate change which they did not cause.” It is important to look in more detail at how human rights interact with the climate justice agenda—a connection that is perhaps not that obvious to some. The Scottish Human Rights Commission sent us a briefing in which it points out that “Human rights standards and principles ... have the potential of informing and strengthening policymaking in the area of climate change” and that states have a responsibility to work to that end. Amnesty International sent us a very good briefing—I have to say that because it was prepared by my wife and she was would be very upset if I did not. I should declare that my wife works for Amnesty and that I am a member of that organisation. Amnesty’s briefing talks about the involvement of some UK-based companies in human rights violations throughout the world. Paul Wheelhouse has already talked about that, so I will not repeat the point. I welcome the debate and the work that has been done so far. However, we should not rest on our laurels and must consider what else can be done. In that regard, I return to the SHRC’s briefing, which says that we have to engage internationally to secure climate justice. The SHRC has also suggested that we have an international conference in Scotland later this year or next year to demonstrate our adoption of the climate justice agenda. I would be interested to hear what the minister has to say about that. I close by echoing Patrick Harvie’s point. We need to consider a financial transaction tax—the so-called Robin Hood tax. That could help domestic finances just as much as it could contribute to the climate justice agenda. As the Oxfam briefing concludes: “If introduced it could well be the most (if not only) popular Tax ever”.

I welcome the debate. The economic situation in Scotland is of on-going concern, and it is right that we debate it regularly. Its importance can be reflected in the fact that just before the recess we had a debate on the youth unemployment strategy and, as Ken Macintosh said, just yesterday we had a debate on the green investment bank. It is right to have a debate about the economic picture more generally today. Much is said about the situation in Scotland, so let us put it in a little context. Compared to its pre-recession level, Scottish output was down 3.3 per cent in the past quarter. That is not good, but the UK was down 3.6 per cent in the same period. In January 2012, the claimant count in Scotland decreased for the fifth consecutive month, whereas the UK claimant count has been increasing for 11 months in a row. The employment rate for 16 to 24-year-olds in Scotland is 2.7 per cent higher than the UK figure. The retail sales index indicates that the volume of retail sales in Scotland increased by 0.7 per cent in 2011, while growth in Great Britain was 0.3 per cent. That is not to suggest that there are no issues with the Scottish economy, but it should place in context the doom and gloom that we hear about. When we make such comparisons we are often asked why we are making them only against the UK. I do not accept that that is all that the Government does—I will come to the international position later, if time allows. We are part of the UK now, though. Some members—a minority, I am glad to say—want us to remain part of the UK. If that is the situation that they want us to remain in, it is only fair that we compare with UK performance. In many respects, we compare very favourably. I agree with the Scottish Government motion. There is broad concern, which I think is shared by some other members, about the UK Government’s deficit reduction strategy. The issue has been raised many times in the Parliament. Many leading economists, particularly Krugman and Stiglitz, have raised concerns about the deficit reduction approach. In Scotland, we have seen that the UK Government is cutting public spending too far and too fast. It is good that the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment is here, because I am sure that he will remind us later that that is particularly true of the capital budget. Capital investment is one of the best ways in which to support economic recovery. We saw how beneficial it was when the Scottish Government was able to accelerate capital investment but, now that that has ended, we see some of the difficulties, although there is still an on-going programme of capital investment that is the best that the Scottish Government can take forward. The UK Government approach is not working. We should have a programme of investment for recovery, but we do not. Instead, the current approach threatens the recovery. For example, in recent weeks, we have had a threat to downgrade the UK’s credit rating, which testifies to the threat to recovery. The UK Government approach is hindering recovery in Scotland.

I will in a second, if Mr Brown lets me carry on for a moment. In recent weeks, the National Australia Bank Group has talked about wanting to disinvest in the Clydesdale Bank, citing the UK Government’s economic strategy as one reason for that. That hardly testifies to the UK as the “safe haven” to which Mr Brown’s amendment refers. On that point, I should give way to Mr Brown.

The point is that we are already borrowing more money—or rather we are not, but the UK Government is borrowing more, because it recognises that its approach is not working. In the autumn statement, we heard that borrowing was higher than previously forecast. If that borrowing had been undertaken a little earlier to support recovery, rather than as a last desperate move, we might not have had that threat. Recently, we have heard a lot of nonsense spoken about what an independent Scottish state’s ratings might be and about companies wanting to disinvest in Scotland. Let us hear no more of that nonsense, when it is being part of the union and the UK Government’s actions that are threatening the Scottish credit rating and investment in Scotland, as is shown by the case of the Clydesdale Bank. I would have liked to have spoken for a little longer about why independence is important, but I see from the Presiding Officer’s expression that there is absolutely no chance of that, so I will make the point quickly. It is interesting that the Labour Party has a five-point programme, but only one of those points relates to a devolved area, with the other four relating to reserved issues. That is why independence matters. I hope that, in future, Mr Macintosh will be able to take forward that five-point programme in the Scottish Parliament.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Can the cabinet secretary tell us whether the functions of the British Transport Police might become the prerogative of the single Scottish police service?

I welcome the debate. Youth employment is clearly an important issue for all of us, so it is right that we are having the debate. I also welcome the Minister for Youth Employment’s speech. It is extremely positive that we have a minister with such a role in the Government. It is the first such position in these islands, and the fact that its creation was supported throughout the chamber means that I am not making a party-political point—it would be very unlike me to make a party-political point—when I say that it represents a clear statement of intent by the Scottish Government. I will turn to some of the Scottish Government’s initiatives in a minute, but a number of references have been made to local initiatives that are worth picking up on. I was interested to hear about the efforts that are being made in Falkirk. I do not know as much about them as Siobhan McMahon does, but it sounds as if what is happening there is a good example that can be learned from. It is clear from what the minister said about the Scottish Government’s approach that it is willing to listen and to learn from good experience across the country. On this issue more than any other, given its importance, that is as it should be. I was also interested to hear John Pentland refer to the £1.7 million funding that North Lanarkshire Council is bringing forward, which I first learned about from the front page of this week’s Cumbernauld News. Not much detail was provided on how the funding will be used, so I look forward to hearing about that. One way in which it could be used to the benefit of young unemployed people would be to increase funding for the Cumbernauld and Kilsyth Unemployed Workers Centre, which is one of the few remaining unemployed workers centres that we have. Its funding is subject to continual squeezing by North Lanarkshire Council. I hope that the centre will benefit from that funding. If I can be particularly parochial for a moment, I will give a good local example of work to combat youth unemployment and to provide young people with the skills that are necessary for the workplace. It is particularly germane to the point that Siobhan McMahon made about young people with autism. Glencryan school in Cumbernauld, where many of the pupils have autism, does a tremendous amount of work in providing senior students with vocational skills that might give them a chance of getting work in the future. I would like to invite the minister to come to Glencryan school, if she gets the opportunity to do so. I am sure that she would be very interested to see the work that is being done there. In the time that remains to me, I will turn to some of the work that the Scottish Government is doing on youth unemployment. As Christina McKelvie said, no one can question how seriously the Government takes the issue. At the end of last month, we saw the publication of the draft youth employment strategy, which focuses on support for young people who are not in work. If I have time, I will deal with that in more detail later. The draft strategy—as the minister did in her speech—has made clear the Government’s position, which goes back to my point about learning from positive examples in our communities and working constructively with any organisation, company, individual or, indeed, political party that shares the commitment to tackling youth unemployment. The third sector, in particular, has a role to play in that regard. I was interested to read the briefing that we got from the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, which welcomed the Minister for Youth Employment’s announcement that continuing support will be provided for community jobs Scotland. According to the SCVO, community jobs Scotland has filled more than 1,300 jobs across all of Scotland’s 32 local authorities in just six months, so it is clear that good work is being done there. The third sector has an important role to play. Of course, we have seen the creation of 25,000 modern apprenticeships, which will clearly go some way towards supporting young people. If I can make a party-political point—I like to make them now and again—it was interesting to hear John Park, who is one of the Labour members whose speeches I always look forward to, say that the initiative was supported throughout the chamber. To that I say that actions speak louder than words. Given that those apprentice positions are delivered only through the Scottish Government’s budget, I have to question why the Labour Party continues to vote against that budget.

The budget is put in place against a context of constrained finances, which began under Mr Park’s party. It is always interesting to hear Labour members fail to mention that, whenever we debate this matter. I believe that Mr Park said that he was asking for 18,000 positions. We got 7,000 more than that. I suggest to Mr Park that, if a Government exceeds his key demands, he might want to vote for that budget. It is for the Labour Party to explain its position. I am sorry, Presiding Officer, but I took a little longer over that party-political point than I meant to. I will come to a close, as I see that I am running over time.

That is very kind of you. I will use that leeway to talk about colleges, which have been an issue for members from around the chamber. I suggest that the situation in relation to colleges is the same as that in relation to modern apprentices, given the key demands for college places and college funding that we have heard about. It was interesting to hear Siobhan McMahon refer to the Scottish Government’s position in terms of college funding. Again, I make the point that members might support a budget that delivers their key demands. Siobhan McMahon and others should reflect on the fact that, between 2007 and 2014-15, the SNP Administration will have invested £4.7 billion in Scotland’s colleges, which is 40 per cent more than under two terms of the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration. I look forward to the rest of the debate. The fact that we now have a Minister for Youth Employment is a clear statement of intent by the Government. I look forward to seeing some of the work that she takes forward in the coming months and years, and I am sure that the position is safe in her hands, just as the issue is safe in the hands of the Government.

The point that I was trying to make was that investment since the Administration came to office to 2014-15 is 40 per cent higher than it was under the previous two Administrations. I ask Mary Scanlon to reflect on the fact that the cuts are emanating from her Government.

I have right here the front page of the Cumbernauld News & Kilsyth Chronicle, which refers to £1.7 million. That is what I was talking about, Mr Macintosh.

It is important to say at the outset that, despite the concern that exists that the Government does not recognise the role of prison visiting committees, that is far from the case. In his speech, the cabinet restated his thanks to the members of prison visiting committees for their work, just as he had done in a letter to the Justice Committee. It is important to put that on the record.

I can only imagine that Mr Chisholm was asleep during the cabinet secretary’s opening remarks, when he said quite clearly that the process that he was talking about was one of open consultation. That process will continue, so it will be possible for such views to be heard. I do not think that the cabinet secretary has had anything but good words to say about the work that visiting committees have done in the past, and he has made the important point that the role should continue.

I think not: we back benchers do not have as much time as those who sit on the front benches. I will continue, if Mr Macdonald does not mind. It is important to recognise the reality of the situation. I understand the point that Annabel Goldie made when she said that things have not changed since the consultation that was undertaken in 2005, but I do not think that it is entirely correct. John Finnie was clear in stating that things have changed in our prisons since 2005. I will say no more than that, because his words speak for themselves. The environment in prisons in the 21st century is dramatically different from the age when visiting committees were first established. In the modern era, we have an independent inspectorate. We have a higher standard of facilities, although there is still work to be done in that regard. In addition, we have human rights legislation that did not exist back in the 19th century. It was interesting that Annabel Goldie referred to political “amnesia” in an intervention on my colleague Stuart McMillan; I remind her that it is her party alone that wants to withdraw from the European convention on human rights and to abolish the Human Rights Act 1998. We should face the fact that, in the modern age, we are in a very different set of circumstances from the circumstances that existed when visiting committees were first established.

I am afraid that I will not, because I have only just over a minute left. It has been suggested that there will be a gaping hole if the proposed changes are made. There has been a failure to recognise—although not across the board, because Margaret Mitchell recognised this—that there is, potentially, a gaping hole at the moment. The cabinet secretary’s remark that very few prisoners are aware of visiting committees or engage with them was well made. We should remember all the prisoners who have serious issues such as mental health and substance addiction issues, to which Margaret Burgess referred. Let us think about the gaping hole that exists in current arrangements for those prisoners. That must be the flipside of the argument. It has been suggested that it is the prison establishment—prison governors—that supports the Government’s position. That is partly true, but it is also the case that Tom Halpin, the chief executive of Sacro, has said that he supports the Government’s position, so it is hardly just an establishment view. It is correct that we examine the current arrangements to see whether they are fit for the 21st century. We should remember that we are talking about an open consultation that will continue.

Like my colleague Bob Doris, I welcome the debate and thank the Labour Party for bringing the subject to the chamber. I suspect that I am like every member in that many of my constituents rely on the provision of reliable, regular bus services, so it is a hugely important issue. In my constituency, there are some good examples of such services. The Abronhill area in Cumbernauld has good, regular bus services—although we are always willing to see further improvements, of course. However, some areas, such as the area of Cumbernauld north of the M80, have a particularly poor bus service. It is often assumed that everyone in Cumbernauld has a car but, judging by my postbag, I think that that is not the case in that part of the town. Many people in that part of the world would like to have a decent, regular bus service but do not. I have consistently raised the matter with the relevant authorities. For all the bluster from certain members, it is interesting that the two pertinent authorities in this case—SPT and North Lanarkshire Council—are dominated by the Labour Party and have refused point blank to intervene.

It is wonderful to see Ms Baillie arriving in the chamber and welcoming my contribution so readily.

It is an interesting posture—

Of course.

I hesitate to point out that Ms Baillie delivered that as well from a sedentary position as she did when she intervened. Welcome to the debate, Ms Baillie. The posturing from Labour members is interesting because, when they have the opportunity to intervene on the ground, they do not do so. It was also interesting to hear Elaine Murray speak about funding levels for the bus service operators grant. Bob Doris made an excellent point. We hear Labour bemoaning the fact that public money is being funnelled into large bus companies—I understand that point—while in the same breath bemoaning the cut to the BSOG. That position is inconsistent. As ever, the issue of public transport is raised with no context whatever. Every time we hear a party—usually Labour—bemoaning cuts to individual budgets, no context is given.

I am always willing to listen to discussion, but allow me to make my point. The context is that the Scottish Government’s budget has been hammered by the Westminster Administration. That process began under Labour, and we hear that the current cuts are supported by Ed Miliband. If Elaine Murray gives us a little context whenever the issue is raised, we may be more willing to listen to her ideas. In response to the minister’s intervention, Elaine Murray said that it is only the Government that can lodge amendments to the budget at stage 2. Procedurally, she is correct, but, earlier in the budget process, at the committee stage, when the various subject committees report to the Finance Committee, the Labour Party could quite easily have suggested the reinstatement of the bus service operators grant. I am on the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee and—I am glad to be corrected—I do not recall a Labour member doing that. It is a bit disingenuous to raise it now.

Is it not a bit rich for Labour to bemoan the deregulated framework when, in government, it did nothing about it? Will Richard Baker also reflect on the fact that the traffic commissioner for Scotland, the bus service operators grant and the concessionary travel scheme are all forms of regulation?

In his discussions with NUS Scotland, has the cabinet secretary had the chance to discuss the comparative merits of the Scottish Government’s approach to tuition fees, as opposed to that of the Westminster Government, and perhaps discuss what the application figures in Scotland are, as opposed to applications to universities in England, for the next academic year?

I thank Malcolm Chisholm for giving way; he is one of the Labour members whom I respect more on this subject and many other subjects. However, I am a little disappointed to hear him backing away from the idea of a multi-option referendum. Let us be clear: the claim of right asserts “the sovereign right of the Scottish people to determine the form of government best suited to their needs”. Why would Malcolm Chisholm seek to narrow that option? Surely it would allow “the Scottish people to determine the form of Government that is best suited to their needs”.

Mr Findlay would do well to remember that he is not in the classroom now, so he does not need to give us definitions of words from the dictionary. I am interested in his definition of the Labour Party’s previous position on the claim of right. If it had such faith in the people of Scotland to assert their claim of right, why did it rule out a constitutional option—independence—at the time?

I remind Neil Findlay, in relation to the legacy of Margaret Thatcher, that it was Gordon Brown, not Alex Salmond, who had Mrs T round for tea. He would do well to remember that. The text of today’s motion should be agreed across the entire chamber, so I will address my comments to David McLetchie in the hope that I can persuade him of the merits of supporting the motion. It might be best if he recognises that we are not actually debating the Claim of Right Act 1689; we are talking about the here and now and about Scotland’s future. It is well seen that Mr McLetchie is a lawyer rather than a historian. His suggestion that the Westminster Parliament was established by the act of union of 1707 is a fallacy. As a lawyer, Mr McLetchie should accept that it was recognised in MacCormick v the Lord Advocate in 1953 that, in fact, Westminster was the English Parliament continuing. However, history lessons aside, who apart from David McLetchie can disagree with the assertion that we acknowledge “the sovereign right of the Scottish people to determine the form of Government best suited to their needs”? With the greatest of respect to Mr Findlay, I say that that is why today’s debate is relevant to the circumstances of this time. We need the form of government that is best suited to the Scottish people’s needs if we are to deal with the challenges that he set out. In its essence, the claim of right is a statement of our faith in the values and principles of self-determination. When we have an Advocate General who acts more like a governor general, it is important that we assert those values clearly. Let me deal with some of the myths around the claim of right and the suggestion that the SNP does not back its principles. Actually, the SNP was involved at the beginning of the process. The Scottish Constitutional Convention was proposed in a private member’s bill way back in March 1980 by the then SNP leader, Gordon Wilson, in the House of Commons. Unfortunately, the proposal was overwhelming rejected. Only one Labour MP voted for it: George Foulkes. I have to express my surprise at that—I never thought that I would be praising Lord Foulkes in this chamber. The constitutional steering committee that was set up by the campaign for a Scottish assembly to produce the blueprint for the claim of right contained three SNP members: Isobel Lindsay, Professor Neil MacCormick and Paul Henderson Scott. On the signing of the claim of right, I return to a point that I tried to make in an intervention. Despite asserting the sovereign right of the Scottish people to determine the form of government best suited to their needs, those controlling the convention at the time denied the sovereign right of the people to choose independence as an option—they limited their choices at the time. There were strings attached and there was a denigration of the assertion of “the sovereign right of the Scottish people to determine the form of Government best suited to their needs”. Some members would do well to remember and reflect on that. As Linda Fabiani correctly pointed out, it is only when the SNP does well that the Labour Party is suddenly interested in constitutional change. The Kilbrandon commission came about only after the Hamilton by-election of 1967. The 1979 devolution referendum came only after the great 1974 result for the SNP, and even that referendum was stymied by Labour and Tory connivance. Labour joined the Constitutional Convention only after the Govan by-election in 1988. A much more contemporary example is that Labour went into the 2007 election committed to no more powers for the Scottish Parliament but then established the Calman commission—surprise, surprise—after an SNP victory.

Labour joined the Constitutional Convention only after the Govan by-election in 1988—proof that the SNP is and always will be the oil in the engine of constitutional change. Let me deal with the tiresome talk of separatism. When we debated Scotland’s future just a couple of weeks ago, I said that I hoped that we would see an end to such ridiculous terminology. I believe that it is Scotland’s lack of independence that keeps us separate and keeps us from interacting with the rest of the world. Patricia Ferguson used the terminology a few times—I think that we know why—and she would do well to reflect on the fact that SNP members are no more separatists for wanting Scotland to be an independent state than the anti-independence parties are separatists for backing the UK as an independent state. They should reflect on that fact, and let us have no more talk of separatism. Some members have, understandably, cited the declaration of Arbroath as a forerunner of the claim of right and as helping to inspire it. I close by referring to another statement of some years ago. It is not of the vintage of the declaration of Arbroath, but it is an important statement of self-determination. I refer to the words of Charles Stewart Parnell: “No man has a right to fix the boundary of ... a nation; no man has a right to say to his country—thus far shalt thou go and no further.” That is as clear a synopsis of Scotland’s claim of right as we will ever hear. No person either in or furth of Scotland has a right to say that Scotland’s journey ended with the devolution referendum of 1997 or the flawed Scotland Bill. No one has the right to say to Scotland, “Thus far shalt thou go and no further.” The Government is asserting Scotland’s claim of right, and it is a journey that I hope and believe will result in our independence.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Give way.

Give way.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. You have already recommended to one member that they stick to relevant issues in this debate. Will you be doing likewise to the member speaking at present?

Will the member give way?

I did not think that the member would give way.

I declare at the outset that, unlike many other members who have taken part in the debate, I am not, have never been and am never likely to be a member of any particular local authority, despite George Adam’s best efforts from a sedentary position to recruit me . The debate is important, as no one should underestimate the importance of local government and local democracy. Local government is, in many ways, the level of government that has the most direct impact on the individual. Before I get to the guts of the debate, I note that I was taken by something that was mentioned by a few members on the Labour side of the chamber. Sarah Boyack talked about local government being in a financial straitjacket, and James Kelly and Anne McTaggart repeated that mantra, as did John Pentland—who will perhaps be bold enough to take an intervention from me or from any other member at some point in the next four years; it will be a gala day when he does. If he had been bold enough to take my intervention, I would have made this point: in 2007-08, local government’s share of the Scottish Government budget was 37.1 per cent, whereas in the current financial year, it is 38.4 per cent. It will be higher than the 2007-08 level in each of the coming years of the spending review period.

I think that I just heard from Rhoda Grant a tacit admission that the supposed facts that were being espoused by her colleagues were in fact nothing like facts at all. She said quite clearly that budgets had been increased by the SNP, and I am happy to back that position. It is clear that the SNP in government respects local government and local democracy. I cannot recall anyone ever saying of this Administration that, as was once said of another Administration, “the executive is resorting to bully boy scare tactics” in relation to local government. Those were the words of Labour councillor Pat Watters on 7 February 2006; I do not think that I need to remind members who formed the Government in 2006. Let us get to the guts of the debate, the background to which is the Gould report. The report’s overall conclusion was pretty damning by any stretch of the imagination, stating as it did that Scotland’s voters had been “treated as an afterthought” in the planning, organisation and execution of the May 2007 elections. Some of the report’s findings are very damning indeed. For example, it states: “the Scotland Office and the Scottish Executive were frequently focused on partisan political interests ... overlooking voter interests and operational realities within the electoral administration timetable.” It also states that “changes were introduced ... with the expectation that such changes would simply fall into place” and that there was “no effective planning process ... connecting legislative timetables to operational timetables”. I could quote a number of such damning findings but I do not need to, as Parliament has welcomed and debated the Gould report. In January 2008, we had a full debate in the chamber after which Parliament passed a motion backing the terms of the Gould report and the devolution of legislative powers over elections to the Scottish Parliament. Mark Griffin, who made one of the better speeches from the Labour benches, was right to welcome the fact that the Scottish Government has acted on the Gould recommendations. We should remember, however, that it is not just the Scottish Government but this legislature as a whole that has done so. That is entirely appropriate, as the changes should not be made in a partisan, party-political way, which is a criticism that was levelled by Gould at the organisation of the May 2007 elections. We must move away from that, and it is clear that we can do that if we all get behind the Gould report. Let us look at what has happened in the intervening period. Many of the proposals in the Gould report have been put into practice. We need only look at the organisational changes that were made for the 2011 parliamentary elections, which ran very smoothly, for evidence that things are going in the right direction. The minister set out clearly the extraordinary level of preparation for the May 2012 local government elections, which has involved testing the ballot papers and a rigorous test of the electronic counting system. A lot of organisation has been undertaken, so no one can level the charge at the Government or the Parliament that Scotland’s voters are being treated as an afterthought in the run-up to the elections. One change, which George Adam picked up on, is particularly welcome. We are unlikely to see massive queues at the polling stations at 10 pm, but if someone has joined a queue to vote and the polling station is going to close, they should not be denied their right to vote. If they have taken the trouble to go out and exercise their democratic right to vote, they should not be told that the polling station is closed and they have missed their chance to vote, which is what happened in Sheffield in the 2010 general election. That should not happen again. Presiding Officer, I was told that we had some leeway. How much leeway do I have?

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. I turn to the issue of 16 and 17-year-olds voting. Unlike the minister and Patrick Harvie, who is no longer in the chamber, I was not surprised at all that the Secretary of State for Scotland was unaware that we do not have the power to extend the franchise for local government elections. It is perhaps a surprise that I was not surprised but, when one considers that the current occupant of that post is Michael Moore MP, why would I be surprised that he did not know what he was talking about? With the greatest respect, I say that Margaret Mitchell most tellingly and incorrectly raised the issue of 16 and 17-year-olds getting the vote. She suggested that that age group is disengaged, but I have seen no evidence or study that suggests that. My experience, like Kevin Stewart’s, is that that age group is fully engaged with the political process. If 16 and 17-year-olds have certain responsibilities placed on their shoulders, they should have certain rights, one of which should be the right to vote not only in local government elections but in every election.

The cabinet secretary will be aware that an issue has been raised as part of the consideration of a single police force about ensuring that we have a transparent, open and independent complaints system. How will that be achieved when a single police force is created?

If the member reads the motion, he will see that that seems to be the logical conclusion of Elaine Murray’s position.

Will the member give way?

To echo Kenny Gibson’s comments, I thank Elaine Murray for at least bringing the subject to the Parliament. I cannot find much to agree with in the motion, but I welcome the fact that we are continuing to debate Scotland’s constitutional future. That will be part of the context of the coming years. It is unfortunate that Mr McLetchie did not let me intervene during his speech, because I was merely going to point out that if Gary McAllister had dispatched his penalty against England in 1996, he would probably have been the figurehead for the devolution campaign, never mind getting a vote in the referendum. However, that is another matter. Like others, I congratulate James Wallace. I profoundly disagree with the terms of his campaign, but he is absolutely right to raise the issue and is to be congratulated on doing so. However, Scotland’s future should and must be determined by people who live here. Elaine Murray said in response to Joe FitzPatrick that her proposal was not to determine who got the vote by ethnicity. However, what other conclusion are we to draw when she suggests that Scots who do not live here should get a vote—presumably by virtue of their ethnicity?

In a moment, I will come to the nightmare that extending the franchise in that way could be. I was going to say that it was for others to explain their obsession with ethnicity, so I suppose that Ms Murray has at least attempted to do so. Mr McLetchie seems to be riled at the prospect of Irish and Commonwealth citizens getting a vote in the independence referendum. However, they may want to take advantage of the potential to have Scottish citizenship, which will be their right in future. It is absolutely right that people who live here have that chance to vote. There are inconsistencies in the position adopted by those who say that the franchise should be extended in the way that the motion proposes, but who also say that 16 and 17-year-olds who live here should not get the vote. Many members of Ms Murray’s party said that the franchise should have been extended to 16 and 17-year-olds in the alternative vote referendum. I say to Mr McLetchie that, unlike those Labour Party members, neither I nor my party believes that the franchise should be extended on a special basis. My party believes that 16 and 17-year-olds should have the right to vote in each and every election in Scotland. We have demonstrated that through our actions in the pilot health board elections and the elections to the Crofting Commission. We have a positive record in that regard, which Mr McLetchie would do well to remember. The suggestion that citizens outwith Scotland should get the vote is interesting. I wonder whether there is any precedent for that happening across the world. For example, among recent referenda was the one in Montenegro. Did citizens outwith Montenegro get to vote on whether Montenegro should be independent?

Do I have time to give way, Presiding Officer? Will I get a little leeway?

I just about followed Neil Bibby’s logic. Frankly, the only basis on which we can determine Scottish citizenship is from a position of independence. Although I may not have time to do so, I want to deal with that point. Determining the criteria for who is eligible to vote in relation to people outwith Scotland is a problem. Who is a Scot? The only clear and concrete fashion in which we will be able to decide that is when we can grant citizenship. At the moment, we are not Scottish citizens. We can grant citizenship only in the context of independence. I would be quite relaxed at the prospect of people from outwith Scotland demonstrating at that stage their willingness to become Scottish citizens and participate in Scottish Parliament elections. However, that is a separate matter.

I do not think that the Presiding Officer will be able to extend me that much leeway. In fact, she is indicating that I cannot take an intervention, so I apologise. If Mr McLetchie had taken my intervention on Gary McAllister, I would have let him in the next time. I do not think that there is any international or, indeed, domestic precedent for extending the franchise in the way that the motion proposes. It was interesting to hear Elaine Murray say that the independence referendum is of such importance that the franchise should be extended in this case. Was the referendum on devolution not of such importance that the franchise should have been extended then? If the franchise that we had for the devolution referendum was good enough for that referendum, it is certainly good enough for the coming independence referendum.

I welcome the debate, but it is somewhat unfortunate that we have focused largely on process. The only point on which Ruth Davidson was correct was that it is rather more important to focus on the merits of the arguments that are ahead of us—Kezia Dugdale said much the same. I look forward to having that debate. When we get to it, I hope that we will hear an end to the tiresome references to separatism—we have heard them again today. I hope that we will come to realise that the separatists in the Parliament are not in the Scottish National Party but in other parties. They are the people who want to keep Scotland voiceless in the world and keep us separate from interacting with the rest of the world. Independence is about ending Scotland’s separatism and ending our voiceless nature. I hope that in the debate ahead of us, Johann Lamont can clarify that her international solidarity extends further than the white cliffs of Dover. I, too, believe in international solidarity, but I happen to believe that for us to demonstrate international solidarity it is not necessary for Scotland’s constitutional position to be to continue as part of the United Kingdom. Johann Lamont said that the SNP’s approach to the debate suggests that the constitution is an end in itself. She referred to the fact that this Parliament, and devolution, were about establishing social justice for the people of Scotland. I have a degree of sympathy with that view and I hope that it will be recognised throughout the chamber and across Scotland that the SNP does not believe in independence as an end in itself. Humza Yousaf made the point that we do not believe in independence for the sake of changing flags; we believe in it for the sake of improving society. We believe that independence is about increasing the likelihood of establishing social justice for the people of Scotland. I hope that that will form part of the debate that is ahead of us. This week’s debate has focused more on process, so let us discuss that a little more. I agree with the starting point of Labour’s motion, which is “That the Parliament recognises that the Scottish Government has a mandate to call a referendum on the constitutional future of Scotland”. I am glad that we are agreed on that much. Let us look at what else has been said this week. Michael Moore stood up in the House of Commons and said—Willie Rennie has today manfully tried to back up his colleague’s position—that it is illegal for this legislature to legislate for a referendum. Yet Dr Matt Qvortrup said in The Scotsman yesterday: “When Michael Moore stood at the Dispatch Box at Westminster yesterday he had a simple message; Scotland’s constitutional settlement rests with Westminster and Scottish independence would require the consent of London. With all due respect, this argument is neither consistent with international law nor is it compatible with the constitutional doctrine of referendums in the United Kingdom ... The basic principle in international law is that the seceding country ... decides whether it wants to become independent.”

The member over there has rather more faith in Michael Moore than I do. I am not sure why he thinks that Michael Moore is doing us such a favour. My colleague Mark McDonald referred to the comments of Stephen Tierney, professor of constitutional affairs at the University of Edinburgh, who said on television yesterday: “The Scottish Government’s ... argument is that referendums are not reserved; the Scottish Parliament can hold referendums—I think that’s correct”. Willie Rennie and Michael Moore need to explain why those eminent legal experts are wrong and they are correct. I also ask any member to point to the restriction in schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998 that says that this Parliament cannot legislate for a consultative referendum on a matter of its choosing. I do not think that anyone has been able to point that out. That said, if the UK Government’s position is that it wants to clarify the matter by way of a section 30 order, we will listen to that, but I hope that there will be no restrictions and no strings attached, because that would impinge on the mandate that we apparently now all recognise this Scottish Government has. The second issue that has been raised this week is the effect of the supposed delay in holding the referendum in causing companies not to invest in Scotland. My colleague Stewart Hosie challenged Michael Moore on the point earlier this week. He asked Michael Moore to name just one company that has chosen not to invest in Scotland. The answer was that there were none. Today, there has again been no mention of a single company that has chosen not to invest during the period in which the referendum has been debated and discussed. It is disingenuous to say that the uncertainty is causing companies not to invest and then not be able to name a single company.

No—I am afraid that I am in my last minute. Let us look at some of the opinion out there. Grahame Smith, the STUC general secretary, said: “the evidence—levels of Foreign Direct Investment compared to other UK nations and regions—strongly indicates the referendum is not currently exerting a negative effect on investment.” Mark Little, managing director at Barclays, said: “Scotland is as good a place as any in the world to open.” That gives the lie to the suggestion that companies are not investing. I know that socialism stopped being the holy grail of the Labour Party and liberalism that of the Lib Dems some time ago, but why have those parties now raised the preservation of the union to the level of a modern-day ark of the covenant? I look forward to hearing Johann Lamont—and the Labour Party—explain why she would rather that David Cameron’s Tories in London continue to tighten their grip in Scotland than that she, as part of this Parliament, democratically elected by the Scottish people, should have full powers of sovereignty, casting the effects of London Tory Governments in Scotland into the dustbin of history.

In the words of a former Labour leader, “Bring it on.”

2. To ask the Scottish Government what guidance is provided to local authorities on assessing the needs of home care service users. (S4O-00550)

Constituents have approached me to say that there appears to be a process in North Lanarkshire Council by which those who receive a care package that is switched to direct payments are having the financial support in the package cut. Does the minister agree that a switch to direct payments should be about empowering the individual and should not be used as cover for cost cutting?

In her future meetings with the chairman of NHS Lanarkshire, will the cabinet secretary raise the concerns of people in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth about the removal from the area of services such as radiology, which is being centralised elsewhere in NHS Lanarkshire’s area? For all the board’s capital investment programme, not a lot seems to be spent in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. Is it not right that money should be spent across the entirety of an area that an NHS board covers?

I welcome the debate. The fact that we have had two education debates in two days is a reflection of the importance that we place on the issue. I am sure that we all agree on the need to improve learning outcomes for all young people in 2012. I am also sure that that commitment will be renewed in 2013, 2014 and every year to come. Education is vital for the individual. It broadens their horizons, as Marco Biagi said, and improves their life chances. It is also vital for the country as a whole. If we want to attract investment, want to be a positive destination and want things to happen here, we need a well-educated population. It is important to set today’s debate in a little context: education is safe in the hands of the SNP Administration. Much has been said about class sizes over the past few years. In 2006, the average size for primary 1 to primary 3 classes was 23.6 children; today, it is 22.5. The average class size for primary 1 in particular has reduced from 23.1 to 20.5 over the same period. That is a new record low. I was interested to see the Conservative Party claim recently that levels of truancy had risen by more than 50 per cent. Unfortunately, it got its maths completely wrong, as I am sure the cabinet secretary will confirm. In the most recent year for which we have full figures, virtually the same level of overall absence was recorded as in 2006-07. The overall rate of attendance in 2010-11 was 93 per cent; in 2009-10, it was 93 per cent. It is beyond me where the Conservative Party got its figures for a 50 per cent increase in truancy.

I will not respond to Mr FitzPatrick’s sedentary intervention for fear of running into trouble. In 2010-11, 89.9 per cent of pupils who left school took up a positive destination—higher education, further education, training or employment. That is an increase on the previous year and reflects a growing trend over recent years. On pupil retention, the UK Government is abolishing EMA, but the Scottish Government is protecting it. The number of applications for further and higher education has increased. It is clear that there is much to welcome in Scottish education. We can all think of good, positive examples in our own areas. I look forward to welcoming the cabinet secretary to my constituency next month to see Kildrum and Whitelees primary schools. Our colleague Tom Johnston and I invited him, and he graciously accepted. He will see the good work that is going on in those two excellent primary schools, particularly in Whitelees primary school, which was the first school to receive five outstanding awards under the inspection arrangements. That suggests that many good things are happening in education. That is not to say, of course, that there are no specific concerns. Marco Biagi was quite right to point to issues relating to the attainment of our poorest youngsters in Scotland. Save the Children sent us a very good briefing, for which I thank it. It was able to demonstrate that there is an educational achievement gap throughout the years, which reflects a trend that has existed for a long time. If we look at the outcomes for pupils from the most deprived areas when they leave school, we see that their attainment level is some 65 per cent below the Scottish average and a huge 137 per cent below that of the richest pupils. That is to say nothing, of course, of the challenges that poverty brings outwith the specific confines of education, which can impact on the educational experience. Christina McKelvie’s anecdote about the young pupil who had to care for his family and the impact that that had on his education was telling. Thankfully, it seems that, in that case, things were sorted in the end. It was interesting to read in press coverage at the weekend the suggestion—members should forgive me, but I cannot remember which newspaper it was in—that poverty is no excuse for low attainment, as there are examples of good work being done in many deprived communities. I whole-heartedly accept that good work is being done in deprived communities, and I accept that some schools are doing particularly well and that there will always be pupils who come out of those deprived communities and achieve in their education. My mother, who was a teacher in the Gorbals and Drumchapel in her career, and my stepfather, who was a teacher in Possilpark, will testify that that can happen, but there can be no denying that a correlation between poverty and educational outcomes exists. That needs to be focused on, and I know that the Administration is doing that. Margaret McDougall said that the work that is going on in the early years to tackle some of those issues is welcome, and I look forward to hearing what the minister says about that at the end of the debate. I hoped to speak a little about the curriculum for excellence but, as ever, I do not have enough time. Actually, the Presiding Officer is indicating that I do have time—you are very generous—so I will talk a little bit about it. I am not an expert on the curriculum for excellence but, from my understanding of it, I think that it is to be hugely welcomed. Members can think back to their own school experiences, as I do. There was much that I enjoyed about my school experience, but I sometimes felt that I did not have too much control over the process. I accept that there will be only so much control that a pupil can ever have over their school experience, but the fact that the curriculum for excellence allows for greater pupil involvement in what they want to get out of their school experience is very positive. The curriculum for excellence is one reason among many why I am confident that the future of Scotland’s education system is safe in the hands of the SNP.

I welcome today’s debate. It would have been very wrong, no matter the course that we take at decision time, if the legislative consent motion had gone through on the nod. Given that these matters affect many of the people whom we represent, it is absolutely right that we are having this debate. As the deputy convener of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, I was very pleased to be able to take evidence as the secondary committee on the matter. I do not feel that we necessarily had enough time to do that, and on that basis it is right that an ad hoc committee is being established—I may turn to that later, if I have time. I was glad that the committee was able to take evidence, and its position can be summarised as follows. Although we accept that reform of the welfare system is necessary, the reforms that are being proposed—on which little information has been provided—are wrong. It is rather like the debate that we had on public pensions reform a few weeks ago, in that the issue is being driven by the UK Government’s determination for deficit reduction—Kevin Stewart was right to make that point—rather than reform of the welfare system. This is the first time that the Scottish Parliament has potentially withheld its legislative consent. Surprise has been expressed about that, and I recently heard Jackson Carlaw on television expressing disappointment at that. However, we should probably be more surprised that, in the 12-year history of the Scottish Parliament, this is the first time that we have withheld our consent. All those who have talked about fights being sought by the SNP Government with Westminster should reflect on the fact that this is the first time that this legislature has potentially withheld its legislative consent—and only partially at that. We have heard Conservative members say that this is a reserved matter. However, given that we are being asked to provide legislative consent, it is not entirely a reserved matter. In that regard, it is entirely correct that we consider whether we want to provide our consent. This is an important issue, as can be judged by the volume of correspondence that we have received from the campaigning organisations. In my four and a half years as a member of the Parliament, I cannot remember ever having received such a volume of correspondence from such organisations. Broadly, the Scottish Government’s position has been welcomed and backed by a number of organisations. Capability Scotland states in its briefing: “We firmly support the approach outlined in the Legislative Consent Motion”. Inclusion Scotland says that it is “supportive of the Scottish Government’s position of giving only partial consent to this Bill.” Children in Scotland says that it supports the text of the legislative consent motion. The Scottish Federation of Housing Associations states that it welcomes the Health and Sport Committee’s recommendation, which has been backed by the Government, “that Scotland introduces its own legislation relating to Universal Credit and Personal Independence Payments.” Shelter Scotland states clearly: “We support the creation of an ad hoc committee of the Scottish Parliament which would continue to scrutinise ongoing welfare reform and review measures in Scotland to mitigate the impact of the cuts.” That is clear evidence, from organisations at the coalface that are working with the people who will be affected by the legislation, that the direction that is being pursued by Nicola Sturgeon and the Scottish Government is the correct one. It is incumbent on Jackson Carlaw, Mary Scanlon and Liam McArthur to explain why those organisations are wrong. Frankly, they have failed to do so in the debate today. I do not want to focus on procedural matters, but I turn briefly to the creation of an ad hoc committee. Bob Doris was absolutely correct in saying that the message that we send out from the Parliament today should be about our opposition to the direction of travel that is being pursued by the UK Government. It is important that we talk about the ad hoc committee that we hope will be created when we agree to the motion tonight. Jackie Baillie set out her concerns about the creation of an ad hoc committee, but I think that it is the correct thing to do. The Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee was pleased to take evidence on the Welfare Reform Bill, but, given the volume of work that comes our way, frankly, we did not have the time—

I hear Jackson Carlaw scoffing. He will recall that we held one evidence session on the Welfare Reform Bill. If Mr Carlaw thinks that that is substantial enough, he is greatly mistaken.

Do I have time to give way, Presiding Officer?

Of course I wish to: it is panto season, after all.

It is probably a good thing that Mr Carlaw is no longer on the committee if that is his attitude to it. I was rather hoping for a better intervention. It is right that we will have a dedicated committee to look at the bill in greater detail. I look forward to the committee’s work and consideration of the impact of welfare reform. However, I look forward more to the day when this legislature does not have to give its legislative consent to Westminster and we can take such decisions for ourselves—Mr Carlaw included.

Will the member give way?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that another reason for this legislature taking on the power is that we do a better job of scrutiny? Does she share my concern that the committee that I am on was told by the SFHA that when it wrote to ask the Scottish Affairs Select Committee to look at the issue, it did not even get a reply?

Will the member give way?

Ho, ho, ho. The member is talking about fuel poverty. Clearly, concerns about that are shared across the chamber. Given that rising energy costs are a key driver of fuel poverty, what actions does she think the Parliament could take to tackle rising energy costs? Or does she recognise that there is not much that we can do?

Yes, I suppose so.

The member accepts that we are in a difficult funding settlement; does he not accept that that is a consequence of his Administration in London cutting the budget?

Thank you, Presiding Officer—I shall do my best to fulfil your expectation. I welcome the debate. My only minor criticism is that it is unfortunate to speak so late in the day, when all the good Christmas gags have been used. However, I thank Kenny Gibson for securing a finance debate in our last afternoon session before the Christmas recess, and I particularly thank the Parliamentary Bureau for scheduling the debate the day after the night before, when the SNP office Christmas party took place. I am delighted to speak in that context. I congratulate the Finance Committee on its report. I agree with Mark McDonald that it has undertaken comprehensive work. Ken Macintosh made a mixed speech. I welcome him to the post that he has secured—I know that it is not the one that he sought, but I am sure that he will do well in it. I could not fault or disagree with much in his speech, but the comment that the committee “pulled its punches” is more than a little unfair, because it suggests that it was a report by the committee’s SNP members. I note that the Labour Party dissented from the report, but I still cannot quite work out why it did so—that is not quite clear. I cannot help but notice that Mr Brown, who is a member of the committee and is not renowned for pulling his punches, agreed with the report, so it is unfair to suggest that the committee pulled its punches. Kenny Gibson continued his new statesmanlike style by adding no prefix to his sedentary intervention of “Rubbish” when Mr Macintosh made his suggestion. It is clear from the report that the committee has done a good job. We heard a number of questions from the committee’s convener to the cabinet secretary. That belies the suggestion that the report was a whitewash, which is wrong. I am glad that the committee is maintaining the focus on the preventative spend agenda.

I am hearing that that quote was from an annex and not from the main report. The council tax freeze has been widely welcomed across the board. Continuing the council tax freeze was in the manifesto on which Mr Findlay stood, so it is a little interesting to hear a new position now. Preventative spend has been of on-going interest to the Finance Committee. We held a debate on the issue in the previous session of Parliament, which was brought to the chamber by our former colleague Andrew Welsh. I will not say much more about the preventative spend agenda—a number of members have set out why it is so important, and I welcome the fact that the issue is still a focus for the Finance Committee. A number of members have addressed issues that have arisen in their committees’ consideration of the budget, and I will do the same in the little time that I have left. As the deputy convener of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, I want to focus a little attention on that area as it relates to today’s debate. We have heard quite clear views on the draconian cut to capital expenditure from Westminster and the effect that it is having on the Scottish Government’s ability to bring forward capital investment. However, even in the context of that severe cut—and I do not think that we can argue that it is anything other than severe—the Scottish Government is doing a very good job. It is bringing forward a significant portfolio of capital investment projects.

I will let in Mr Macintosh in a minute.

Then I will not let Mr Macintosh in, for which I apologise. Surely now is the right time to bring forward a programme of capital investment. As Paul Wheelhouse has explored in committee, we can actually get more for our money at present because construction costs are lower, so it is right to focus on capital investment. I would have liked to focus on it a little more, but time is going to get the better of me. I conclude—in time; I do not think that it will take me 28 seconds to do so—by commending the Finance Committee for its detailed work. Today’s debate has been very interesting, and I look forward to hearing what the deputy convener has to say in his closing remarks.

6. To ask the First Minister what assessment the Scottish Government has made of the Reform Scotland report, “Powering Scotland”. (S4F-00343)

Does the First Minister agree that in two senses the report calls into question the judgment of renewables naysayers? First, it shows that there is absolutely no need for a new generation of nuclear power stations in Scotland and, secondly, it demonstrates that those who have jumped on other reports with relish and used them to claim that renewables are not sustainable in the context of independence were totally wrong to do so.

I welcome today’s debate. Unlike Helen Eadie, I am a willing and keen contributor—there is absolutely no need for strong-arm whips in the SNP. However, I thank her for the image that she provided of the conversation that she obviously had with Mr Park. She mentioned that the debate has been more or less consensual, which is to be welcomed, as that is obviously a good way to proceed. There is disagreement, but there is a lot of agreement as well. Rhoda Grant mentioned that the debate might be a little dry. I must confess that, when I first saw the title, I probably came to that conclusion, too. However, the nature of the subject matter does not make it any less important. It is important that we have the right regulatory framework for business and that we protect the interests of the people. That is the approach that the Scottish Government has taken. It is about trying to strike the correct balance between creating the climate for economic growth and protecting the interests of the people. Much nonsense is said on a regular basis about regulation. A great mythology has built up around the issue. I will not go into detail on that, but I thought that Mark McDonald and Nigel Don did a good job of demonstrating the nature of that mythology. It is important that we reflect that in our speeches. While I am talking about my colleague Mark McDonald, I say with respect to Helen Eadie that she picked up Mr McDonald’s point incorrectly. I think that he correctly referred to article 12. If she reads the Official Report, she will find that there is a lot of consensus between her and Mr McDonald on that point. I do not mean that in a critical sense; I just point it out for the record. Never let it be said that Mr McDonald’s knowledge of the various articles of EU legislation is anything other than exemplary. I referred to the balance between creating the climate for economic growth and protecting people’s interests. There is a tendency to think of those as competing principles, but John Park made a very good point when he set out that many countries arguably have greater regulation than the United Kingdom while definitely having greater economic growth. Therefore, the two principles should not necessarily be viewed as competing. Dave Thompson made the good point that regulations are often in the interests of business, so it would be wrong to say that regulations are automatically contrary to the interests of the business community. The aim of striking a balance typifies the Scottish Government’s approach to regulation. Indeed, as Margaret McCulloch said, it probably typifies the Scottish approach. That approach has influenced the Scottish Government’s proposed better regulation bill, which will be introduced in due course. I understand that the bill has come about through dialogue with national and local regulators, COSLA, local authorities and the business community. That again emphasises the consensual approach to the issue not just in this chamber, but in the wider community.

Mary Scanlon has put that on the record. If she is asking me to speak for COSLA, she is asking the wrong individual, because I am not here to speak for it. Although there has been consensus today, we have heard that there is not quite the same level of consensus among the Conservatives. The bill is a response to calls from business, demonstrating the consensual approach that is being taken. The FSB has stated the need for a stronger duty to comply with the principles of better regulation and an end to legislation that charges local authorities with designing and implementing 32 separate regulatory regimes to achieve the same policy objective. Dave Thompson made that point very neatly. It is not about doing away with regulation; it is about creating better regulation. That is the purpose of the regulatory review group, which has stated its overall aims as being about “creating a culture and environment in Scotland where both business and Government (in all its forms) work together to create better regulation for all; and in doing that, make Scotland recognised as the leading country in Europe in terms of better regulation.” That agenda is shared across the board. As the minister set out clearly, SNP members do not agree with getting rid of regulation for the sake of it, although that typifies the antipathetic approach to regulation that we have seen from the UK Government. It has justified that approach on the premise that it will promote growth in employment and in the economy as a whole. However, recent announcements from the Office for Budget Responsibility—and, for example, the autumn budget statement, which we debated yesterday—identifying continued slow growth suggest that that approach is not working. How much longer do I have, Presiding Officer?

Okay. Having mentioned the Tory approach south of the border, I turn quickly to the amendment in the name of Tavish Scott’s ideological soulmate, Gavin Brown. I agree that there is merit in the business and regulatory impact assessment approach, which is a useful one. However, the amendment requests that the Scottish Government explain why that approach has not been taken, citing the specific circumstances. We do not need the amendment now, as that has been achieved: the minister has said clearly that such an approach would be disproportionate and unnecessary. Frankly, the amendment has more to do with Tory antipathy to the measure than the issue of regulation and, on that basis, I will not support it. I will support the Scottish Government’s motion this evening.

It is important to consider the economic backdrop to the debate. John Swinney was absolutely correct to say that the UK economy remains in a very fragile condition; indeed, we heard in the autumn budget statement that the Office for Budget Responsibility has revised down its GDP growth forecasts for the coming years. Significantly weaker growth is now expected this year and next year. It has been forecast that the UK economy will grow by just 0.9 per cent this year, 0.7 per cent next year, and up to 2.1 per cent the year after. The Office for Budget Responsibility does not believe that the UK economy will fall back into recession, as the OECD predicted, but it has predicted that output will be negative in the last quarter of 2011 and that there will be only very weak growth at the start of next year. It is quite clear that there are rather negative economic conditions. There is an expectation that between the first quarter of this year and the first quarter of 2016, UK general Government employment will fall by more than 600,000. In last week’s pensions debate, I mentioned that I was at the Public and Commercial Services Union picket line at Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs in Cumbernauld, where very real concerns were expressed to me about the cuts that we will see in the UK Government workforce. That stands in stark contrast to the Scottish Government’s stated aim of having no compulsory redundancies. It would be remiss of me not to pick up on John Pentland’s point about the Scottish Government’s position on pensions. If he had been bold enough to take my intervention, I would have said then what I am about to say. Perhaps he will be bold enough to take an intervention by the end of the parliamentary session—or perhaps not. He was in danger of trotting out the Willie Rennie line of argument, which he would not have heard, as he was not at last week’s debate. Willie Rennie might think that that is a good place to be, but I do not think that the rest of us—including Mr Pentland, I am sure—think that it is a particularly good place to be. The Scottish Government had absolutely no choice: it had no room for manoeuvre on pensions. How could it have any room to manoeuvre? Willie Rennie rose— I see that Willie Rennie is trying to intervene on me again. I will let him in in a minute. That will be the third time that he has intervened on me on the matter. Mr Pentland fails to acknowledge Danny Alexander’s threatening letter. Some £550 million would be removed from the Scottish Government’s budget over the next few years. Richard Baker recognised that position, and he has previously accepted the difficulties for the Scottish Government.

I missed that radio programme. I am always happy to listen to Mr Swinney; to be courteous, I will leave the other part of the equation unspoken.

Mr Findlay has signally failed to recall the cabinet secretary’s budget statement. The cabinet secretary hopes to end the pay freeze next year. He has not taken forward a pay freeze with relish. I hear Mr Findlay chuntering from the sidelines—it might be better for him to listen for once in his life. Mr Findlay fails to acknowledge the context that the Scottish Government has found itself in, which was, of course, begun under his party. Let us not forget that 85 per cent of the cuts to the Scottish budget were planned under his Government. I return to the autumn statement. UK borrowing in this year is now expected to be £127 billion, which is £5 billion higher than the OBR forecast in March and £11 billion higher than it forecast in June 2010. I am not critical of that borrowing per se. Indeed, the cabinet secretary has previously called for £20 billion of borrowing for targeted measures, which would have been very sensible. However, it would have been much better if that borrowing had come earlier. The fact that we are seeing that borrowing now demonstrates the folly of the UK Government’s position. We have consistently heard from those on the Conservative benches—and, today, from the Conservative adjunct, Willie Rennie—that that approach is entirely necessary. It fails to recognise, however—[Interruption.] Indeed, Mr Rennie might as well move down to the Tory front bench. He is being invited to do so; why does he not respond to that call? That approach fails to recognise that many others have been suggested. Different approaches have been put forward by the Scottish Government, by the trade unions and by others on investing in economic recovery. Different approaches have been suggested by leading economists such as Paul Krugman and Joseph Stiglitz. I could say a lot more, but I have had to deal with some interesting interventions. I look forward to hearing what the cabinet secretary has to say at the end of the debate.

I will try to focus on the reality of the situation, rather than produce a submission for “Jackanory” such as we have just heard. I would be wrong if I said that I am glad to speak in the debate. No one can be glad about what is happening to public sector pensions. However, it is right that we debate the issue on this day and I hope that at decision time the Parliament will add its voice to the voices of the more than 2 million workers who are acting to combat the Tory-Liberal attacks on pensions. Contrary to what Mr Rennie said, the Scottish Government has been consistent in its approach. It has consistently opposed the action that the UK Government has taken on public sector pensions and has consistently called on the UK Government to halt action on its damaging proposals. The people who are striking on this day of action have the support of SNP members in their aims. For a clear statement of intent, we need look no further than the First Minister’s letter of 4 October to people who work in the public sector and contribute to pension funds, to which Willie Rennie referred. The First Minister wrote: “Public sector workers are entitled to pensions that are affordable, sustainable, and fair both to workers and to taxpayers. We are strongly opposed in principle to the UK Government’s policy of increasing contributions.”

Let us get away from the fallacy that there is a funding gap. We have surpluses in many pension funds. We are witnessing nothing less than a cash grab by the UK Government in an attempt to tackle the deficit. It is not about reforming pensions for the sake of reform.

I will come to that point if I have time to do so—if there are not too many more interventions. I must say that Mr Rennie has made a better intervention than he did the last time that I spoke in a debate on pensions, when he asked me whether I realised that money does not grow on trees. That was banal; he is doing a little better today. There is no choice for the Scottish Government. Mr Rennie should understand the limitations on the Scottish Administration’s ability to apply financial levers. The Scottish Government has had a gun to its head on the issue. I will try to steer clear of unparliamentary language—for your sake and mine, Presiding Officer—but Mr Rennie has been entirely disingenuous in his approach to the debate. I support the motion and the Scottish Government’s position. I agree that the UK Government relishes the action that is taking place today and has done little to prevent it. The STUC said clearly that there has been no formal dialogue since 2 November. Mr Brown suggested that negotiations have been on-going until today. That is not what the STUC says, and I trust it over the ranks—not massed but meagre ranks—of Tory MSPs any day. On the wider issue of economic recovery, I wonder whether any Tory MSP can tell me which of the following they think has helped to support families through the current economic difficulties: the VAT increases; the national insurance contributions increases; or the significant increases in pension contributions. I see that no Tory has sought to intervene yet.

Of course.

Mary Scanlon said it quite clearly: there will be increases to pension contributions. I struggle to see how that is a benefit to hard-pressed families at this moment in time. [Interruption.]

I would not worry about it, Presiding Officer. I was not listening anyway. Every member here today will have constituents who work in the public sector and are deeply concerned about the impact of the proposals. HM Revenue and Customs is one of the biggest employers in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth and, this morning, I visited the picket lines there to hear some of the concerns about the UK Government’s proposals. Some concerns are about the serious impact on people’s living standards during their working lives because of the increased contributions and during their retirement because of reduced pensions. Concern was also expressed about the increase in the state pension age to 67 being brought forward, which was announced yesterday. That will affect all who are aged 52 or under, which includes me, for the avoidance of doubt. That is the other part of the pensions equation. We are starting to see the state pension being hammered as well. Jim Eadie was right to raise concerns about changes to calculations. I was glad—well, perhaps not glad—to be able to go along and hear the concerns that were expressed to me this morning. Having cited the experience of those I talked to who are on strike, I turn to the concerns of another constituent who contacted me. General practitioners as a profession are not noted for their militancy but, in an e-mail to me, my constituent made it quite clear that he is livid about the UK Government’s position. He said: “The increase in contributions has nothing to do with ‘unaffordable pensions’ or longevity. The suggestion it has is disingenuous. The NHS Scheme runs at a surplus and the negotiated changes in 2008 will provide £10bn extra to the Govt. over the next 5 years as a loan at preferential rates.” We should remember that there have been changes and that the workforce has been willing to negotiate and to see those changes in recent years, but now others are being foisted on it. That GP is very concerned about the negative impact of the proposed changes on him and those who work in the national health service. I had hoped to say some other things, but I will conclude by saying that I hope that the message goes out loud and clear from Parliament that we are on the side of the public sector workers who are fighting the cuts to their pensions.

The member referred to 37 empty seats. I point out that a few Liberals are not here, either.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I am glad that Willie Rennie has given way at last. He mentioned the statement from Danny Alexander. Why does he refuse to acknowledge that his colleague sent letters to the Scottish Government, threatening it with the withdrawal of £100 million from its budget in the coming year?

I congratulate Kevin Stewart on securing the debate—his first members’ business debate—on this important issue. I also thank him for the litany of information about St Andrew that he provided. My only regret is that I was not able to take notes, so I will have to refer to the Official Report tomorrow. I also congratulate Jamie McGrigor. I was unaware of St Andrew’s perspective on higher education funding in 21st century Scotland and it is useful to have that information. It is also useful to know that he attended Eton college because I thought that he went to Possilpark secondary school in Glasgow.

Wherever the saltire is flown, we should always welcome it. I also join Kevin Stewart in paying tribute to Dennis Canavan’s efforts in campaigning for the St Andrew’s day holiday. I was not privileged to be a member of the Parliament at the same time as Dennis Canavan, but I worked here in another capacity while he was a member. The high esteem in which he was then held was clear, as is the high esteem in which he is held today. Much of that is down to his efforts in creating a St Andrew’s day holiday. The debate is something of a reprise from last year, when John Wilson lodged a similar motion. It is clear that the issue is of continuing interest to MSPs. I agree with the statement in Kevin Stewart’s motion that there is increasing interest in celebrating St Andrew’s day. I see that in the communities that I represent. I will be particularly parochial: my young daughter attends a nursery in Cumbernauld and, over the past week, I have been impressed at its efforts to raise awareness of Scottish traditions and raise money for charity along the way. That culminated in a ceilidh today, which I hope that my daughter enjoyed. That indicates that, sadly, she did not get a St Andrew’s day holiday, but I will give her time off in lieu on Friday. That also reflects my wider experience. When I go into the schools and nurseries in the communities that I represent, I see that St Andrew’s day is increasingly recognised. That is welcome and indicates that Kevin Stewart was correct to say that there is increasing interest in celebrating it. However, I agree that we need to do more to make it a widely celebrated public holiday. Jamie McGrigor rose— I am tempted to say that Mr McGrigor is on to buttons, given that he would not let anyone intervene on him. Do I have time to let him intervene, Presiding Officer?

I should clarify that I did not seek to intervene on Jamie McGrigor, but some of my colleagues did. I was being slightly disingenuous in my comment about Eton, but I welcome its recognition of St Andrew’s day. However, some of the suggestions that Jamie McGrigor made for encouraging further celebration of St Andrew’s day in Scotland were rather piecemeal. More needs to happen here. It is often suggested that a public holiday comes with an economic cost—that there is a negative impact on the economy. On the contrary, such national holidays can be considered an economic lever. Kevin Stewart made that point well when he referred to the primary example of the St Patrick’s day celebrations in Ireland and further afield. We should, of course, aspire to have St Andrew’s day celebrated internationally in just the way that St Patrick’s day is. St Patrick’s day is a huge party for the Irish people and levers a significant amount of money into the economy. St Andrew’s day should be the same in Scotland.

Last week, when I spoke in the debate on Scotland’s oil and gas framework, I was a rare speaker from the central belt amid a sea of speakers from the north-east. I am getting much the same feeling today. I may not be the only one of today’s speakers who is based in the central belt, but I think that I am the only speaker so far without an obvious constituency interest in the coastguard. Tavish Scott said that he understood that members are angry about changes affecting their areas. I, too, understand that anger—and it is a concern that is shared by many of us who do not represent the areas most directly affected. Unlike Mike MacKenzie and his family, I do not have the sea in my blood—although there has been the odd ferry trip to Brodick, Millport or Dunoon—but some of the people whom I represent work in the maritime industries, and many more of them will use our coastal areas, especially the Firth of Clyde, for the purposes of recreation. That is the area on which I will focus most of my remarks although, if I have time, I will speak about other areas also affected by the UK Government’s decision. I welcome today’s debate and hope that it will offer cross-party support for the Scottish Parliament’s opposition to the changes that the UK Government proposes. The debate is timely, coming as it does so soon after Tuesday’s coastguard announcement. It might be difficult to get consensus. Tavish Scott and Alex Fergusson seemed to feel that the Government and the main Opposition party were unduly negative in their approach. I find it hard to be positive because there is not much to be positive about. If those members can explain why closing two coastguard stations in Scottish waters and reducing the number of personnel are positive steps, perhaps SNP members will have something positive to contribute.

I do not think that there is an improvement on what we have got. What we have got is a reduction in the provision of coastguard stations. Arguably, the proposals were more draconian before, but let us not use that as our starting point. Let us use the current situation as our starting point. If we do that, we can safely say that it is hard to be positive about the changes that are being introduced. Our concerns are based on the risk to life and limb and the dangers to the marine environment as a result of those changes. It is not just the Scottish Government that is concerned. The Scottish Wildlife Trust has contacted us to set out its concern about the potential negative impact of the changes on Scotland’s marine environment. The concerns go wider than just the political sphere. Once more, Scotland is being used as a test bed for changes. I see Tavish Scott mouthing away as if I am saying something wrong. Closures will happen in Scotland first. Why is that? Scotland has a significant proportion—18,000km—of the UK’s coastline. A significant part of Scotland’s economy is based on maritime industries. Why is Scotland being hit first with these negative changes?

That is a fair point.

In a moment, Mr Fergusson. The minister’s point builds on what Mike MacKenzie was saying about Baroness Michie’s position in respect of her former constituency. I hope to see cross-party support for the motion at decision time. Perhaps Alex Fergusson can tell me whether we will get it.

I did not use the term “guinea pig”—I said “test bed”—but I take the point on board. It would be far better if we could get consensus on protecting Scotland’s coastline, which is, fundamentally, the position that is being advanced by the Scottish Government. It is for other members to justify their position; it is not for me to have words with the cabinet secretary. I would have thought that Alex Fergusson was big and bold enough to have his own words with the cabinet secretary. How much more time do I have? I have taken three interventions.

You are very generous. I want to talk about the Clyde area because it is the most pertinent to my constituency. The point has been well made, and I congratulate Stuart McMillan on his assiduous campaigning on the issue. I recognise that it has been done on a cross-party basis, as Duncan McNeil and others have also campaigned on the issue. When we consider that the Clyde station is the busiest in Scotland and the third busiest in the UK, given all the activity on the Firth of Clyde, its closure cannot possibly be justified, so I am very concerned about the decision. I am similarly concerned about the closure of the Forth station and the downgrading of the Aberdeen station. However, I do not have enough time to go into that. I hope that the UK Government will see common sense and that, at decision time, the Parliament will unite in sending a loud and clear message to the UK Government that we do not want the closures to go ahead. If the UK Government refuses to listen, that will add weight to the argument that the Scottish Parliament should have responsibility for Scotland’s coastguard service.

Is that not a disingenuous representation of what Dave Thompson said? Was his point not that, fundamentally, 129 elected members of the Scottish Parliament are far better placed to make decisions for Scotland than 59 out of 650 Westminster MPs?

Will the member give way?

Does the minister share my perplexity? Surely the logical extension of the position—that the seas do not recognise borders—espoused by Rhoda Grant in response to his intervention is that there should not be a UK coastguard; rather, the UK coastguard should be merged with the French or Irish coastguard. That position is surely nonsense. Surely a Scottish coastguard could co-operate with the remainder of the UK coastguard.

If awards were given out for persistence and obstinacy, the Tory benches would be weighed down by bunting and medals. In every debate on housing, they return to the same old chestnut—their obsession with the right to buy. That position flies in the face of the situation on the ground. If the Tories are relying on their record of achievement in the 1950s—as Alex Johnstone seemed to be suggesting—it will be a long way back for the Ruth Davidson-led Tory party. Alex Johnstone referred to “prejudice” against the right to buy on the SNP benches. I have no prejudice against the right to buy. Indeed, many people in my extended family have exercised the right to buy, although—I do not know whether my stepfather will appreciate my saying this, but I am going to say it anyway—my stepfather’s father refused to buy his council house on a point of principle. We have to question whether the right to buy was good and sound public policy. The Scottish Federation of Housing Associations has estimated that, as a result of that creation of the Thatcher era, some 500,000 homes have been lost from rented stock in Scotland alone. Many people are languishing on waiting lists for council houses, or for social rented houses, and every member in the chamber will have seen many of them. I question whether the removal of all the houses that would otherwise have been available to them was a sensible policy. The position of the Government—of my party—in relation to the right to buy is not prejudiced but practical. We are now having to play catch-up in relation to the availability of social rented housing, and the Scottish Government is doing a lot. Members do not have to take my word, or the minister’s word, for that. The Scottish Building Federation has said that “Between 2007 and 2010, the value of public sector new housebuilding in Scotland has risen by 89 per cent” and that “the number of public sector new homes built in Scotland annually has risen by 42 per cent”. Good work is going on. A significant number of those homes are council houses—the most council houses that have been built for a great number of years. Therefore, the Tory position on the right to buy is a nonsense; it is an absolutely ridiculous position because there would be no incentive for local authorities to continue that council-house building programme if, as soon as they built a house, it became subject to the right to buy. Again, members do not need to take just my word for that. Shelter has said that it disagrees with the Conservative position on right to buy as expressed in the motion today, and the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations has said that the Government’s position is correct. The Government’s position is coherent; it is designed to protect social rented housing, and it is backed by the people at the coalface—those who work in the housing sector. However, there is a degree of incoherence in Alex Johnstone’s position. He criticises the Government’s position on housing association grant but simultaneously calls for increases to the discount for the sale of council houses. Such a position would not only remove vitally required houses for social rent but would cut money from the public purse. Lewis Macdonald was right when he said that the Tories have brought forward “the right subject but ... the wrong issues”. As Aileen McLeod said, it would have been better if we had been talking about the Welfare Reform Bill and how it will affect housing.

I look forward to hearing what the minister has to say at the end of the debate.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I speak in favour of the Government’s motion. A number of colleagues who have spoken in the debate today come from the north-east, so they have obvious links to the industry. The reason why I am speaking might be because we have exhausted our supply of SNP back benchers from the north-east. Dennis Robertson is away now, but he made the point that the motion refers to Aberdeen when it should really refer to Aberdeenshire. I will extend that a bit further—it should include my constituency of Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. The industry is important throughout the country, and there are companies in my constituency that form part of the supply chain for the sector. A number of people in my constituency work in the sector. In fact, one of the individuals who lost their life in the helicopter crash that was mentioned earlier resided in the Cumbernauld area, so I know that members’ points about health and safety are well made. That is why I am happy to speak in the debate. The sector is important to all Scotland; it has been so in the past, and it is vital to Scotland’s future, which I will touch on a little later. I think that it would be useful if I quantify the current position of the industry in Scotland first. As the motion states, the industry supports the employment of 196,000 people throughout Scotland. Last year, an average of 2.2 million barrels of oil and gas equivalent was produced per day from the North Sea, and approximately 40 billion barrels has already been extracted in total. The oil and gas industry has contributed more than £300 billion in tax revenue to the UK Exchequer, which comes out at £60,000 for every man, woman and child in Scotland. In the past year alone, £13.4 billion has been contributed to the Exchequer, and it is estimated that, over the coming five years, starting this year, £61 billion will be raised. The sector is a significant part of the Scottish economy. Lest anyone think that the sector is in decline, OPITO—the UK oil and gas industry’s focal point for skills, learning and workforce development—makes the point that 81 per cent of oil and gas companies expect their business to grow over the next five years. As Tavish Scott noted, the sector is growing. OPITO also makes the important point that 63 per cent of oil and gas companies expect to diversify into wind power in that timescale, which illustrates the link-up with the renewables sector to which the motion refers. I hope that I can return to that subject later. I welcome the investment in skills for the industry. We have seen quite clearly that this Administration recognises the importance of a skilled workforce for the oil and gas sector, and the potential for engineering expertise to transfer into renewables technologies, to which the motion also refers. In October, the First Minister announced 2,000 modern apprenticeships for the energy industries, with an additional 1,000 flexible training places in energy and low carbon. Jewel and Esk College announced that its new centre of excellence in engineering and clean technology will create more than 1,000 apprenticeships in the energy and oil and gas industries over four years, so there is investment in the skills base for the sector. The debate has been very consensual, and I preface my next remarks by saying that I am not trying to inject controversy unnecessarily. However, it is important that we reflect on how we can benefit from the oil and gas revenues that accrue from the North Sea, because for far too long we have not been able to benefit here in Scotland. Given the moneys that are forecast to flow from the North Sea over the coming years, the opportunities for Scotland are significant indeed. Quite often, we hear it said—to be fair, we have not heard it said much today, but we have heard it said often in the past—that we should not read too much into oil and gas revenues because they are fluctuating in nature and the resource is finite. I accept that that is the case, but I always think that it is ironic that we must be the only people on the planet to have the boon of oil and gas and to react in that fashion—some people, at least, react in that fashion; Kevin Stewart’s anecdote about the man at the event when he was young illustrated that point well. We should put all this in context. We should remember that the UK Government has benefited from this resource, even though it is a fluctuating source of revenue and a finite resource. The UK Government has used it to underpin budget after budget. If it is good enough for the UK Government, we should maybe consider whether it is good enough for us. I said that I did not want to be too controversial, lest I break the consensus across the chamber, and I am not necessarily trying to make a constitutional point. I happen to believe that the best way to achieve control over these resources is through independence. However, as Tavish Scott can tell us, Shetland has had its own oil fund for a great many years. I hear him say, “It’s Shetland’s oil.” Indeed, it might be Shetland’s oil, but that demonstrates that the argument that we should create such a fund for Scotland is not necessarily a constitutional one. I hope that we can all get behind the idea of Scotland having greater access to the revenue that is created by its oil and gas. We should be investing that revenue in the renewables opportunity that is ahead of us. In April, total renewable energy generation capacity in Scotland was 4,417MW.

That is significant, but we need to do much more. If we took the money that we generate from the North Sea and invested it in that sector we would provide job opportunities for people in the sector in the future. That is how we should utilise North Sea oil and gas in future years.

Forgive me for my arrogance, but I assume that I am one of the people to whom Mr Brown is referring. Does he recognise that I firmly placed in context the call for an oil fund? It could happen under the current constitutional arrangements. Why not?

Mr Stewart mentions the UK minister at the time. Does he regret the fact that that minister did not take the opportunity to establish an oil fund when oil was first struck?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that an organisation that provides advocacy services should be independent of the organisation that it interacts with on behalf of an individual? Will she set out what the Scottish Government is doing to promote independent advocacy?

I welcome the debate, but it is important to place it firmly in the context of the motion and the Labour amendment. I will turn first to the motion in the name of Michael Matheson and deal with what I understand is meant by the principles of rehabilitation and reablement to which it refers. As I hope we all agree, sustaining services for older people is important, but there is a serious challenge. Nonetheless, providing quality compassionate care for older people that protects their dignity and independence is one of the most important duties of any civilised society. It is right to work to allow older people to lead independent lives. The serious challenge that is before us and which we must rise to is, as the minister set out, the major demographic change that we face in the coming years. By 2033, the over-60s will make up one third of the population. There is an expectation that, in the next six years, there will be a 25 per cent increase in the number of older Scots who need some form of care. That will have a real impact, given that the Government estimates that, overall, about £4.5 billion is spent every year on older people’s services across health and social care. That is in the current context, so the figure is likely to increase in the future. About one third of that £4.5 billion—£1.4 billion—goes on unplanned emergency admissions to hospital. It is therefore vital that we do more to reduce unplanned admissions. One way in which to achieve that is by integrating health and social care through the lead commissioning model. The Government has established a lead commissioning integration group to consider that. Why is it important to reduce unplanned admissions? Clinicians, care managers and older people tell us that such admissions to hospital are often distressing and result in poorer outcomes than might have been achieved through a package of primary and social care in the community. Further, it costs the Government more in the long run. Therefore, changing how we work in the area is important and that fits very well with the preventative spend model to which we are increasingly moving. There is broad consensus in the Parliament that we should move towards the integration of social care and health services, although there are different views on how that is best achieved. The Government has come to the view that lead commissioning is the way forward. I agree that that is the way in which we should move, because it will give people quicker access to care and will reduce delayed discharges. I am sure that we all share those aims. Jackie Baillie raised issues about delayed discharges and asked whether we share those concerns. She mentioned that, recently, 95 patients were discharged late. I absolutely agree that that is 95 too many, although Kevin Stewart made the point rather well that we must consider that in the context of the past situation. About 10 years ago, more than 2,000 patients were delayed in leaving hospital by more than six weeks; of course, that was under the Labour-Liberal Executive. Dr Simpson rose— I will let Mr Simpson in in a minute, because I was just about to turn to him. I should say Dr Simpson—I apologise. I do not know whether the Official Report will pick this up but, in response to my point that more than 2,000 patients were delayed in leaving hospital under Dr Simpson’s party, he said from a sedentary position, “We didn’t make promises.” That was quite telling. The Labour Party made no promises—presumably, no promises to tackle the problem. We might come to the conclusion that coming to the chamber and raising those concerns is somewhat contrived. I do not think that that is the case. I got the impression that Jackie Baillie was genuinely concerned by delayed discharge, and those concerns are shared across the Parliament.

I return to my earlier point: we must place the figures in the context of where we have been. Only 10 years ago, 2,000 patients were delayed in leaving hospital for more than six weeks. I accept absolutely that we want to get the figure to zero, but tremendous progress has been made over the past decade and we should recognise that. I said that that position is shared throughout the Parliament. Only last month, the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy said: “the reality is that too many patients, many of them older people, are still waiting too long to be discharged.” The matter is important to the Government. I have got caught in a cul-de-sac on that issue, so I must move on more quickly and return to lead commissioning. Lead commissioning is an important way forward. It is important to get health boards and local government working together and contracting services from one another with one taking the lead. That model can focus far better on a person’s needs and on outcomes than can different parts of the public sector operating in silos. Lord Sutherland himself has said: “Lead commissioning provides the best and quickest way of achieving an integrated care system, and I believe the Scottish Government’s approach is the right one.” I am being told to wind up. Our latitude has obviously run out, although I could have said much more on the matter. I welcome the debate and look forward to supporting the motion this evening.

Will Mary Fee give way?

Does the member recognise that more people are employed in the allied health professions than during the final year of the Labour Administration?

I welcome the tenor of the debate, which has been consensual. That reflects the fact that, across the chamber, we all recognise the importance of supporting veterans. The debate is timely. It is just over a week until remembrance Sunday, when we will all go to remembrance events, so it is right to have the debate now. There can be no family in Scotland that has no family member who has served in the forces. Richard Simpson spoke tellingly about the severe impact on a family when a family member serves in the forces and the worst comes to the worst. In my family, my grandfather was a Seaforth Highlander—he was one of Montgomery’s highway decorators in the second world war. His father fought in the Boer war and the first world war and received the freedom of Dumbarton for his service in the Boer war—a plaque to commemorate that hung proudly on my grandparents’ wall for many years. My grandfather’s generation was magnificent and was part of the generation who defeated fascism in Europe. In the post-war era, those veterans combined to build a better society, and the first drive took place for veterans to get a better deal. That was possible largely because many veterans came out of the second world war. Veterans are fewer now, which is why we must recognise their importance in our society. Their number is not particularly big these days, so they need people to look out for them. Keith Brown was right to say that veterans in our society are not just old men who gather to mark battles that are long past. Unfortunately, war seems to be ever present in this world. In recent years, wars have taken place in Iraq and Afghanistan. Before that, we had the war in the Balkans, the Gulf war and the Falklands battle, in which the minister saw active service. He is one of the few members to have seen active military service. Whatever our views are on the circumstances of individual wars—many of us, including me, opposed the war in Iraq and were concerned about the direction of the war in Afghanistan—it is right to support the veterans who have fought in them. I spoke of my great-grandfather. I happen to think that the two wars in which he fought—the Boer war and the first world war—were gross imperial misadventures, but we must separate our view about a war from our approach to those who fought in it. We can still be proud of people’s service and recognise that those who served deserve support. The Scottish Government has a good record on supporting veterans. The Administration has taken several actions, such as extending the concessionary bus travel scheme to include injured veterans and giving priority NHS treatment to veterans for service-related health issues. The Government has also established the Scottish veterans fund and provided funding of £1.2 million for Combat Stress to support mental health services for veterans. Legislation has been used to make it easier for veterans to establish local connections to access housing. Several initiatives have been taken, some smaller and some greater but, combined, they go some way towards recognising the depth of society’s debt to those who have served in the military. Support has been provided to bodies that do good work with veterans. Elaine Murray spoke about some of the organisations that work with veterans, many of whom experience great challenges. For example, the Government gave £10,000 to Erskine for a supported accommodation pilot involving five cottages alongside welfare, retraining and employment advice for recently discharged service personnel. That support for Erskine would meet with my grandfather’s approval, as he was an enthusiastic supporter of the charity and left a bequest for it in his will. Funding of £7,000 was provided for the Lady Haig Poppy Factory for a mobile museum tour to engage children with the poppy appeal. It is important that we help young people to understand the role that veterans have played in shaping the world that they live in. Various other projects have been supported. The annual report on Scottish Government support for our armed forces and veterans community sets out a number of areas in which great progress has been made. As ever in such debates, time is running out, so I will come to a close. The Scottish Government has a strong record but, lest we fall into complacency, we should recognise that more must be done. That is why I welcome the new strategy that will be published in the spring of next year, which Jim Eadie mentioned. I look forward to seeing the further actions that it contains, although we should recognise that offering all the necessary support to veterans is a circle that might never be squared, because the debt that is owed is so great that we can probably never do enough. I welcome the work that has been done and look forward to the work that will be done in future.

Is the Deputy First Minister aware of Allied Bakeries’ decision to consult on the future of the Patak’s factory in Cumbernauld in my constituency? Does she share my concern that the consultation should be genuine and open and should, hopefully, result in a long-term future for that site? However, if worse comes to worst and the company decides to close the factory, what reassurances can she give me that the Scottish Government will be able to step in and help the 108 employees there?

Shame!

Some people might have thought that a debate on winter resilience would be rather boring; however, this debate has actually been rather lively at points. It has also been rather informative. Who knew before today that Helen Eadie had a Keith Brown fixation? We are all better for knowing that—although I can see that Keith Brown is not entirely happy that members keep referring to it. I withdraw the remark. Also, although some people might have thought that the debate was not important, since I was elected no issue has sparked as much correspondence for me as last winter’s weather. It is important that we have the debate. However, having spoken to colleagues, I know that not all of them received the same volume of contact on the matter. That tells me that there may be something peculiar about the way in which North Lanarkshire Council deals with bad weather. I will return to that later. I would like to echo the call that some members made by saying that we all have a role in tackling the problems associated with extreme winter conditions. Clearly, local government and Scottish Government agencies have the primary role, but we all have a part to play. I saw that for myself in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth last winter. Like many other members, in their areas, on several occasions I played a part in clearing my street with my neighbours. However, as Christine Grahame said, the task could seem fruitless—no sooner had we finished clearing the snow than it fell again. Unlike Dennis Robertson, I was not in danger of being infuriated by a snowplough. There was no sign of a snowplough or a gritter anywhere near my street. The issue of litigation is raised from time to time and a few members touched on it. Last winter, the issue was raised with me by a shopkeeper in Cumbernauld village—where I happen to live. He is a barber and he cleared the street and pavement outside his shop. No sooner had he done so than some happy individual walked by and threatened him with legal action should he slip on the street. However, as Graeme Dey said, the available advice on where the law stands is that it is very unlikely that any individual could be the subject of litigation for clearing the streets. The answer that I received to a written question last year also showed that to be the case. People should have no fear of playing their part in clearing snow and ice from the pavements and streets around them. Concern has been expressed that people do not feel ready for the winter. The Scottish Government commissioned a survey of just over 1,000 people in May, and about three fifths of those questioned felt that they were not properly prepared for heavy snow, a prolonged freeze or flooding—all of which we can expect to experience in a harsh winter. We should welcome the ready for winter campaign, which, as well as allowing Kenny MacAskill to demonstrate his sartorial elegance—I thought that Jackson Carlaw was most unfair in his description of Mr MacAskill’s attire—will remind individuals and families of the risks and consequences of being underprepared, will highlight the range of information and resources that are available, and will encourage as many people as possible to be ready for winter this year, which I am sure we all support. Turning to what the Government is doing, I believe that lessons have been learned from last year. We must remember the context. Dick Lyle, I think, made the point that last winter was the worst one that Scotland had seen since the winter of 1962-63—which, unlike him, I cannot remember. It clearly posed challenges, but lessons have been learned. As well as the ready for winter campaign, following the problems that motorists faced on the M8, in particular, last year, a multi-agency response team has been formed, which includes representatives from the police forces, the trunk road operating companies, Transport Scotland and ScotRail. It will operate from the traffic control centre in Glasgow. In addition, there was the suitably dramatic-sounding exercise polar storm—a polar storm is certainly not what we hope to see this winter—which looked at how we can respond more coherently and in a better fashion to severe winter weather. We should accept that Scotland should be more prepared for bad weather than ever before, because of the lessons that have been learned. I see that the Scottish Government resilience room will operate 24 hours a day during spells of severe weather. That should allow for better support and improved co-ordination of the response, which will involve the Government and—vitally—the public being better informed. Jackson Carlaw and Dennis Robertson touched on why that is important. I notice that we do not have quite as generous a six minutes as we did at the start of the debate, so I will turn to the final area that I want to discuss, which is the experience in my area. John Mason suggested that the priority should be ensuring that Broadwood stadium is kept clear so that Clyde games can go ahead. I am not sure that that will be the Government’s number 1 priority, but I will see what North Lanarkshire Council can do. However, there are wider concerns about the way in which North Lanarkshire Council approached snow clearance. Jackson Carlaw mentioned North Lanarkshire Council reporting that attacks on gritters made some places no-go areas. My first response was that my constituency must be a haven of vandalism, so rare a breed were gritters in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth last winter, but I doubt that that is the reason. Of course, we should be concerned about any attacks on public servants—any person who makes such an attack should be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law. However, there are genuine concerns about the council’s strategy for snow clearance, which left entire areas untouched. I hope that it has done the same as the Scottish Government and has learned the lessons from last winter. I hope, too, that its response will be better in the event that we experience the bad winter that we hope does not transpire. I welcome the debate and commend those who were involved in responding to last winter’s weather. I wish those who have the responsibility for responding to this winter’s weather well, but I hope that they are not prevailed upon to the same extent.

I apologise to you, Presiding Officer, and to other members because I have to leave before the end of the debate to get to an appointment in Cumbernauld. I congratulate Jenny Marra on securing tonight’s debate on a very important issue. Far too many people in Scotland—one third of Scottish households—are in fuel poverty. It is an absolute outrage in this fuel-rich country that any household is in fuel poverty. Let us consider the effects of fuel poverty on individuals and families. Professor Hills, who is director of the centre for analysis of social exclusion at the London School of Economics, has argued that fuel poverty poses serious public health and environmental problems. According to the Office for National Statistics, there are some 27,000 extra deaths in the UK each winter compared to other times of year. That figure is worse than the figures for Finland, Sweden and Norway, all of which have severe winters more regularly than these islands do. Professor Hills and his team estimate that, in about half of cases in which a death was attributed to lower-than-average indoor temperatures, there were economic reasons. The manifestations of problems that are associated with fuel poverty, particularly in wintertime, are stark and serious. However, lest we think that it is only a wintertime issue, I point out that fuel poverty affects families all year round. It is a disgrace that some families are forced to choose between heating and eating. Fuel poverty occurs against the backdrop of oil and gas from Scottish waters funnelling billions into the UK Exchequer, and the energy companies enjoying great profits at increased price for households. Earlier this month, the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets released figures that show that profit margins for energy firms have increased to £125 a year per customer from only £15 earlier in the year. As Jenny Marra mentioned, the average dual-fuel bill is now more than £1,000 a year. That is set to rise by £175 to reach £1,345 by next month. That is clearly a significant challenge for any household, but especially for those that are in fuel poverty. I welcome the fact that the First Minister is calling for the big six energy companies to meet the Scottish Government and stakeholders to discuss the issue, and I am sure that the cabinet secretary will tell us more about the plans for that meeting. However, reform of the industry that is more fundamental than a simple meeting with those companies is required. That is why, although there is nothing objectionable about Jenny Marra’s motion, I did not feel that I could sign it and lodged an amendment to it that acknowledges the part that fuel costs play in driving fuel poverty. Jenny Marra mentioned that in her speech, but her motion fails to acknowledge the part that energy companies play in the problem. That is why my proposed amendment suggests that the Parliament “recognises that the energy market is a reserved matter, and believes that power to legislate in this area should be transferred to the Scottish Parliament to allow for better regulation of the market as a vital tool in tackling the problem of fuel poverty in Scotland.”

I am just about to conclude, otherwise I would have been delighted to give way. If we are serious about tackling fuel poverty, the conclusion in my amendment is inescapable for the Parliament. We cannot simply complain regularly about fuel poverty without acknowledging that the powers that we have to deal with the problem are limited. I urge all members to support the transfer to this legislature of powers such as those that are called for in my amendment, so that we can end the scandal of fuel poverty in a fuel-rich society.

I thank the member for his generosity in taking my intervention. Does what he has just said not gloss over the fact that one of the drivers of fuel poverty is the cost of domestic fuel and that the energy companies are profiteering? They do not need to be making the profits that they are making just now. Surely the member has to accept that.

As John Mason did, I place the debate firmly in the context of the Government’s strong record on housing. Between 2008 and 2011, a record £1.7 billion was invested in housing, which supported delivery of more than 27,000 affordable new-build starts between 2007 and 2011. That is the largest number in any comparable period since the early 1980s. Indeed, between 2009 and 2011, 3,295 council houses were approved, and in 2010 more than 1,000 of them were begun. Again, that is the highest figure recorded in 20 years. By comparison, as Dick Lyle reminded us, Labour completed six council houses in the 2003 to 2007 period, all of them in Shetland. It is shameful that none of them was in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth—not that a share of six council houses would have done us much good.

In just about every debate that involves public expenditure, we have heard carping and whining from Labour members about the Government’s direction, but we hear no ideas, innovation or suggestions. Mr Macdonald has been invited several times to suggest where alternative funds could come from, but we have heard nothing but bluster from him; we have heard not one suggestion of where the money should come from. We all accept that circumstances are difficult and we have had severe cuts to the Scottish Government’s budget, so we now require new and innovative ways to fund house building.

Mr Hume demonstrates a singular unwillingness to recognise the difference between revenue and capital budgets. The cut to capital budgets is far more substantial than 12 per cent, and we should remember that his party in the Government south of the border is delivering that cut to the SNP Administration’s budget. We need innovation in house building and the Scottish Government is providing that. We have heard criticisms from Labour members about the size of the housing association grant, but they fail to recognise that we are in a different context, because houses are cheaper to build now. In that context, and given the budgetary pressures, it would have been wrong of the Government not to revisit the housing association grant. Even with the change in the benchmark figure for the grant—I think that the new figure is about £40,000—the sector is rising to the challenge. Every time we hear criticism of the availability of the grant, we hear housing associations being done down, because they are willing to meet the challenge and are rising to it.

We all accept that housing associations will ask for more money, just as every sector will. However, they are also willing to accept the challenge that has been laid before them and they are rising to it. New houses are being brought online. Alex Johnstone criticised the national housing trust, but he failed to recognise that the scheme has been welcomed by the sector. Gordon MacRae, the head of communications and policy at Shelter Scotland, said: “Let’s get one thing straight—the National Housing Trust is a good thing—a positive initiative which aims to facilitate the building of new privately rented homes across Scotland.” Jonathan Fair, the chief executive of Homes for Scotland, said: “The National Housing Trust is making a significant difference to the companies involved in delivering these much needed new homes for the people of Scotland”. I would rather listen to those individuals than to Alex Johnstone, who also demonstrates a singular unwillingness to provide any new ideas for housing. I want to touch on the approach that we are seeing in Scotland and the different direction of travel south of the border, although I will probably not have time to say as much as I wanted. Maureen Watt was correct to identify that there is a clear divergence between what is happening here and what is happening south of the border. Here, we have seen a restriction of the right to buy, which has given councils the confidence to invest in council houses again, while the Prime Minister said on “The Andrew Marr Show” that he wants to reinvigorate the right to buy. That is entirely the wrong direction for the people of England, as are the reforms in housing benefit and the rent increases for social housing south of the border.

You are very generous, Presiding Officer. You are becoming my favourite—I don’t know whether I should say that. [Laughter.] How much more time does that get me?

I should conclude, in that case, by welcoming in particular the significant investment in social housing in my constituency. In the past few years under this Administration we have seen new houses in Carbrain, Seafar, Kildrum, Cumbernauld village, Westfield and Kilsyth. They are good-quality homes that have been provided to the people I represent, many of whom have languished on waiting lists for a long time. In the past few days, the Scottish Government has committed £2 million for the second phase of redevelopment of the Ainslie Maclehose scheme in the Kildrum area of Cumbernauld. I welcome that investment, and I look forward to welcoming Keith Brown or Alex Neil—or indeed both them—with or without hard hats when that scheme is open.

Will the member take an intervention?

I join David Torrance and Richard Baker in congratulating Rob Gibson on securing the debate, which is pertinent, given that we are constantly discussing the future of Scotland’s energy supply. It is clear that this discussion is an important part of that debate. I welcome Germany’s decision to phase out its nuclear power plants by 2022. That decision was provoked or inspired by the tragedy at Fukushima in Japan not long ago, but the direction of travel in Germany somewhat predates that, of course. As David Torrance correctly pointed out, the former green-red coalition in Germany set Germany on that course. Its target was to shut down Germany’s nuclear power stations by 2021, but the Christian Democrats altered that decision. There has, of course, been a U-turn in light of Fukushima. I welcome that U-turn. Richard Baker is correct to say that Germany’s energy policy is a matter for Germany. However, it is right that we should take an interest in the issue of nuclear energy in particular, given the ramifications across boundaries if a nuclear incident occurs. There is, of course, a history of incidents at nuclear power stations, the most well known being Chernobyl in 1986. The massive impact of that incident on Ukraine, Belarus and the surrounding area cannot be denied. Huge numbers of individuals—up to 600,000—were involved in the clean-up operation. It has been reported that some 100,000 of them have since died or are badly affected by radiation poisoning. That is to say nothing of the evacuation and relocation of the people who lived in the area, and the stigmatisation and the infection that occurred. As an aside, I commend my constituent Jim Gillies in the Abronhill area of Cumbernauld, who undertakes a vigil each year to commemorate the tragedy of Chernobyl and has raised money for many children affected by radiation poisoning in Ukraine. Lest we fall back on the complacency that standards in the UK’s nuclear industry are much higher than they were in the former Soviet Union, which is undeniably true, and we believe that there is no danger in the perpetuation of the nuclear industry here in Scotland and the UK, I remind members that there have been incidents in more developed countries than the Soviet Union. Fukushima is a recent example. It was described by Arnold Gunderson, a former nuclear industry senior vice-president, as “the biggest industrial catastrophe in the history of mankind”. That is a rather stark warning from someone who was involved in the nuclear industry. Lest we become complacent and say that Fukushima was a one-off because of a natural disaster that could never occur here in Scotland, we need only look at what happened more recently at Marcoule in France, where one person was killed and four injured in a blast at the Marcoule nuclear site. That demonstrates that we should not be complacent about the higher standards of safety here in the UK. I want to deal with the myths of nuclear power. David Torrance made the point well that we are told that it is environmentally friendly, yet the mining of uranium scars the landscape and contaminates the area mined. Another myth is that it is safe. Uranium is mined from some unstable parts of the world, and there are health concerns for workers involved. There is the myth that uranium is sustainable, yet it is a finite resource. We have to ditch the nuclear obsession and follow the German example. Let us have no nuclear power stations and let us invest in a renewable future.

I assume that the member’s inference is that her colleagues down south have levered in private finance to further education and have not, therefore, passed on a cut to the further education sector. Why is it, then, that cuts to further education budgets south of the border are twice as much as they are in Scotland?

We have now heard it said twice that the ancient institutions—the ancient universities—in this country are elitist organisations. As an alumnus of the University of Glasgow, I have to say that this is the first time that I have ever been accused of being part of any elite, so I thank the Labour Party for that news. I welcome the debate. I thank the Conservatives for their choice of subject matter, but I disagree with the terms of their motion for two reasons. First, it totally and utterly fails to acknowledge the budgetary circumstances of the time. It is quite clear that the Scottish Government has been passed a very challenging budget settlement from Westminster and it is trying to do the best that it can with it. I heard the groans from the Tory members when the cabinet secretary made that point, but their groans cannot mask the fact that the cuts that the Scottish Government is facing are a consequence of decisions being taken by their party at Westminster. It was interesting to hear Mary Scanlon say that colleges cannot work miracles with cuts; I wonder whether she will follow that statement through to its logical conclusion.

I was just about to come to that point—I hear the Labour Party members applauding. Others have said that this is a matter of choice. Of course there is still choice to be exercised by the Scottish Government—I absolutely accept that. However, what we have not heard in any of the debates about public spending by the Scottish Government is the choice that other parties would exercise. What areas of the budget would they seek to cut? From which other areas of the budget would they lever funds to give to areas such as further education? The second reason why I disagree with the Tory motion is that it raises once more the spectre of tuition fees. The motion refers to a “consequence of the Scottish Government’s refusal to allow additional private sources of finance in the higher education sector”. That is quite clearly a reference to tuition fees, so we know that the Conservatives still want to see the imposition of tuition fees here in Scotland. It is not just me who believes that; the National Union of Students said: “We fully reject the Scottish Conservatives’ motion which once again calls for, in effect, tuition fees”. I would like the Scottish Conservatives to let go of the idea that we need tuition fees in higher education. It is clear that members on these benches—and I hope others, although we have heard in recent days that the Labour Party seems to support tuition fees of £6,000 in England—believe that education should be based on the ability to succeed and learn and not on the ability to pay. We are seeing that commitment in further education as well as in higher education. The education maintenance allowance has been protected, despite the attacks on it south of the border. That clearly benefits further education students because a significant proportion of those who are in receipt of the EMA are further education students. Again, we have seen the NUS welcome that decision. I had hoped to go more into the background of the sector and the debate more generally, but I must close by referring to Cumbernauld College, which is the only tertiary education institution in my constituency. I thank the Minister for Learning and Skills for visiting the college with me on Tuesday, and I am sure that he agrees that, although it is one of the smaller colleges, it is an excellent institution with good reports from Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Education. The college told us that there are challenges ahead for tertiary education and the further education sector, but they are challenges that the colleges are embracing. The colleges want to ensure that the sector moves forward strongly in the future. I close with one last reference. I know that there are plans to regionalise the structure of colleges, and I imagine that there is a temptation to use local authority boundaries as the logical way to do that. I hope that that can be revisited. The constituency of Cumbernauld and Kilsyth does not sit easily or readily in the North Lanarkshire area for a number of reasons—historical, cultural and linked to public transport. I hope that that will be considered, and I will take it up in future with the cabinet secretary.

The First Minister will appreciate the public concern about yesterday’s appeal court decision on Robert Foye’s conviction for a heinous crime that was committed in my constituency. What assurances can the First Minister provide for my constituents and the general public throughout Scotland that a mechanism is built into the justice system to ensure that, if Robert Foye is still regarded as a danger to the public, he will spend the entirety of his sentence behind bars?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what consideration it has given to social and environmental measures as an alternative to gross domestic product as a means of assessing living standards in Scotland. (S4O-00192)

Two factors suggest that now is the time to consider social and environmental measures not as an alternative but as a complement to GDP as a measure: first, the appointment of Joseph Stiglitz to the Council of Economic Advisers and the good work that he has done in that area; and secondly, the Oxfam humankind index by Oxfam and its partners, which has been brought to the attention of MSPs. What work is the Government doing in that regard?

I thank the members who signed the motion that is before us to enable it to be debated and those who have stayed behind to participate in or listen to the debate. I thank Save the Children and the Daycare Trust for bringing to our attention the matters that are in their report “Making Work Pay—The Childcare Gap”. I specifically thank Save the Children for assisting me in preparing for the debate and for bringing robotic dolls to the Parliament earlier today to publicise the debate. That generated some press interest and no shortage of sideways glances from bystanders. Those of us who are parents know the trials and tribulations of organising childcare. I consider myself fortunate, in so far as my wife and I have been able to find reliable, good and affordable childcare for our young daughter. However, as “Making Work Pay” demonstrates, not everyone is so fortunate. Earlier this year, Save the Children and the Daycare Trust jointly surveyed more than 4,000 parents across the United Kingdom to explore their views on how the cost of childcare and access issues impact on their employment and family budgets and, in turn, to explore the effects on child poverty. More than 14 per cent of those who were surveyed reside in Scotland, and the trends here are consistent with the overall findings. Those findings are striking, but they are not new. We know a lot about the difficulties that parents experience and what could make a difference. The results of the survey focus on the experiences of parents who live on the very lowest incomes—those in severe poverty. It will be no surprise that those families face the greatest challenge in accessing affordable childcare. Of the parents who responded to the survey, eight out of 10 who are in severe poverty said that cost is a barrier to accessing childcare. Parents who live in severe poverty were twice as likely as other participants to cite cost as a barrier to accessing childcare above any other barrier. The majority of parents who are in severe poverty—61 per cent—said that they had struggled to pay for childcare, whereas the figure for parents on higher incomes was 37 per cent. Of the respondents, 41 per cent said that their childcare costs were similar to their mortgage or rent costs. That such a large proportion of families find the cost of childcare to be on a par with paying for a roof over their heads is surely a stark demonstration of the challenges. The high cost of childcare is felt by most families, but for families in severe poverty the impact is particularly drastic. The survey establishes that parents who are in severe poverty often need to cut back on key essentials simply to pay for childcare. Nearly half of families living in severe poverty have cut back on food to afford childcare and such families are more than twice as likely as families on higher incomes are to cut back on household bills just to afford childcare costs. We can surely all agree that no family should have to choose between feeding themselves or heating their homes and paying for childcare. Many children are missing out on opportunities to help them grow and develop. Parents who are in severe poverty are more than twice as likely as parents on higher incomes are to cut back on after-school activities. Many parents in severe poverty have to make difficult financial choices simply to pay for childcare. The cost of childcare has caused a third of parents who live in severe poverty to get into debt, whereas that has happened to less than a quarter of parents on higher incomes. It is little wonder that many parents in the UK struggle with the costs of childcare when they face the highest childcare costs of any Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development country relative to their income and spend 33 per cent of their net income on childcare. The pressures continue to rise. The Daycare Trust suggests that average costs for childcare have risen significantly since 2010. For instance, between 2010 and 2011, the cost of a childminder for kids aged two or over increased by 8.3 per cent, which is about four times as much as the uplift in the average wage in the same period. Make no mistake—the ramifications of those pressures are serious and, again, are particularly acute for the poorest families. The survey indicates that a quarter of parents in severe poverty have had to give up work as a result of not being able to afford childcare. Those are not parents who have been made redundant or parents who could not find work. They are parents who had work but felt that they had to quit because they could not afford to continue to work. One third of parents in severe poverty had had to turn down a job; a quarter had not been able to take up education or training; and one in 10 had had to move home as a result of difficulties finding suitable childcare. Recent changes to working tax credit by the UK Government will only exacerbate those problems. Its decision to reduce the percentage of costs of formal childcare that is covered from 80 to 70 per cent will be very damaging to poorer families. There is no better demonstration of the concerns that were caused by the changes to working tax credit than those expressed by one of my constituents in Kilsyth, who took part in the survey and said they felt that “it is very short sighted of the UK government to make cut backs in working tax credit and tax relief for child care as there is a real benefit to the health and well being of parents plus the economy of helping parents work.” I turn to what we can do to go some way to tackling the problems that are identified in the report. First, we can call on the UK Government to reverse its decision to alter working tax credits in a negative way. I hope that the minister can state what the Scottish Government might be doing to that end. Here in Scotland, we can call upon local authorities to provide their statutory hours of childcare provision in more flexible ways to support parents into employment. In the longer term, we can consider Save the Children’s other suggestions—that those statutory hours of childcare provision be extended to two-year-olds, beginning with the poorest families; and that more be done to support out-of-school care for children aged up to 14 in low-income households. Given the budgetary pressures, that may not be easy, but investing in that area may have wider economic and social benefits. It could also fit in well with the Scottish Government’s expressed desire to increase preventative spending. It might also make life that bit easier for some of the most vulnerable families in the country. Surely we can all agree that that is a goal well worth achieving.

I will bear that in mind, Presiding Officer, although I note that Willie Rennie did not take any interventions. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement. In a previous debate on the programme for government, I said that the debate was set firmly in the context of the difficult financial settlement that the UK Government had given Scotland. The spending review is set in the same context. Over the next three years, the Scottish budget will be cut—in real terms, I remind Mr Brown—by a substantial £3.3 billion, or 11 per cent below the 2010-11 level. That and the substantial reduction in the capital budget represent a major challenge to the Scottish Government’s efforts to support public services and investment and provide a stark and severe illustration of the problems that it faces. John Swinney said that the spending review falls at a defining moment not only because of those Westminster cuts but because of the fragility of the UK and global economies. Indeed, the downgrading of Italy’s financial status has provided another reminder of that fragility. Closer to home, though, problems have been identified in the UK’s economic outlook. Last summer, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development forecast a 2.5 per cent growth in UK gross domestic product in 2011, but this summer, it downgraded that figure to 1.4 per cent—a move that has been reflected in downward revisions by others. Westminster’s decision to cut the deficit too deeply and too fast is simply not stimulating the economy and only bears out the warnings made by Paul Krugman, Joseph Stiglitz and others that such an approach would not work. In that regard, I thought it ill advised for Willie Rennie to speak as a Tory champion—although I note that he is not listening at the moment. The Scottish Government needs to take strong action to protect Scotland, and we heard a lot about that in today’s statement. I welcome the announcement of investment in capital spending, even though, given the severe cuts to capital budgets, such a move cannot be easy for the Government. With the announced investment in affordable housing, the Forth replacement crossing, the school building programme and the Edinburgh and Glasgow improvements programme, the Government is not only supporting economic recovery in the short term with the employment of people to construct those projects, but opening up longer-term economic opportunities and ensuring that Scotland has an infrastructure fit for the 21st century. I welcome John Swinney’s comment that he hoped that this would be the last year of a public sector pay freeze. He took that measure not with any great relish but as a consequence of London’s cuts agenda; nevertheless, he will appreciate how difficult it has been for workers.

If Mr Findlay had listened to what I said, he would have heard me welcome the cabinet secretary’s hope that the pay freeze will end next year. I hope that Mr Findlay, too, welcomes that. Indeed, I remind him that his party’s former Chancellor of the Exchequer said that under Labour the cuts would have been more severe than those made by Margaret Thatcher. Moreover, we should not forget the role that Mr Findlay’s party played in leading us into the situation that we face today. I accept—and Neil Findlay will agree with me—that things have been difficult for workers and their families. I welcome Mr Swinney’s hope that the pay freeze will end. We have seen an uplift in the Scottish living wage. I keep hearing from the Labour Party that it is campaigning for the Scottish living wage, but the Government is taking it forward. The Labour Party wants it to be implemented across the entirety of the public sector, but there are clear limitations on the Government’s ability to do that. It cannot dictate to local authorities what their pay policy should be, but I would, of course, welcome local government following the Government’s strong lead in implementing the living wage. There is also a commitment to continue the policy of no compulsory redundancies—the Government has given a clear commitment to those who work for it in that regard. I regret the announcement that pension contributions are likely to be increased as a consequence of Westminster holding a proverbial gun to the head of the Scottish Government and, by extension, Scottish public sector workers. In that regard, it is highly understandable that Gavin Brown pleaded with us not to focus on the record of his Government. If my party’s Government had such a record, I would be trying to divert attention away from it. If that sounds like Tory bashing, let me turn to the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, who recently wrote to John Swinney, following John Swinney’s request for an extension to the implementation date for the increase in pension contributions. Danny Alexander wrote: “In the event of any time overrun ... I would have to reduce the Scottish Government’s budget by £8.4 million for every month’s delay ... I cannot agree to your request to extend the implementation date beyond April 2012.” I think that that is an absolutely scandalous—

I was just about to invite Mr Rennie to defend his colleague.

I can confirm to Mr Rennie that I am well aware that money does not grow on trees. Is he aware—I would have thought that he would be—of the Liberal Democrat principle of subsidiarity, which is about decisions being taking at the most appropriate level? I thought that he was a confirmed devolutionist, yet his party and his Government are dictating to the Scottish Government what its policy should be on pensions by demanding that it should follow their lead and bribing it to do so. Willie Rennie rose— Do I have time to give way again, Presiding Officer?

If I did not have to close shortly, I would have been delighted to give way to Mr Rennie, even though he showed a remarkable reluctance to give way to anyone. I had hoped to focus on preventative spend, which was an extremely important aspect of the cabinet secretary’s statement, and which Kenny Gibson spoke well about. I welcome the announcements that have been made today. The emphasis on preventative spend is just one of many reasons why all sides of the chamber should welcome John Swinney’s statement.

The member referred to the “unsustainable council tax freeze”. Will he remind us what the Labour Party’s policy on the council tax was at the election?

Why does Patrick Harvie say that the Liberal Democrats seem confused? I thought that it was clear that they support the agenda that emanates from Westminster.

I congratulate Bill Kidd on securing the debate and apologise to the Presiding Officer and other members, as I may have to leave early as a result of an unavoidable appointment in Cumbernauld at 7 o’clock. I cannot think of a topic for discussion in the chamber that is more important than peace. It is from peace that all that is good in life can emanate. No society that finds peace at contest will be able to offer its citizens security or the opportunities that we take for granted in Scotland. Bill Kidd cited Dwight D Eisenhower. An American statesman of older vintage, James Madison, wrote in his “Political Observations”: “Of all the enemies to public liberty war is, perhaps, the most to be dreaded, because it comprises and develops the germ of every other.” Those words from 1795 are as true today as they were when they were first written. That is why I welcome this international day of peace. I apologise to Bill Kidd that I will not be able to attend his reception to mark the occasion, but I hope that it goes well. The international day of peace, or peace day, provides an opportunity for individuals, organisations and entire nations to create practical acts of peace on a shared date. Today’s debate is only one of many events to mark the day. Those events are testament to the commitment of many people to the goal of peace. In that regard, I want to mention an event that was held in my constituency to reaffirm the commitment to peace. Today may be the international day of peace, but the United Nations designated 1986 as the year of peace, and a peace garden was established in Kilsyth in that year as part of Cumbernauld and Kilsyth District Council’s contribution and efforts to mark it. Earlier this month, I was pleased to attend an event to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the creation of that peace garden. A number of people attended the event, and those who were present were able to restate their support for peace. Although the garden’s origins are not necessarily directly tied to the international day of peace, the objectives are such that it is well worth mentioning. I do not want to take up too much time, as I know that other members want to speak. I thank Bill Kidd again for securing the debate, and look forward to the day when peace is secured across the globe. That might be achieved somewhat sooner if we could move away from a global circumstance. In 2010, some $1.6 trillion was expended on the military and armaments—some 43 per cent of that by the United States alone. I am not so blinkered as to expect that that expenditure will entirely wither away—indeed, I believe that secure defences can be important to secure peace. However, when we see extreme poverty and its consequences—hunger, illiteracy and disease—run rampant in parts of the globe, it is surely right to question the size of the global expenditure. Perhaps if we took even a portion of that expenditure to feed and educate the world, the goals that are represented by the international day of peace might be closer to being achieved.

16. To ask the Scottish Government what consideration it has given to the findings arising from the first HMIE inspections under the newly introduced inspection framework. (S4O-00169)

Will the cabinet secretary join me in congratulating the schools in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth on the excellent number of HMIE reports that they have received? In particular, will he join me in congratulating Whitelees primary school, which was, I understand, the first to get five “excellent” awards under the new inspection regime? Will he also agree to visit that school at some point in the future with me?

In the cabinet secretary’s discussions with bodies furth of Scotland, has mention been made of recent indications of Scottish public opinion on independence?

Will the member give way?

I too am a great supporter of civil liberties. The member has not explained why any change to the structure of the police would alter our civil liberties.

The programme that the First Minister has set out before us does not stand alone but has been firmly placed in a wider context, which has at least two strands. The first is that it builds on the achievements of the past four years of the SNP minority Administration. That was underscored by the result that we got at the election, when, as the First Minister said, our competence and commitment were recognised. Those achievements were reflected in many areas, such as the reintroduction of free education for our students. On that point, I have to say that Iain Gray was wrong to say that his party abolished tuition fees. Labour abolished tuition fees no more than Murdo Fraser will abolish the Tories. Labour merely rebranded tuition fees, just as Murdo Fraser wants to rebrand the Tories. However, that is the political equivalent of Opal Fruits transforming into Starburst—different packaging but, in the cases that I am talking about, the same nasty flavour. Other achievements in the previous session include the phasing out of prescription charges, the renaissance in council house building, the additional police officers on the streets and the saving of two threatened accident and emergency departments. That investment in infrastructure and the wellbeing of Scotland’s people has contributed to a better country. The second strand of the context that we must recognise is that we still live in fragile times. The First Minister made clear reference to the Scottish Government’s concerns about the economic approach that is being pursued by the UK Government and others. That is a matter that we have debated previously—indeed, the Deputy Presiding Officer has raised the issue on a number of occasions in members’ business debates that she has secured. We all know that that approach to deficit reduction threatens our economic recovery. It is vital that the Scottish Government does all that it can with the limited powers that it has to support economic recovery.

No, I do not think that those words came out of my mouth. I quite clearly do not agree with that approach. We have to recognise that there is a different approach that involves making capital investment to promote the wellbeing of our people and sustain economic recovery while simultaneously dealing with the deficit. Both things can be done. One key way in which the Scottish Government can rise to the challenge that is before us is by investing in our national infrastructure. Given that I am the convener of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, it might come as no surprise that I want to focus on that area, which is one that has been significantly affected by the UK Government’s cuts agenda. There have been significant cuts to the amounts that are available for capital investment, but we must remain committed to it, as it is important for short-term growth, because of the construction jobs that are involved, and for the creation of a modern infrastructure, which will mean that we do not need to invest money in creating that infrastructure in future, because we will already have it. It is also important with regard to opening up long-term economic opportunities. I was glad, therefore, to hear the First Minister refer to, for example, the Southern general hospital and the new Forth crossing, which represent significant investments that will bring about economic and social benefits.

I thought that Mr Harvie might want in at this point.

I would love to see investment in publicly owned renewables, but we must reflect on the reality and the limitations of devolved government. The First Minister’s statement refers to supporting investment in renewables infrastructure. Many members are focusing on the statement itself—rightly, because it kicked off today’s debate—but there is a wider document that includes many other things to which I had hoped to refer, although I doubt that I will have time. There is a clear commitment to investing in renewable energy generation. I am sure that Patrick Harvie will share my interest in the details that are emerging on the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvements programme, on which Network Rail is currently consulting. It will, I hope, directly benefit my constituency, and the significant capital investment will create jobs, improve transport links and help our environment. I had hoped to go into the rest of the programme in a little detail but, as ever, time runs away from me, so I will conclude. We heard a little from Iain Gray and Ken Macintosh earlier about how the Administration should utilise the powers that it has available for the benefit of Scotland. It is clear from what we have heard today—from SNP members and from the First Minister—about what the document before us contains that the Scottish Government is doing that, but we must be clear about the limitations. Murdo Fraser and Willie Rennie should rest assured that there will be an independence referendum in this session of Parliament. It is coming down the line, and it will be won. We will then have joined-up government and the real power to make a better country.

Does the cabinet secretary share my regret that UK Governments of various shades have created the situation that we face today—Labour by introducing tuition fees in the first place, and the Tories and Liberals by their recent changes to fees in England? As much as we appreciate the cabinet secretary’s statement—

Is it not the case that, if those parties had acted differently, the cabinet secretary might not have been in a position in which it was necessary to make the statement in the first place?

I congratulate Margaret Mitchell on securing tonight’s debate and on her use of myriad acronyms in her speech—it was quite something to follow what she was saying at times. However, the issue is important and she should be congratulated on bringing it to the chamber. In saying that, I admit that I have not considered the issue in great detail, so I have been interested to read a little more about it in preparation for the debate. I am also interested to listen to what people have to say and perhaps learn a little bit more along the way. It was very interesting to hear Amnesty International being quoted in the chamber by a Tory. That is not something that I hear all that often. I am probably even less used to hearing Max Weber being quoted in the chamber by anyone, so Margaret Mitchell should also be congratulated on that. It is the hallmark of any democratic society that the police should be subject to appropriate scrutiny, and by and large, we have that right in Scotland. We have local police boards with elected members and an elected Parliament that can exercise that scrutiny function. It is especially important, however, that when any member of the public feels, for whatever reason, that they have to complain about the police, there should be a rigorous complaints procedure. I did not sign Margaret Mitchell’s motion, not because I do not acknowledge the importance of that fact, but because I am not quite sure of my position on the transfer of powers away from the complaints commissioner to the SPSO. Margaret Mitchell raised a lot of concerns, and I am sure that we will get the benefit of Graeme Pearson’s considerable experience in a minute. Much of what she said reflects what the police complaints commissioner said when the issue was raised earlier in the year: “Any perceived scaling back of that oversight would be a regressive step that could erode trust and undermine public confidence in the police.” That would be true, but would a transfer of powers to the SPSO in and of itself mean a scaling back of that oversight role? I am not particularly convinced that it would. I have a sense of déjà vu in approaching this subject, because I was the deputy convener of the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee during the previous parliamentary session. It might not have been the most scintillating of subject material to deal with, but concerns about the implications of mergers of various commissions or commissioners were raised at that time. I can understand those concerns but, as long as the core service of the body is retained, and as long as people can be confident that their complaint is being dealt with, there is some merit in creating a simplified landscape.

I certainly accept that the police have a specific role in our society and specific powers that are different from the different bodies that the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee looked at. Again, that is not necessarily an argument against a merger, although I do not have a set position at this time. Margaret Mitchell is right to raise her concerns, but I reiterate that a simplified complaints landscape for the public is worth considering, as long as we can protect the core services of each institution. When she quoted Amnesty International, Margaret Mitchell also raised a number of civil liberties issues, but I am not at all convinced that any merger of the PCCS with the SPSO would in and of itself abrogate any individual’s civil liberties. I must conclude, as I see that I am out of time—that always seems to happen to me in members’ business debates. We should recognise the good work that the police complaints commissioner undertakes; I certainly do. I also recognise that it must be a bit of an uncertain time for the PCC’s staff, but I think that the proposal is worth looking at and I look forward to hearing what the minister has to say at the end of the debate.

4. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the reported concerns of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce that any legacy for Scotland from the 2012 Olympic games will be “absolutely minimal”. (S4F-00060)

Is not it the case that against a range of measures—the number of events to be hosted, the number of tickets for Scottish schoolchildren to attend events, the number of tourists coming to Scotland, support for grass-roots Scottish sport, and contracts awarded to Scottish companies—there is no discernible benefit to Scotland from the 2012 Olympic games? In addition, the Olympic committee continues its attacks on the integrity of the Scottish national football team. Does the First Minister agree that when about £1.7 billion is being spent on regenerating the east end of London to stage the Olympic games, Scotland should receive the Barnett consequentials of that figure, which could go towards Scotland having a legacy from the 2014 Commonwealth games of which we can all be proud?

Thank you for that warning, Presiding Officer. The cabinet secretary mentioned the change from the use of the retail prices index to the consumer prices index in the calculation of pensions and the suppression that that will cause to their value. Does he agree that that is because the CPI does not adequately reflect the cost of living and that, moreover, the Treasury must already know that, because it uses the RPI whenever it wants to justify an increase in taxation?

Presiding Officer, I apologise to you and others in the chamber, because I may have to leave early to attend a constituency commitment. I congratulate Elaine Smith on securing the debate, and I am sure that all speakers in the debate will do so. She secured a similar debate previously, and I congratulate her on her tenacity in bringing the issue back to the chamber. However, there is a key difference between the two debates, which I welcome. In the previous debate, a few of us remarked that no Conservative or Liberal Democrat members were taking part; and in this debate, no Liberal Democrat member is taking part. Perhaps the party’s reduced numbers in the Parliament goes some way towards explaining the situation—although there were no Liberal Democrats at the previous debate, when the party had more MSPs. However, I am glad to see that Gavin Brown is here to participate and perhaps try to defend the United Kingdom Government’s record, although I believe that it is fairly indefensible. I look forward to hearing what he has to say. The debate is about an important issue, so it is right to debate it again. I support the STUC better way campaign. In my constituency, the PCS in Cumbernauld will have a conference this Friday in support of the campaign. Unfortunately, I cannot attend the conference, but I am glad that such local events are being held. I am sure that there will be similar events in other members’ constituencies. Like Elaine Smith, I support the people’s charter. I should declare an interest in that I, too, am a member of the Scottish steering group of the people’s charter. I believe that I have Elaine Smith to thank for that. I use the word “thank” advisedly, given the increased commitments in my diary.

A primary example is the policy to end investment in nuclear weapons. Another example could be that my party last year debated the issue of the Afghan war and we believe that we should withdraw from Afghanistan this year. I know that the people’s charter also has that position. So, those are two examples for Mr Brown. My starting point in this debate is the same as my starting point in the previous debate: is the UK Government’s agenda necessary? My conclusion in the previous debate was that it is not and, in the interim, I have not seen much evidence to make me change my opinion. The fiscal deficit that we face is a problem, but I believe that the UK Government’s approach is wrong because it is too fast and the cuts are too deep. The UK Government’s direction of travel is not inspired by the necessity of dealing with the fiscal deficit; in fact, it is an ideological approach in which we see unreconstructed Thatcherites trying to roll back the state. It is an attack on the state, and they are questioning what it is for. Putting that to one side, is the approach correct? I believe that it is wrong. In the previous debate on the issue, I quoted Paul Krugman, and I will use the same quote again. He pointed out that “there is no evidence that short-run fiscal austerity in the face of a depressed economy reassures investors. On the contrary: Greece has agreed to harsh austerity, only to find its risk spreads growing ever wider”. So, the UK Government’s approach will not necessarily deal with the problem that it says it wants to deal with. Elaine Smith’s comments about the approach in 1945, when there was, proportionally, an even bigger deficit than there is now, were well advised. I reassure Gavin Brown that I accept that there is a need to deal with the deficit. The STUC has said that it accepts that need. However, the current approach is wrong. I believe that there is a better way.

Gavin Brown talks a lot about what other parties are doing, but he has not yet addressed what his party is doing. Incidentally, I did not criticise the Conservatives for not signing up to the people’s charter; I criticised them for the measures that they are taking. When will the member get on to his Government’s record? For example, it has cut posts in Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs, when retaining those posts might result in an increased tax take, which is something the member says he supports.

Does the member therefore regret that it was Labour that opened Pandora’s box by introducing tuition fees?

I think that we have heard from Jenny Marra a new option in the mix of available constitutional options: full devolution. Some of us call that independence, but perhaps that is a matter for another day. I join others in congratulating the members who have made their maiden speeches today. It is clear that we have some great new talent in the Parliament. I also welcome the Government front-bench team, which has been temporarily depleted from three to two. In particular, I welcome my friend Alasdair Allan to his new role after his elevation to Government. Ken Macintosh started by referring to the fact that this is the first education debate of the new term. The approach is different from that taken in the previous session, in which it seemed that there was an education debate every week. I am sure that the new pace will be welcomed by the front-bench education teams across the parties. On Tuesday this week, I was pleased to go to Abronhill high school’s student awards ceremony. It was clear from the ceremony that there is a great breadth of talent at the school. I reflected that there was no comparable event at my school—it was only afterwards that I thought that there might have been an awards ceremony but that I was never invited. I will not linger on that thought for too long. At the ceremony, I enjoyed the contribution of the school’s headteacher Brian Paterson. He referred to education as a battle for civilisation. That is more than just grand rhetoric; it refers back to the first principles at the heart of our civic society, which Marco Biagi talked about. The values of secular tolerance, education and understanding are vital in securing those principles. In what was a very good maiden speech, Gordon MacDonald pointed out the strong record of performance in education in Scotland, so it is clear that we are winning the battle for civilisation. On that basis, today’s education debate is important. We have seen a clear record of achievement from the SNP in government. We have seen strong investment in the higher education sector: £1.1 billion for the next academic year. That investment will lead to a strong higher education sector, and it has been welcomed not just by the sector but by the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, which said: “The skills of our graduates and the quality of our research are key components of our international reputation as an economy and a nation. Our universities ... are an international and social strength for Scotland, creating the skills required for future economic growth.” The investment in higher education is more than worth it and is highly valued across the board. At school level, we have heard a lot about teacher unemployment. We know that there is an issue, but we should reflect on the fact that teacher unemployment in Scotland is lower than it is anywhere else in the UK. That is an objective fact. We have heard clearly that the issue causes Mike Russell some distress, and I know that he will be working hard to secure improvements. We have also seen class sizes at the lowest ever level in Scotland. That achievement will be maintained and built on in primaries 1 to 3, in agreement with COSLA. I welcome the education secretary’s action on rural school closures. We have seen a firm and clear commitment to try to reflect the concerns of parents of children in rural schools. Although they were not rural establishments, we have lost schools and nurseries in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth in recent years, and I know the distress that a school closure causes a local community and the impact on the wider community. I therefore congratulate the Scottish Government on its action in relation to rural schools. There is an issue in urban Scotland, too—I see that the cabinet secretary agrees—and I am sure that the Government will maintain vigilance on any changes to schools in urban Scotland. Poverty is one of the greatest challenges facing education and society more generally. The cabinet secretary talked about the advantages that education can provide for the most disadvantaged in our society. He is right, but we have to reflect on the depth of the challenge. Some members have referred to Scotland’s good record of attainment, and it is right that they did so, but it is not a uniformly good record. Marco Biagi spoke well about the differentials in attainment, and in a good briefing Save the Children refers to an educational achievement gap: “There is a stark disparity between the educational outcomes of children growing up in poverty compared to their better off peers ... By three years old”— that is, by the earliest years— “children from deprived backgrounds are already 9 months behind the average development and ‘school readiness’ ... In S4, there is a huge 85 per cent difference in attainment between the poorest and best off pupils.” That manifests itself in a vicious cycle of poverty. Some 22 per cent of school leavers from the most deprived areas in Scotland move into unemployment, compared with 6 per cent from the least deprived areas. That then affects the life chances of the children of those people, all of which results in the vicious cycle of poverty. I was therefore very glad to hear about the new generation of family centres that the cabinet secretary referred to in his opening speech. I hope that Cumbernauld and Kilsyth will benefit—I am sure that I will discuss that with him further. Those centres could be a key component in breaking the cycle of poverty. I had hoped to go on in some detail about the tertiary education sector but, as ever in these debates, I am running out of time. I will just let the cabinet secretary know—I do not know whether he knows yet—that I have written to him to invite him to Cumbernauld College. It is an excellent institution. It is small compared with the rest of the sector, but it has a strong record of achievement and is important to the town and the area. I hope that the cabinet secretary will be able to join me in visiting the college, and I look forward to seeing the Scottish Government’s continued good work in education.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to support tourism in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. (S4O-00036)

I thank the minister for that answer and welcome him to his new role. He may be aware of the Duncarron fort that is being built in the Carron valley by the Clanranald Trust for Scotland. Russell Crowe recently visited the site, and I am sure that a visit from the tourism minister would add further glamour; he is welcome to come any time. Will the minister set out the additional support that the Scottish Government could give to this important local project? It could be a great tourism project for the area.

I congratulate members who have made their maiden speeches today. It is right and sensible that the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament should be endowed with borrowing powers. In that context, I welcome today’s debate. In doing so, I clarify that I look forward to the day when such debates are a thing of the past. It seems strange to me that a national legislature must have such debates. In a previous debate, other SNP members and I remarked on the normalcy of independence. Part of that normalcy is, of course, having a Government that is able to borrow as any sovereign Government is able to borrow. In such a context, no such debates would be required in the Parliament. We might debate the necessity or sensible nature of an independent Government borrowing a particular amount of money that it seeks to borrow, but we would not need to have debates on whether a Scottish Government should be able to borrow. I look forward to that day. I welcome Nick Clegg’s announcement this morning. Maureen Watt said that he would be welcomed back to Scotland more often if we got more such announcements. I understand where she is coming from, but I am not sure how welcome he will be in Scotland, not least among his Liberal Democrat colleagues in the Scottish Parliament, given the recent performance of the Liberal Democrats in the election. That said, surely everyone will welcome the announcement that was made. As we have heard in the debate, there is clear consensus that it is sensible for the Scottish Government to have borrowing powers. Perhaps I will turn to why that is the case a little later. It is clear that the announcement came about only because of pressure from the Scottish Government. It was interesting to hear Mr Findlay making the case that the SNP has somehow done a U-turn and changed its stance on the Scotland Bill. Let us be clear. The entire Calman process and the entire further devolution process have been driven by one thing alone: the election of an SNP Government in 2007. The process will be driven further by the re-election of an SNP Government this year. We welcome the announcement that was made, but it is obvious that we should take a cautious approach, as John Swinney suggested. We need to see the detail and ensure that the transfer of borrowing powers is signed, sealed and delivered before we break out the ticker tape. I welcome the broad consensus that has been expressed across the chamber and Richard Baker’s stated position that Labour supports the devolution of borrowing powers. I note the terms of Labour’s amendment, which is not particularly objectionable, and the point that Patrick Harvie made during Richard Baker’s speech about the Scottish Government exercising fiscal responsibility was well made, but the debate has been consensual, although even Gavin Brown noted that David McLetchie tried to break down that consensus. Mr McLetchie seemed to go off on one about the Klingons. I am not quire sure where he was coming from. He seemed to be the only one trying to cling on to an unreconstructed, do-Scotland-down unionism that is, thankfully, dying a death in Scotland. I thought that John Pentland was going to follow Mr McLetchie’s lead; he just about avoided that. I thought that he was going to do the same when he started to talk about independence. He referred to independence being relative and the fact that we live in an interdependent world that is subject to the forces of change. That is objectively true and is, in fact, why I support independence. It is surely also why the Scottish Government should have borrowing powers. Annabelle Ewing made a point very well about the Scottish Government’s ability to respond to changed economic circumstances with borrowing powers. I want to comment briefly on Neil Findlay’s point about seeking the Scottish Government’s backing to tackle tax evasion. I will leave aside the year-zero approach that he seems to adopt in glossing over the fact that much tax evasion took place under the direction of his Labour Party in government. It is, of course, clear that we do not have the powers to tackle such tax evasion properly so, as well as welcoming his support for borrowing powers for the Scottish Government, I welcome what I presume is his support for Scottish independence, which would endow us with the powers to tackle the tax evasion to which he refers. I turn to why I believe that the Scottish Government should have borrowing powers. The Government’s submission to the Calman commission stated: “The ability to borrow would ... give the Scottish Government greater influence over the pace and priorities of Scotland’s capital expenditure programme.” The Government argued that that would allow it to phase funding “in a way that is sensible, efficient and wholly appropriate to Scotland’s circumstances.” By any measure, that is reasonable. Members frequently call for projects in their area that require capital investment—incidentally, I am as guilty of that as any member—and that might require borrowing powers, so it is sensible to argue that the Scottish Government should be endowed with such powers. I turn to devolved legislatures internationally. The Basque Country is responsible for raising about 86 per cent of its budget and has far greater financial competence than we have in Scotland. At the start of 2009, the Basque Country’s credit rating was higher than that of Spain, which shows that, even within the constraints of devolution, devolved Administrations can successfully have borrowing powers and can be assessed as exercising them more effectively than the state of which they are part. I am running out of power, Presiding Officer. I beg your pardon, I do not think that I have any power—I am running out of time. I will close by welcoming the debate and the impending transfer of borrowing powers to Scotland. I reiterate that I look forward to the day when we are independent and do not have to have such debates.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Having congratulated John Scott last week on his success in becoming a Deputy Presiding Officer, I now offer Elaine Smith similar congratulations. I congratulate Siobhan McMahon on her maiden speech. I think that it was Billy Connolly who once remarked, upon returning to Glasgow to perform in front of the native citizens of his city, that he was a little nervous performing in front of his relatives. That was literally the case for Siobhan McMahon; I am not quite sure how she felt about it, but I thought that she made a very good speech indeed and one that reflected the good quality across the board of the maiden speeches that we have heard today. I am loth to remark on any of them specifically, but Drew Smith’s cannot go unremarked, given his extremely sensible comments about Partick Thistle. I hope to hear more of those over the coming years. Like Tavish Scott, I was a little surprised to find myself branded as a sporting champion. I thought that that might have been because I was one of the Parliament’s most finely honed athletes—I entirely accept that that is a comparative rather than an absolute measure—but I was disappointed to find out that it was because I had signed a pledge during the recent election campaign. That demonstrates the importance of sport, politically. Before I come on to the substance of my speech, I should declare an interest as a member of the Jags Trust—I think that I have made my footballing allegiances fairly clear. Humza Yousaf talked of the pain of being a member of the tartan army. As a supporter of Partick Thistle and the national team, I can testify to having experienced twice the pain and double the agony. It is good that we are having a debate on sport, because there is a tendency in some quarters to denigrate sport. Sport plays an important part in our wider civic society. Sporting success is important for our national psyche, and the minister’s point about how it affects our pride and prestige was well made. It is important for the individual, as well. We know that physically active people have a 20 to 30 per cent reduced risk of premature death and a 50 per cent reduced risk of contracting major chronic disease; making those remarks has reminded me that I should probably be more active. As well as demonstrating the health benefits for the individual, those statistics highlight the important benefits that sport has for our NHS, which Gil Paterson correctly pointed out. I want to spend the rest of my allocated time talking about the importance of sport in the Cumbernauld and Kilsyth area that I am privileged to represent in the Parliament. It is important at grass-roots level and beyond, but I will begin with the grass roots. I was pleased by the support for grass-roots football that the Scottish Government provided recently through the cashback for communities scheme that Humza Yousaf and Mark McDonald mentioned. Cumbernauld Colts Football Club, which is an excellent institution with 500 members that provides training and diversionary activity for youngsters across Cumberbauld, was given one of the largest awards in recent times for a new dedicated facility in the town. During the election campaign, I was delighted to meet the chairman of Cumbernauld Colts to hear about the club’s plans for that money and the new facility, and about the potential that exists for joint working with Cumbernauld Rugby Football Club to create a great sports hub for the area. In the event that that is created, I am sure that the Colts and the rugby club, if it is involved, would not mind me inviting the minister to come along and see it. That facility will be possible only as a result of the cashback for communities initiative. I realise that this is not an area that falls entirely within the minister’s responsibility, but it is one on which I hope that some movement is possible. I know that the amount of money that can be raised by the cashback for communities scheme is limited, and that any excess goes back to the Treasury, but I hope that we can see some movement on that. Rather than moneys that have been seized as the proceeds of crime going down the plughole at HM Treasury, we would all rather see them being spent in our communities to benefit sports and other clubs. Another grass-roots sports club in my area, members of which I was pleased to meet during the recent election campaign, is the Cumbernauld BMX Club. I met them at a sports club fair at St Maurice’s high school, which demonstrated the variety of great sports clubs that we have in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. It has been many a year since I have been on a BMX. The club wants to create a dedicated track in the Westfield area of Cumbernauld, which, as well as benefiting local youngsters and others from a physical activity point of view, could attract events to the area and provide it with an economic boost. Sport is important not only for physical activity, but for economic reasons. Unlike James Dornan, I cannot lay claim to representing the home of Scottish football—although the supporters of Clyde Football Club might disagree with that. Clyde are the only senior club in the Cumbernauld and Kilsyth area, although there are two junior clubs. Perhaps I should have lodged a motion offering my congratulations to Kilsyth Rangers on winning their division this year. I do not have much time left, but I want to talk about the situation of Clyde Football Club. I support Partick Thistle, who are considered Clyde’s great rivals, but I represent the area in which Clyde play. The club has great concerns about its lease with the North Lanarkshire Leisure trust for the use of the Broadwood stadium, because it cannot generate the revenue required. I should perhaps discuss the issue with Clare Adamson, who said that she was a member of the trust. I do not suppose that I can ask the Scottish Government for direct intervention, or to comment on this area too much—I am sure that the minister will be glad that I am not asking her for that—but I wonder whether she will consider how councils support senior sporting institutions such as Clyde Football Club and other football clubs in the area. Although Clyde are not in the SPL like St Mirren—the club mentioned by George Adam—they are still important to the area. I see that I have no time left, so I thank the Presiding Officer for the time that she made available, and I look forward to hearing what the minister says at the end of the debate.

I notice that today there has been talk of controversy in some members’ speeches. I do not know whether what I say will be controversial—I suspect that people’s views will be subjective; it is in the eye of the beholder—but I hope that it is not controversial for me to begin by congratulating you, Presiding Officer, and welcoming you to your role. I look forward to your astute chairmanship of meetings of the Parliament. I congratulate new members who have made their maiden speeches today. I agreed with the content of only some of them, but I will turn to that issue later. I return to Parliament in a new role. In the previous session, I was a member for Central Scotland, but I am now the member for Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. I want to say a few words about the previous member for Cumbernauld and Kilsyth, Cathie Craigie. She and I did not always see eye to eye politically. However, although she may not have been the first member of the Scottish Parliament to be elected in 1999—Tom McCabe filled that role—she was the first ever member for Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. No one can take that away from her. Before her time as an MSP, she was a councillor for many years, so she had many years of dedicated public service. I join others in wishing her well for the future, personally if not politically. I turn to the content of today’s debate. The First Minister’s statement this morning clearly set out a vision for the future. Let us make no mistake—it was a visionary statement, not an attempt just to take a managerial approach to government. Margo MacDonald’s comment that the statement aimed high was well made. The statement was literally about trying to take Scotland forward—the subject of today’s debate. Given the time restrictions to which we are subject, as ever in such debates, I will focus on only a few areas of the Government’s plans for the coming five years. The first is housing. I am proud to represent Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. When Linda Fabiani spoke about East Kilbride, I was struck by the similarity between the experiences of Cumbernauld and East Kilbride. Perhaps that is not surprising, given that both are new towns of a certain age. At one time, Cumbernauld was looked on as a desirable place in which to live. It is still a desirable place in which to live—I say that as a resident of the town—but some of its older housing stock needs a bit of repair. There is a certain pressure of housing need in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. Some progress has been made in the past few years. I pay tribute not only to Alex Neil but to Stewart Maxwell, who filled the role before Alex took office. Many new houses have been built across Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. I was delighted to hear the First Minister set out an ambitious target for housing for the coming five years. With Keith Brown now in post, I look forward to more new housing for Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. On education, it is clear that the SNP Administration has a record of achievement over the past four years. It was the SNP that restored the principle of free higher education. I am delighted that we went into the election with a firm commitment to maintaining that position. It is worth remarking that, of the four main parties—three and half now, perhaps—only the SNP has consistently supported free education. On the earlier years, I am delighted that we have a continued commitment to lower class sizes. Work is being done with COSLA in that regard. The commitment to continue with the education maintenance allowance is very important, and it shows a different direction of travel compared with south of the border. The sure start fund ties in neatly with the subject of education, as it involves getting it right in the early years. I declare an interest, as a father of an 18-month-old daughter. I welcome the idea of the fund very much. It builds on the work of Susan Deacon, who was commissioned by the Government to look into the matter. I especially like the idea of children and family centres, which can help families in marginalised areas. I will be looking into how areas of Cumbernauld and Kilsyth might benefit from such centres, and I look forward to working with the Government in that regard. I will now focus on the destination that the Scottish Government is aiming for. The First Minister quoted John Steinbeck in his statement. Following the election just passed, we might also turn to a writer of older vintage and pose the question: “Stands Scotland where it did?” On the one hand, the answer might be yes. Prior to the election, we had an SNP Government exercising its devolved functions, and that remains the case today. Beyond that simple analysis, however, it is clear that Scotland is now in a very different place compared with before. As has already been well remarked upon, we have the first majority Government since devolution, and the re-election of an Administration that is committed to meaningful constitutional reform—to independence. It has been suggested that such reform might somehow be at the expense of making progress across the areas of life that are devolved to this Parliament. The achievements of the past four years and the priorities set out in my party’s manifesto and by the First Minister today testify to the fact that that is not the case. I do not think that there is any contradiction in wanting to alter the constitution of Scotland to seek a better society. We need additional powers for the Parliament in order to make greater progress. This morning, we heard Kezia Dugdale voice concern about tackling poverty. Incidentally, I vehemently object to her suggestion that SNP members are not similarly concerned. If she is so concerned, she must support tax and welfare powers coming to this Parliament. Would she prefer that the Tories retained those powers, instead of this Parliament exercising them? Perhaps that is why she secured Tory praise for the content of her maiden speech from Liz Smith. There must be some consensus on the need for more powers for this place. The First Minister spoke about that upon his re-election to the post. If so, we should work together, hand in hand, to that end. It is clear, however, that there continues to be no change of opinion among the various parties as to the necessity of independence. The outcome of the election does not seem to have changed that. I hope that, as the referendum on independence nears, there is an end to the tiresome use of the term “separation”. An independent Scottish state will be no more separate from the rest of the world than the British state is now—or any other sovereign nation. As Kenny Gibson and Christine Grahame pointed out this morning—and Annabelle Ewing this afternoon—independence is normal.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made in implementing the national framework for park and ride for buses. (S3O-13313)

Is the minister aware of the on-going campaign for a new bus station for Cumbernauld town centre to replace the shambles that passes for a bus station at the moment? What advice can he give to those of us who are campaigning for a new bus station for the town?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. On what basis are members allowed to ask questions about train station park-and-ride facilities when the substantive question was about bus station park and rides?

In any of her recent meetings with NHS Lanarkshire, has the cabinet secretary been able to discuss the U-turn on the future of Monklands accident and emergency unit by the Labour Party? If so, was it met with as much incredulity by NHS Lanarkshire as it was by us? Is it not the case that the future of Monklands A and E is safe only with the Scottish National Party?

I, too, congratulate Michael Matheson on securing the debate. I welcome residents from Denny and Dunipace to the public gallery. I, too, think that it is disappointing that no Labour member is in the chamber to take part in the debate. I had not seen Mr McMahon, either. He seems to have drawn the short straw in having to sit manfully in the chamber so that Labour can say that it was present for the debate.

That was a very useful clarification. There is no interest from the Labour Party in Denny town centre. It is also very useful to know that Mr McMahon is sitting in the chamber only to do some revision and that he is not interested in the debate. If the member is concerned that Labour has no Central Scotland list members, I gently point out to him that that will be rectified after the election. The SNP will pick up a number of those constituencies, which means that Labour will have to seek representation through the list system. It remains a disappointment that there are no Labour members in the chamber for the debate. With the Tories, Labour forms part of the Falkirk Council administration. At least Margaret Mitchell is in the chamber to try to defend the position of her colleagues on the council, albeit that she did so somewhat unconvincingly. She certainly failed to convince my colleague Michael Matheson. The complacency from both Labour and the Tories at local government level will ensure that my colleague Michael Matheson wins Falkirk West again on 5 May.

On the basis of Ms Mitchell’s contribution, in the main. Hugh O’Donnell stole my thunder somewhat. Like him, I live in Cumbernauld, which, as he mentioned, won the carbuncle award in 2001 and 2005. I was going to say—only in a jocular fashion, of course—that it might be useful to have another dismal town centre nearby to draw attention away from Cumbernauld town centre. Interestingly, it was the residents of Denny who asked for the carbuncle award to be awarded to the town. Some people might think that that was out of a sense of shame in their town, but I think that they are to be congratulated on being proud enough of their town to recognise that a problem exists in relation to the town centre and on their being willing to take a fairly drastic step to highlight that problem. In 2001, when Cumbernauld received the carbuncle award, the then editor of the local newspaper said: “I think the people of Cumbernauld are very proud of their town, but they are very ashamed of their town centre.” It seems pretty clear that there is a similar experience in Denny, where the people are willing to stand up and say that the town centre does not match their pride in their town and that something must be done. When the carbuncle award was once again awarded to Cumbernauld, in 2005, the then director of planning and environment at North Lanarkshire Council, David Porch, was very defensive and said that, in the council’s opinion, it was a “ridiculous” award. It seems to me that Falkirk Council has adopted exactly the same position regarding Denny, saying that it is disappointed by the move to apply for the award. I advise Ms Mitchell that that is where the complacency comes in. It seems that Falkirk Council would rather bury its head in the sand than tackle the problem head on. Michael Matheson set out clearly the lack of support that there has been for redeveloping Denny town centre. The town centre regeneration fund would have provided an ideal opportunity for Denny town centre; however, having looked into it, I do not believe that there was any real application to it by Falkirk Council. I see that the council is going to improve the traffic lights in Denny town centre using funding from the town centre regeneration fund. That is all well and good, but Denny does not need just new traffic lights; to use a traffic light metaphor, it needs green for go for a proper regeneration of the town centre. Once again, I congratulate Michael Matheson on his campaign, and I congratulate the residents of Denny and Dunipace on their campaign, too.

I welcome the reaffirmation of the Scottish Government’s support for free education, but I want to ask the cabinet secretary a question about governance. One group of people with whom the cabinet secretary said that he wanted to explore further the matters that he has raised are the chairs of the various university courts—a role traditionally filled by the democratically elected rector at our ancient universities. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the right of the rector to chair the court should be restored where it has been removed? Does he also agree that we should consider creating a rector at every single higher education institution in Scotland?

I congratulate the committee on its work on this report. I am not on the committee and have not been intimately involved in the process, but even a rudimentary read will show that it is an important report that deals with important issues and has important lessons for Scotland. That is particularly true given the current circumstances, and it is important that we consider preventative spending in the light of spending constraints from elsewhere. First of all, though, I echo others’ comments about the work of Andrew Welsh. I wish him very well in his well-earned retirement. He has represented his party—my party—and his area with very great distinction for many years since he was first elected in 1974. I have not seen him in action at the Finance Committee at first hand, but his colleagues’ comments this afternoon speak volumes about his work and this is the culmination of many years of dedicated public service and his astute chairmanship of the Finance Committee. I wish him well for the future. As I have said, the report is important. However, a useful starting point might be to ask the question, “What is preventative spending?” After all, we have been using the term without assessing what it means. The committee report says: “there is not an established definition in use by relevant bodies that would capture all the examples that were provided to the Committee”. Essentially, however, what it means is spending that helps to prevent negative social outcomes, as becomes clearer in the context of the three specific policy areas that the committee examined. Those areas are the early years framework—I should declare an interest as the father of a one-year-old at home—health and social care, and collaborative working. Before I look at each of them, I should mention in passing the benefits of the committee focusing on and looking at such areas in very close detail. Considerable research has shown the benefits of early and effective intervention in the early years. Indeed, I am talking not just about policy-based evidence; the Scottish Government’s response to the report highlights the work of Professor James Heckman of the University of Chicago, whose studies of the neuroscience of brain receptivity from pre-birth to age three show that intervening in the very earliest years is likely to achieve better results than later intervention. As a result, the committee was right to focus on the early years framework. Evidence also shows that the benefits of such intervention apply at any stage of a child or young person’s life, indeed even after they have been defined as a young person. The early years are our first chance to get it right for every child. The report highlights examples from the Netherlands and Scandinavia, including universal child care provision from birth. I am sympathetic to such policies—I should perhaps redeclare my interest—but I think that, in its response to the Finance Committee about implementing such policies in Scotland, the Scottish Government was probably right to caution against cherry picking policies from different contexts and taking them in isolation. I do not want to strike a discordant note, but the committee might like to reflect, as I am sure some members have, on the fact that the context for the Scandinavian countries and the Netherlands is very different from that of a devolved Scotland. For a start, those countries are independent. The report also examines specific preventative spending issues in health and social care. I was very interested to hear of the life begins at 40 project that Mr FitzPatrick mentioned although, unlike him, it will be many years before I will have to avail myself of it.

It seems plenty to me. I also gently point out that Mr Welsh had represented Angus for five years before I was born, although I am not sure whether he will thank me for saying so. The report asks whether greater investment is needed in health professionals such as health visitors in supporting early years programmes. I note from its response that the Scottish Government agrees that those professionals play an important role in providing care, advice and support but that it is for health boards to determine appropriate provision in their areas. I suppose that that reflects the fact that we need a collaborative approach to this type of preventative spending. That brings me to the third area that was considered. Collaborative working is crucial to ensuring the effective use of resources, particularly in times of squeezed budgets. The report recognises the role of community planning partnerships in taking forward collaborative working that involves agencies, local government and health boards. I know that the Government encourages partnerships to go beyond traditional policy boundaries and spending territories to make the best use of resources, which is particularly important in the current context. In conclusion, it is clear from the committee’s report and the Scottish Government’s response to it that the committee and the Government agree that the report will help to inform the commission on the future delivery of public services, which is chaired by Campbell Christie and is due to report later this year. The report is useful in that regard. It is playing its part, and I hope that it will leave a legacy beyond its mere publication. It seems that committee reports are too often published and then forgotten about, but that should not happen with this one. I welcome the debate, which has been fairly consensual, and the general thrust of the report. I wish Andrew Welsh the very best for the future.

As I was appointed to the Public Audit Committee only in November of last year, I was not part of many of the discussions that shaped the reports that the committee has produced in this session and which in turn we consider today. However, some weeks after I joined the committee, it was given the committee of the year award, which might or might not have been a coincidence. The committee has established a reputation for robust and rigorous scrutiny of the work of the Scottish Government and other public bodies in Scotland. As Nicol Stephen said, it is a vital committee and I have enjoyed participating in its proceedings during the final months of this Scottish parliamentary session. I echo the comments of Hugh Henry and Nicol Stephen in thanking committee colleagues and the clerks for their help and support. I also thank the Auditor General for Scotland, who is in the public gallery, and Audit Scotland for the quality of their reports. That such scrutiny can take place at all is a tribute to the first phase of devolution since 1999. Before that date, decisions that affected Scotland were generally taken by a small cabal of Scottish Office ministers, often with little electoral mandate. Scrutiny, when it came, was dependent on time being available in the cumbersome structures of the Westminster system and on the willingness of back-bench members of Parliament from Scotland to make those structures work. In short, the Westminster system traditionally did not lend itself to the highest standards of transparency. We should therefore be encouraged that devolution has improved the transparency and accountability of decision making in Scotland. That is true in relation to the legislative scrutiny and investigations that subject committees carry out and particularly in relation to the Public Audit Committee’s role in casting its eye over the wider public sector, following on from the reports of the Auditor General. The report that is before us is a useful summary of the main themes that can be drawn from the various investigations that the committee has carried out and the reports that it has issued since 2007. The themes of improving transparency, data collection and governance throughout Scotland’s public sector provide a useful basis for understanding how we can ensure that decisions are made as effectively as possible, especially given the constrained economic circumstances in which we find ourselves. The late makar, Edwin Morgan, in his poem to mark the opening of the Scottish Parliament building, said: “Light of the day, shine in; light of the mind, shine out!” Transparent decision making in the clear light of day is the first step in a robust scrutiny process. The committee has pushed hard for disclosure of information on the use of public funds, especially as regards salaries in the civil service and non-departmental public bodies. As the cabinet secretary said, matters concerning the senior civil service are reserved to Westminster, but I welcome the Scottish Government’s confirmation that it seeks to comply with Cabinet Office regulations on the publication of information about senior salary levels. The Scottish Government has taken steps to answer issues that the committee raised about the handling of commercial confidentialities during the awarding of public procurement contracts. The Government actively discourages the use of confidentiality agreements in such contracts and procedures are in place to ensure that as much information is available as possible under the terms of freedom of information legislation. That is important in further enhancing the principles of transparency. Measuring the effect of policy decisions, and especially spending decisions, is important for informing future decision making and for evaluating the on-going impact of those policies. The provision of accurate and timely statistical information and qualitative data, where appropriate, allows effective monitoring and evaluation of policy impacts. The committee has considered the provision of information on a range of topics and policy areas, and the report considers in particular the availability of statistics on free personal and nursing care, health care quality, anti-depressant drugs, and the broader sweep of data on national outcomes. A proper balance has to be struck for all those things, and nobody would wish to imagine that the Public Audit Committee was asking for excessive additional resources to be spent on monitoring outcomes at this time of a squeeze on public sector finances. Although additional information is useful for casting light on the utilisation of public resources, the cost of gathering such data must be proportionate to the expenditure that is being analysed generally. The Scottish Government has taken steps since 2007 to make reports on its policy successes and national indicators available to anyone who is interested. The Scotland performs website, to which the cabinet secretary referred, provides an at-a-glance snapshot of how Scotland and its Government are doing. It represents a new standard in governmental accountability, which enhances the already wide range of statistics and data that are available from a number of different official sources. The final major theme to emerge from the work of the Public Audit Committee this session was the need for good governance in the public sector. In particular, effective management, monitoring and decision-making procedures in health boards and in the development of major capital projects are cited as examples of where getting it right is important. Guidance exists to ensure that those structures operate effectively, and I understand that all health boards have now completed a self-assessment process using the Scottish Government’s health board development diagnostic tool, which has led to an improved process of induction for new members of health boards. The Public Audit Committee has played an important role during this session of the Scottish Parliament. Its work is vital for the role of the legislature as it holds the Executive to account. In that regard, the Scottish Government has responded positively to the committee, as was reflected in the cabinet secretary’s opening remarks today, and in the Government’s written response to the report, which the committee considered yesterday. I welcome this opportunity to raise the various themes that have been discussed by the Public Audit Committee over the past four years. As I said, the committee has an important role to play, working with the Scottish Government to ensure transparency in public expenditure and in the outcomes from that expenditure. I wish whoever forms the Public Audit Committee in the next session well with the task.

Jamie McGrigor talked about good faith. Does he accept that the Government acted with good faith to try to save the event because it already had creditors? If the event had collapsed, creditors would not have been paid. Part of the motivation for trying to find a new buyer was to help creditors. Surely the Government acted with good faith.

I am tempted to begin by listing a number of individual backers of the Labour Party and wondering what their position might be on the there is a better way campaign. However, that would not be a particularly useful beginning, so instead I will congratulate Elaine Smith on securing a valuable debate. It was delayed, but I am glad that it has come back. I am pleased to support the STUC’s campaign. STUC representatives gave a useful presentation to the SNP group at the Scottish Parliament. I am supportive of the general thrust of the campaign. On a related matter, Elaine Smith knows about my support for the people’s charter, because I have shared a platform with her in support of it, but I will not be in committee room 4 tonight. However, I have signed up in support of that charter. A useful starting point is to assess whether the UK Government’s cuts agenda is necessary. The Government talks about there being no other alternative, but we should consider whether that is true. It is a matter of regret that no Tory or Liberal member is here or is brave enough to stay to make their Government’s case. In the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s budget statement to Parliament last year, he described the budget using terms such as “unavoidable”, “fair” and “progressive”. He said that, although the budget was tough, it would be implemented in a progressive and measured fashion. Let us examine those assumptions. First, is the budget unavoidable? Elaine Smith usefully remarked that the significance of the deficit now is proportionately nowhere close to that of the deficit that we had in 1945. Further, the projected size of the 2010 deficit was £178 billion, but the actual figure was £156.1 billion, which was still a significant figure but not as big as had been imagined. That is instructive in considering whether the budget is unavoidable. Is the agenda fair or progressive? The STUC has useful information on that. It states: “Low-income households of working age lose the most from the ... Budget reforms because of the cuts to welfare spending.” The Scottish Government’s assessment has indicated cause for concern. For example, it estimates that the freeze in child benefit for three years will reduce the income of around 621,000 families in Scotland, with the greatest proportionate impact on low-income families. There are also concerns about changes to disability living allowance, with an estimate that 10,700 people in Scotland will lose their entitlement to DLA in 2013-14, rising to 31,700 in 2014-15 as a result of changes in the assessment criteria. That does not show the budget to be particularly fair or progressive. Will the path that has been chosen work? The comments of Paul Krugman in that regard are instructive. He has said: “Why the wrong turn in policy? The hard-liners often invoke the troubles facing Greece and other nations around the edges of Europe to justify their actions. And it’s true that bond investors have turned on governments with intractable deficits. But there is no evidence that short-run fiscal austerity in the face of a depressed economy reassures investors. On the contrary: Greece has agreed to harsh austerity, only to find its risk spreads growing ever wider”. Therefore, it might not even work in the long run. I am very supportive of the STUC’s there is a better way campaign. I have been working locally with the Cumbernauld and Kilsyth campaign to protect jobs in public services, and I will keep doing so. I congratulate Elaine Smith on securing the debate. This is probably an area where we will not all agree. No one can deny that there is a huge challenge as far as the Scottish Government’s approach is concerned, with a £1.3 billion withdrawal from the Scottish budget as a consequence of the decisions of the UK Government. Despite those challenges, which I accept exist, the Scottish Government has delivered a fairer, more progressive budget than could ever be imagined under the UK Tory-Liberal Government.

15. To ask the Scottish Government what the outcome has been following the consultation undertaken in 2009-10 by Transport Scotland on railway station car parking. (S3O-13164)

In its submission to the consultation, North Lanarkshire Council stated that “station parking charges would probably only be required in town centres or other areas where they might be used by non-rail travellers”, a position with which I agree. Is the minister aware that North Lanarkshire Council now plans to introduce car parking charges at both Croy and Greenfaulds railway stations, which in no way could be described as town centre railway stations? Does he agree that that would be counterproductive to encouraging people to get out of their cars and on to the train?

The minister has set out the benefits of the M8 completion, but he will be aware that, although benefits accrue through the completion of motorway upgrades such as the M8, M74 and A80/M80 projects, such upgrades cause disruption to residents and businesses along their route. Will he outline what steps the Scottish Government takes to ensure suitable consultation, mitigation and, when appropriate, compensation for those affected by motorway works, perhaps with specific reference to the projects that I mentioned?

The minister will recall that in this chamber I suggested the development of a Roman heritage centre near the Antonine wall. In the absence of such a centre, however, I wonder whether she can set out the efforts that are being made to ensure that young Scots can find out about and engage with their Roman heritage.

8. To ask the Scottish Government whether the United Kingdom Government’s proposals to reform health services in England will have implications for NHS Scotland. (S3O-12733)

Does the cabinet secretary, in emphasising the importance of the Scottish Government’s determination to keep the national health service public, agree with the findings of the House of Commons Select Committee on Health that the reforms that are being introduced in the NHS in England are risky and expensive? Will the cabinet secretary expand on her reported comments that the reforms south of the border may make the stability of the NHS in Scotland more attractive to health professionals from elsewhere in the United Kingdom? Will she confirm that it is the Scottish Government’s intention to protect health spending for the duration of the next parliamentary session?

Is the cabinet secretary aware of figures that were secured by our colleague Dr Eilidh Whiteford, in the House of Commons, which demonstrate that more than 2,000 miners throughout Scotland—including 52 in the Cumbernauld, Kilsyth and Kirkintilloch East Westminster constituency—died before they received compensation for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease largely as a consequence of the obfuscation and obstruction of the previous Labour Government?

I rise to speak fairly sure in the knowledge that my main qualification in the eyes of the SNP whips is that I am the second-youngest member of the Parliament, although that probably does not qualify me as young in the eyes of most of Scotland’s young people. If Aileen Campbell had been available she would probably have been the first port of call for the party whips. Nonetheless I am happy to contribute to the debate. [Interruption.] I am not sure what the kerfuffle was among the Liberal Democrat members. They seem to be rather excited about something. I echo Jim Mather’s point about the impact on young people in times of economic difficulty, which is why it is important to have a debate such as this. The Government has a strong record of support for opportunities for young people. I will return to that, if I have time. The ideas in the motion are in the context of the Grameen Bank. I confess that I was not really aware of its work in detail, although I was aware of its existence. It was only in preparing for the debate that I learned a little bit more about it. Since its inception in the 1970s, the initiative has loaned more than $10 billion to more than 8 million borrowers, the vast majority of them being women and people who live in poor rural villages in the developing world. The word “grameen” can mean rural or village. In the context of the Grameen Bank, it embodies ideas of community and co-operation, and recognises the mutual dependency and mutual benefits that we must all share if we want to succeed and build better societies. The Grameen Bank model has been successfully adapted to poverty reduction initiatives in 38 countries around the world. It lends small amounts at affordable interest rates for projects that allow individuals and communities to make a living for themselves. It provides an alternative to loan sharks and a source of funding in circumstances in which the more traditional banks refuse to lend. The threat of loan sharks and the lack of support from traditional banks are undoubtedly faced by many households, businesses and—as the motion states—young people in Scotland today. Scotland has a long and proud tradition of sensible and sustainable lending practices, whether through the network of credit unions around the country—as Mr Whitton’s amendment rightly noted—or in the legacy of our savings banks, which are now represented proudly but, sadly, uniquely by the Airdrie Savings Bank, which we have acknowledged in the Parliament in recent months. Nevertheless, it is well worth exploring how the specific Grameen model can be adapted to Scotland. There is much to look forward to in the work of the Grameen Caledonian creative lab that has been established at Glasgow Caledonian University. Like Robin Harper, I welcome that work. Last year, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth met Professor Yunus and the principal of the university to discuss how the project can be taken forward. I am sure that we will hear more about the Scottish Government’s support for the initiative from the minister at the end of the debate. I hope that that gives Green members some comfort that their desire to see Scotland’s young people supported in accessible and innovative ways is shared by others. I turn to some examples of support for young people that have been delivered by the Scottish Government. Responding to the difficult economic times that we are in, in June last year Keith Brown, the then Minister for Skills and Lifelong Learning, announced a special package to support young people moving from school into the employment market. It included 800 vocational pathway opportunities for 16 and 17-year-olds; a £1,000 incentive for up to 2,000 employers to offer modern apprenticeships to young people; 750 graduate placements over the next three years; 1,000 volunteering opportunities; and access to 5,000 all-age modern apprenticeships. In 2009-10, nearly 87 per cent of school leavers went on to positive destinations such as employment or further education. Liz Smith made the point that higher education may not be the be-all and end-all. School leavers who go to university in Scotland now benefit from the restoration of free higher education by the Scottish Government. Thousands of graduates benefit from that decision, and 20,000 part-time students each academic year are benefiting from a new £500 grant. The Scottish Government has prioritised opportunities for young people that parties in other parts of the United Kingdom seek to deny to future generations. We should welcome new ideas, such as those that were suggested by Robin Harper. The ability of the Parliament and the Scottish Government to leverage finance and to find new funding for schemes such as microfinance and Grameen Bank projects is limited by the terms of the current devolution settlement. If we really want to raise the vision and aspirations of our young people, perhaps we should start by aspiring to be a Parliament that has the normal powers of the countries that are cited in Robin Harper’s motion, not the least of which is Bangladesh, which I recall has been traduced in the past by prominent Scottish unionists. Those normal powers are, of course, the powers of independence.

It is in the very nature of Scotland's education system to pursue excellence and to strive always to do better and achieve more and I think that the system seeks to imbue such ideals in our children and young people. No matter their background or means, they should, with a good education, strive to go on and achieve their goals. It might be easier  to say so in rhetoric than it is to achieve in every case but, nevertheless, it should always be our aim. We should never be content with things as they are or be complacent; we should always be willing to examine what is necessary to ensure that the principle of excellence in education is maintained. I believe that that has been central to the SNP Government's vision of and ambition for education in Scotland over the past four years. Karen Whitefield and Des McNulty referred—wrongly—to a litany of failure in education. Instead, we should focus on the litany of achievement under the SNP including the extension of entitlement to free school meals; 20,000 apprenticeship places; the preservation of the education maintenance allowance, despite its abolition elsewhere in the United Kingdom; the promotion of Scottish history and literacy in schools; the reduction in school exclusions; and, of course, the abolition of the graduate endowment. Those are just some of the many achievements in education that have happened under the SNP. In education, it is crucial to get things right early on. Given that investment in early years pays dividends throughout the educational experience, we can be proud that class sizes are at a record low of 23 in primary schools, with around 22 per cent of P1 to P3 pupils in classes of 18 or fewer. Legislation has delivered a statutory limit of 25 pupils in P1 classes across the country—that, too, is an achievement. Smaller classes mean more contact time between individual pupils and their teachers, providing more interaction, easier discipline and, above all, a greater opportunity to learn. The Government's amendment also notes the positive impact of the extension of free school meal entitlement on some of Scotland's hardest-pressed families and I welcome its recognition of the principle and practice of extending free nutritious meals to our youngest pupils. That demonstrates the investment in the early years and a confidence that the benefits will be seen in years to come. Since May 2007, the Scottish Government has worked to lift 120,000 pupils out of poor school conditions. It is a simple fact that more than 300 school building projects have been completed in the same period. Despite the rhetoric that we have heard from the Labour benches, I was interested to read in Labour's 2007 election manifesto: "We will accelerate the school building programme and re-build 250 more Scottish schools in the next term of the Scottish Parliament." We have, in fact, delivered 300-plus. During the lifetime of the Parliament, the Scottish Government will have spent an average £700 million a year on school buildings whereas, in the  previous eight years of devolution, the average spend per year was £531 million. Of course, many local authorities are struggling with the legacy of the private finance initiative. In many areas, as much as 5 per cent of the education budget is being used to pay fees and debts to PFI consortia.

I think that Mr McNulty is well capable of asking his own questions.

Members on the Labour benches might be surprised to find that I am not the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, at whom I believe the question was directed and who I am sure will answer it. The annual cost of education private finance initiative and public-private partnership schemes in 2008-09 was more than £240 million. Hundreds of millions of pounds have been paid to PFI consortia, many of which are backed by banks that have enjoyed a bail-out from the previous UK Government. Taxpayers are, in effect, paying twice and, while the bankers grow rich, the local authorities feel the squeeze and funds are being removed that could be put to good and effective use in Scotland's education system. Local authorities have a key role in ensuring that our education system fulfils our aspirations for it. Many residents of North Lanarkshire were disappointed when the Labour-led council decided to press ahead with the school closure programme last year. Parents, pupils and the wider community were sorry to see the loss of St Francis of Assisi primary school in Cumbernauld and two nurseries in the Abronhill area of the town. I thank the cabinet secretary and the previous Minister for Skills and Lifelong Learning for their answers to parliamentary questions last year as I helped campaigners to oppose the closures. Like Alasdair Allan, who paid tribute to the campaigners in his area, I pay tribute to the campaigners in North Lanarkshire. It is a matter of regret that the Labour-led council went ahead with the closures. Worryingly, the leader of North Lanarkshire Council has suggested that there might be further closures. However, any future proposed closures would be subject to the enhanced scrutiny and protection afforded by the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010—another significant achievement by the Scottish Government in the past four years.

I acknowledge that the council followed the principles of the act. I hope that the member acknowledges that there was nothing in the act that compelled the council to go ahead with the closures. It was the Labour Party that closed those establishments and not the SNP Government. I was hoping to turn to higher education, but I am running out of time. I welcome the debate and look forward to hearing what the minister has to say at the end of the debate. There have been no positive suggestions from the Labour benches about how to take Scotland's education system forward. Labour members would rather use the issue as a political football.

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Government what role it has in the regulation of activities in Antarctica. (S3O-12473)

Does the minister share my disappointment that provisions in the Scotland Bill will prohibit members of this Parliament from bringing forward proposals to create a Scottish commissioner for the Antarctic? That would undoubtedly have been a welcome addition to the public landscape in Scotland. More generally, does the minister agree that, however banal some instances may seem, the re-reservations in the Scotland Bill are, given the co-operative arrangements that are already in existence, not only unnecessary but contrary to the principles of the devolution of power?

To ask the Scottish Government what concerns it has regarding the impact on the economy and communities of Scotland of the provisions of the United Kingdom Government's Postal Services Bill. (S3O-12416)

Does the cabinet secretary share my concern about the emphasis on financial sustainability in the bill, which may place at risk some of the most cherished aspects of postal services, such as the post office network, six-day delivery and universal service obligations? Does he agree that communities in Scotland have already suffered enough post office closures? Will he seek reassurances from the UK Government that the bill will not herald another cull of local post offices? What perspective can he offer on the shedding of crocodile tears by some Labour MPs over the bill's direction, given their party's plan to part-privatise the Royal Mail?

I, too, thank Bill Kidd for bringing the debate to Parliament. I begin by declaring my membership of the Scottish Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and of parliamentarians for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, and by reflecting on the fact that it is extremely unfortunate that not one Liberal member has bothered to participate in the debate, just as no Liberal participated in last week’s debate on Afghanistan. At the crux of the motion is a simple idea—that of popular self-determination and the will of the Scottish people to state their opposition to the stationing of nuclear weapons in Scotland. The beauty of the nuclear weapons-free zone initiative lies in its simplicity. Ordinary citizens can be encouraged to declare their homes, workplaces, schools and any other spaces nuclear free. In that regard, I am happy to declare my home and my parliamentary and constituency offices nuclear weapons-free zones, and I encourage others to do the same. I accept that that is largely a symbolic gesture. However, it is not unimportant. Declaring any area a nuclear weapons-free zone may seem like a quiet or modest protest, but cumulatively, if more and more people declare their space as nuclear weapons free, the message to the UK Government will be loud and clear. Let us make Scotland a nuclear weapons-free zone in reality. To see the success of such popular movements, we need look no further than New Zealand. Popular opposition to nuclear weapons culminated in New Zealand passing strong anti-nuclear legislation and becoming nuclear free. The popular will to make Scotland a nuclear weapons-free zone exists. Opinion polls indicate time and again the opposition of people in Scotland to weapons that continue to make the world a more dangerous place. We are constantly told that, among the dangers of the modern world, the primary danger to our security is global terrorist networks. Although those arguments are sometimes overblown, I accept that that is the threat we face. However, a nuclear weapon cannot be deployed against an extraterritorial force such as terrorism. It is futile in the extreme. I enjoyed Jackson Carlaw’s speech, although I disagreed with it entirely. I will say what I would have said in my intervention, if he had been bold enough to accept it. I hope that he will be brave enough when he is the leader of the Tories in this place, as he surely will become. By talking about  the contribution of Gorbachev, Thatcher, Reagan and other “Spitting Image” puppets from my childhood, he reinforced our argument that the cold war is over. Why, then, are we trying to perpetuate the arms race? Why are we spending £100 billion on a new generation of Trident? However, there is, the world over, growing consensus about the need to take positive steps towards global nuclear disarmament. The new START treaty, agreed by President Medvedev and President Obama, is indicative of the growing consensus on achieving a nuclear-free world. In Scotland, and in this Parliament, there is a commitment to nuclear disarmament. In June 2007, we voted overwhelmingly—by 71 votes to 16—against the renewal of Trident. Without checking the Official Report for absolute accuracy, dare I say it that Jackson Carlaw was probably included in the 16. The political will in this Parliament can be conveniently ignored by Westminster—circumstances that will persist even once the Scotland Bill has been passed. It is regrettable that there appears to be no chance of the UK Government disarming at any time in the near future. At Westminster, there is a lamentable and distinct lack of will to take necessary and constructive steps towards nuclear disarmament. We see that from the Tory position; we also see it from the Labour position, although we have heard from some honourable exceptions today, and I am sure that we will hear another shortly. We need the full powers of independence to make Scotland nuclear free in reality. In the meantime, though, I commend the direction that is suggested in Bill Kidd’s motion, just as I commend Bill Kidd for securing the debate.

Will the member give way?

No one so far has defined the difference between a dangerous airgun and a safe one. I am confused and wonder whether Pauline McNeill can help.

Although I have some sympathy with Patrick Harvie’s position on the lack of input into the process for civic Scotland, I welcome the debate. I also welcome the bill, albeit with some reservations. That is why the reaction from other quarters to the SNP position seems more than a little disingenuous. Today and on previous occasions, we have broadly welcomed much of the bill, yet still the argument is rehearsed that we are obstructionist. It seems a little like a pre-rehearsed line that members are desperate to cling to and convince people of, despite the facts.  We have just heard from Jeremy Purvis the tired old propaganda about the non-existent lines of division in the SNP. Let me state clearly that all of us in the SNP believe in independence yesterday, today and tomorrow—we all want independence as soon as possible. More than any Scotland Bill, independence will empower us to make the difference that is needed in Scotland. That said, I welcome the Scotland Bill that is before us today, albeit with some reservations. The history of devolution is marked by a series of milestones and there is no doubt that the Scotland Bill is another milestone on the way. As Tom McCabe said, it confirms that devolution is a process, not an event, and that the story of the growth of this Parliament’s powers is not at an end. Just as constitutional perfection was not achieved in the Scotland Act 1998, let none of us pretend that the Scotland Bill represents the last word on the devolution settlement. I do not believe that it represents the settled will, as some have argued—although not, I was interested to hear, Tavish Scott, who believes, as I do, that we should go further than the provisions of the Scotland Bill.  What emerges from the Scotland Bill process, and from the ways in which the powers of the Parliament are enhanced or changed as a result, will cast the history of devolution in a new light. At the end of the process, we may well ask what could have been different if we had had some of these powers sooner—what might we have done if we had had the powers over drink-drive limits and airguns or control over our own elections? How might we have utilised borrowing powers in response to the current situation if those powers had been part of the original Scotland Act 1998? My party will always support measures that maximise the powers of the Parliament. There is much in the Scotland Bill that is to be welcomed. Bringing stamp duty and landfill tax to Scotland—or, more accurately, abolishing those taxes in Scotland and giving the Parliament the power to reintroduce them—is a small step on the way to the full fiscal powers of independence that the Parliament and the country need, but it is a step on the way nonetheless.  I turn to SNP reservations about the Scotland Bill. One big question that has to be asked is why it seeks to return to Westminster powers over a number of areas and to make exclusions in areas that are to be devolved. There are both principled and practical reasons for asking such questions, which must be addressed by the committee in its consideration of the bill. One example that has been cited is that the Scottish Parliament will be able to change the speed limit for cars but not for cars towing trailers or caravans. Another example is that the devolution of control of airguns makes an exception for “dangerous” airguns—it is good to know that Westminster trusts us in Scotland to deal with safe airguns. I struggle to think of any good evidence-based policy reasons for those decisions. I suggest that some technical aspects of the bill have not been fully worked through. One of the more noted reservations in the Scotland Act 1998 was in schedule 5, section L6, on “regulation of activities in outer space”. Why the UK Government at the time felt it necessary to reserve that area remains unclear. It now seems that one of the final frontiers on earth is also to be reserved. Proposed new section L7 in schedule 5 to the 1998 act will reserve “Regulation of activities in Antarctica”. In that, we begin to see clearly convergence in the principled and practical concerns about the rereservation of powers. The UK Government and Scottish Government already co-operate in developing administrative arrangements for scientific expeditions overseas. The reservation is therefore unnecessary from a practical point of view. Also, each time that we look at such a  reservation, we must ask whether it is in the spirit of devolution and the wishes of people in Scotland. At each milestone and staging post of the devolutionary process, even going back to the Kilbrandon commission on the constitution in the 1970s—way before my time, of course—the starting point was the principle of giving power away from Westminster to Scotland and other parts of the UK. There was an acceptance that constitutional reform would continue and that further devolution could be expected. There was never the assumption that the UK Government might, at some point, take powers back. If Opposition members genuinely support the reservations, they must be the only political leaders in history who want to give potential power away. Shadow ministers appear to be saying that, if they were in power, they would not or would not be able to make decisions in those areas. It appears that Labour members would rather have the Con-Dem coalition Government in London regulate the health care professions in Scotland or implement European legislation on devolved matters in Scotland than allow any Government in Scotland, even one of which they may be part in the distant future, to have control over those areas. If my understanding of the principle and its implications is not correct, I look forward to hearing other members explain why. That is, as it should be, part of the debate that Scotland must have on the Scotland Bill. We have before us draft legislation and a timetable for changing the powers of the Parliament, which was founded on the principles of openness, accountability and the sharing of power. The first Scotland Bill was scrutinised by 72 MPs from Scotland and steered through Westminster by three Scottish Office ministers. Rightly, this bill is subject to scrutiny by a full Parliament of 129 elected members—a Parliament that has some of the most open and transparent processes in Europe. We owe it to the people of Scotland to do that job effectively and to have as much opportunity as possible to ensure that the bill enables the Parliament, as the motion would have it, “to serve the people of Scotland better”.

I congratulate Karen Gillon on securing tonight's debate. She raises the general issue of preventive care measures as well as the specific work of the WRVS, which is well worth the recognition that is given to it in the debate. I was pleased to add my name in support of the motion. My friend Aileen Campbell was also happy to sign the motion, and she has asked me to pass on her apologies for being unable to take part in this evening's debate. For those who do not already know, she gave birth to her baby boy earlier today, and mother and baby are both doing very well, albeit a day late—although those who know Aileen will know that one day late is actually quite early for her. Aileen lives in Biggar, which is in the Clydesdale area of the South of Scotland region that she represents, and she has told me of the great respect that she has for the work of the WRVS in that area. I am more aware of its work in my own area—I will come to that shortly. I am sure that the same respect is extended by all members to the WRVS in their part of the country. It was founded more than 70 years ago, and the ethos and impact of the organisation remain as important now as they were back then. About 10,000 volunteers help to deliver WRVS services across Scotland. Earlier this year, I was privileged to see some of its work in the Central Scotland region that I represent. I visited its cafe at Monklands hospital, where I met volunteers who have provided years of dedicated service, giving  their own time to help others. Those volunteers, along with others at Udston, Wishaw and Hairmyres hospitals, thoroughly deserved to be the first-ever winners of the merit award from the lord lieutenant of Lanarkshire earlier this year. The motion recognises both the social and the financial value of such volunteering, including at the volunteer-run cafes in our hospitals, which helps to preserve funding for front-line medical treatment and care. Many of the volunteers will have years of experience and can offer friendly, informal advice and support to those who make use of the hospital cafe, whether they are patients or their friends and family. Other services that are provided by WRVS volunteers help to meet wider social aims. Karen Gillon's motion refers to community transport and good neighbour schemes, which provide older people in particular with lifts to shops and other services or help with household tasks such as changing light bulbs or basic gardening. That work is to be commended. Many of us are familiar with the meals-on-wheels services that are provided by the WRVS, and I have had the opportunity to join teams taking meals to older, vulnerable residents in Croy and Cumbernauld on more than one occasion. Again, I pay tribute to the sterling work that volunteers have done as they have literally delivered that service, which makes a great difference to those who are on the receiving end. The specialist vehicles and the logistics behind meal preparation and delivery runs are equally impressive. Those involved at that end deserve credit, too. Such services do not simply provide social and practical benefits to the individuals involved, although for many recipients the friendly face of the WRVS volunteer is valued as much as the meal that they enjoy, as was clear to me from my experience of travelling with the meals-on-wheels service. Such services help to maintain the independence of the individuals who use them, which, as Karen Gillon said, has a wider benefit for society as a whole. As she mentioned, for every £1 that is spent on preventive social care services for older people, savings of £1.20 can accrue to the national health service. They help to keep people fit and active through community transport schemes, they provide a healthy diet through meals on wheels, and they keep homes safe and secure through good neighbour projects. Those services all help to prevent circumstances in which older or vulnerable people might need to rely on public services for support—and they reduce the cost to the public purse. Age Scotland has produced research that shows that a package of preventive support that is delivered in the community can cost almost two thirds less than a full-time place in a care home for  an older person. That is important financially, but delivery in the community is important because it also respects and supports the dignity of the individuals themselves and allows them to live happier, more structured lives than might otherwise be the case. I welcome the support and recognition that the Scottish Government has given, and will no doubt continue to give, to preventive services and to the many volunteers who help to deliver them. I am sure that the Minister for Public Health and Sport will explore some aspects of that in her winding-up speech. I congratulate Karen Gillon once more on bringing the debate to Parliament.

I thank those members who supported the motion, not just those of my party but Elaine Smith, Marlyn Glen and Bill Butler, whose signatures allowed it to qualify for debate. It is right and appropriate that the Parliament should have the opportunity to debate and express our perspective on the conflict in Afghanistan. Afghanistan might be thousands of miles away, but the effect of the conflict is felt here in Scotland every day. It is felt by the families and communities of our soldiers who serve there, and especially by the families and communities of those service personnel who have given their lives in Afghanistan and of those aid workers who have been killed, such as Linda Norgrove, whose compassion and example in the work that she did should be an inspiration to us all. We were told that the United States of America and United Kingdom presence in Afghanistan began as an attempt to capture Osama bin Laden. Of course, there are those who argue that there were other strategic geopolitical interests driving the decision to go to war. Indeed, I have to agree with the view that the desire to capture bin Laden was merely a convenient pretence. However, such is the limit of time for a members' business debate that I do not intend to focus on that area. Instead, I will look at what we know to be fact. First, we know that military operations began in Afghanistan in October 2001, meaning that this war has lasted for nine long years. As my motion notes, that is longer than either the first or second  world wars, which conflicts left such an indelible mark on those who fought them that they were known as "the war" to the respective generations who saw battle in the corners of the globe that were affected by them. The conflict in Afghanistan has gone on almost as long as both world wars combined. Secondly, we know that 345 UK combatants have been killed in Afghanistan, 55 of whom were based in Scotland. Also, 1,411 US military personnel and thousands of civilians—no one knows exactly how many—have been killed as a result of the conflict in Afghanistan. Thirdly, the accumulated cost of operations in Afghanistan to the UK Exchequer has hit £11 billion, which is an amount of fantastical proportions. Despite that level of expenditure, we still hear reports of malfunctioning, outdated or inappropriate equipment, and soldiers feeling that they have no choice but to buy their own kit to supplement or make up for deficiencies in what has been provided to them. Fourthly, despite it being the stated purpose of the incursion into Afghanistan to capture him, and despite the many casualties that have been endured, Osama bin Laden has evaded capture. I use the word "endured" advisedly. As the motion notes, the US operation in Afghanistan is called operation enduring freedom, but to endure ultimately means to suffer. In the name of freedom, the conflict has brought untold suffering to uncounted thousands of Afghan civilians, and immeasurable grief to the families of the military personnel who have been killed or injured as a result. To what end have the military operations in Afghanistan been? Despite the cost and suffering, the purpose of the presence of US and UK troops is unclear. If the purpose of the conflict is to find and eliminate bin Laden, it has failed. If the purpose is to defeat the Taliban, we should heed the words of Brigadier Mark Carleton-Smith, the commander of UK troops on the ground at the time, who told The Times two full years ago that, in his opinion, a military victory over the Taliban was "neither feasible nor supportable". If the purpose is to protect our country from terrorism, we must ask why it did not prevent the 7 July bombings or the Glasgow airport attack, and why the threat of international terrorism in the UK remains severe according to the UK Government's standards. The military operation in Afghanistan has become a directionless quagmire. Two weeks ago, a NATO conference attempted to find some coherence and, above all, an exit strategy. David Cameron has of course committed to withdrawing UK troops from combat operations in Afghanistan by 2015. We will see how many troops remain in non-combat operations after  2015, and we will see whether such a non-combat role results in fewer casualties, but the fact remains that, by 2015, combat operations in Afghanistan will have lasted for 14 years and will be the longest military engagement that Britain has been continuously involved in on foreign soil since the Taiping rebellion of the mid-19th century. I believe that we should seek to withdraw combat forces from Afghanistan sooner than 2015. In doing so, let me set out that I do not believe that we should cut and run from Afghanistan. The mess that has been created by the war means that we owe it to the people in Afghanistan to find a way to undo some of the damage that has been done. First, there is the moral obligation to do so but, secondly, if we genuinely want to build a safer and more secure Afghanistan and a safer and more secure world—which is surely in our own enlightened self-interest, if nothing else—military action must play an ever diminishing role in the efforts. History teaches us that conventional forces rarely beat an enemy fighting an unconventional guerrilla war where the enemy cannot readily be discerned. Western powers say that they wish to see western-style democracy in Afghanistan. Chairman Mao may have had it that power emanates from the barrel of a gun, but I do not believe that democracy can be imposed at the barrel of a gun. Of the £11.1 billion that has been spent by the UK in Afghanistan since 2001, only around 10 per cent has been in the form of aid and development funding. I wonder what Afghanistan would look like if those proportions had been switched around. What might it be like if, instead of roads, hospitals and schools being taken out in the crossfire of war, the finances had been spent on building new roads, hospitals and schools? I believe that we should redirect our focus to help ordinary Afghanis to help themselves through humanitarian aid and real efforts at nation building. That is the way to build a safer, stable and more secure Afghanistan. Demonstrating genuine interest in the social welfare of ordinary Afghani citizens and civilians will build a more powerful case against extremism than any military surge or strategy ever could. It is through that peaceful endeavour that stability in the region and wider world—and here at home, too—will be promoted. There has been too much war in Afghanistan. Now is the time to give peace in that country, which has seen almost constant conflict for my entire lifetime, a lasting chance. We must have peace, and we must have a withdrawal of operational combat forces as soon as possible. The pursuit of peace is invariably less dramatic than the theatre of war, but it is no less important.

You mentioned independence. In this instance, your proposition seems to be that you support a referendum on a principle that you do not support. Why will you not support a referendum on independence on the same basis?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Finally—thank you very much. It is interesting that the member talks about the American system. Is the former leader of the Liberal Democrats suggesting that there has never been a problem with an American election? I seem to remember one in 2000.

I congratulate George Foulkes on that entertaining and energetic performance. On 5 May 1961, Alan Shepard became the first American astronaut. Twenty days after that historic mission, before a joint session of the US Congress, President Kennedy made his historic pledge to put a man on the moon before the end of the decade and safely return him to earth. You will be relieved to know that that is not a set-up for some space cadet pun, but I have to wonder about the circumstances in which an AV referendum on 5 May next year could in any way be described as historic. It is a referendum on a policy that no political party supports unconditionally and for which, from speaking to the people whom I represent, I hear no great clamour. Robert Brown made great play of the fact that the timing of an AV referendum is hardly the talk of the steamie. That statement is absolutely true, but nevertheless I find it extraordinary. A referendum on AV would hardly be the talk of the steamie at any time. On 5 May next year, people will have to make a historic decision: to re-elect the first ever Scottish National Party Government and consider the decisions that the Parliament and the elected Scottish Government will have to take in the coming years. Voters in Scotland should—indeed, must—be allowed to focus on such matters next May. Decisions about the electoral system at Westminster should, quite literally, be left for another day and members have highlighted many good reasons for that. First, the Gould report, which was unanimously endorsed by the Parliament, clearly stated that different kinds of elections should take place on different days. One of Gould's key findings was that separating out elections would prevent wider issues from dominating local government campaigns. I would have thought that there was a real danger of the AV referendum overshadowing Scotland's general election because of the dominance of UK and London-based media but, according to David McLetchie, the referendum will be the footnote to the Scottish Parliament election. I see him nodding his head at that, but I would have thought that anyone out there who actually supported AV and  wanted to make the case for it—whoever they might be—would not want to risk the debate on AV being overshadowed by the Scottish Parliament elections. Contrary to what the Liberal Democrat amendment suggests, there are certain widespread and legitimate concerns about the administration of these two polls on the same day that have nothing to do with the Scottish people's capability to vote on a referendum on the same day as voting in an election to this Parliament. Having been told that opposition to the holding of both ballots on the same day is patronising to the Scottish people, I find the Liberal Democrats' argument in that respect to be patronising in the extreme. As for the Tories, if they are as concerned about value to the public purse as their amendment suggests—and, indeed, as David McLetchie argued with Mike Rumbles's eager backing—surely we should be thinking about saving not £17 million but the £90 million to £120 million that the AV referendum will cost across the UK by ditching the whole thing. I find it extraordinary that David McLetchie should advance the proposition that the Tories do not want this referendum when they seem willing to spend nearly £120 million on holding it. As Maureen Watt and George Foulkes have made clear, there is a danger that, if the referendum is conducted under Westminster voting regulations, the two polls will be conducted on different boundaries and possibly under different franchises, which will cause only confusion. There were suggestions that returning officers would be told that the referendum would take priority in the counting process, which would have led to a delay in establishing the shape of our Parliament and who would form the Scottish Government. We heard from David McLetchie that that will not be the case and that the UK Government has somehow graciously conceded the point, which is evidently something that we should be grateful for. I must say that anything other than that position would have been a total and utter disgrace, and we have nothing to be grateful for from the UK Government in this regard. As Pauline McNeill set out, there has been no genuine consultation and no discussion in advance. Anyone with the most basic grip of Scotland's political system knows that this Parliament has fixed terms, and the dates of our future general elections are clear. As Jim Mather suggested, perhaps the Tories and Liberals have not looked at next year's calendar—and who can blame them for not wanting to think too much about next year's elections, such will be the judgment cast against them? Anne McLaughlin  asked how the UK Government could not have known that there is a Scottish election next year. It does know, but the truth is that it does not want to think about it too much. The clash of the election and referendum on 5 May 2011 is not the only potential clash of polls. The UK Government's Fixed-term Parliaments Bill will establish a UK general election on the first Thursday in May 2015 and on the same day every five years thereafter. This Parliament will also be up for election on the first Thursday in May 2015. I understand that the UK Government has conceded some ground on the issue—although I am not particularly grateful for it, Mr McLetchie—and that this Parliament may be empowered to change the date of its election to prevent such a clash. I have two responses to that. First, by 2015, we will be operating in circumstances in which Westminster elections no longer figure in Scotland's politics because we will be independent. Secondly, and in relation to today's debate, if the Government is prepared to concede that there should not be a clash of Scottish and Westminster parliamentary elections, surely it stands to reason that it is not appropriate to have a clash with an AV referendum either, given that to all intents and purposes it is a Westminster election too. All that speaks to a complete lack of respect for Scotland's democratic processes and structures on the part of the UK Government. It is not so much that the coalition sees what goes on in Scotland as a distraction from its agenda; our issues and concerns do not even feature on its radar. When the coalition Government first announced the plan for fixed-term parliaments, concern was immediately raised about the possible clash of elections in 2015. Despite that concern and the Government having several months to think about it, it went ahead and announced that the AV referendum would take place at the same time as the Scottish Parliament elections next year. In conclusion, the merits of the alternative vote—whatever they may be—are the real distraction on 5 May next year. Robert Brown says that constitutional reform at Westminster is important to the people of Scotland. The genuine alternative that is open to people in Scotland—the constitutional reform that will really improve democracy, accountability and the future prospects of the country—is independence and Scotland's withdrawal from Westminster. Some members who vehemently oppose a referendum on independence want to cheer on a referendum on an obscure voting system and risk obscuring the important issues that we need to discuss in our next general election. A successful  referendum on independence would give us the powers to grow our economy and develop our public services to find the best way to help Scotland emerge stronger from the global economic downturn. That is the referendum denied to voters in Scotland, and that is the referendum that people in Scotland need.

Will the member take an intervention?

The cabinet secretary has confirmed that he does not intend to use the Parliament's tax-varying powers in the budget. Does he agree that, far from being a progressive measure—as some members seem mistakenly to believe—any such move would in fact have a regressive impact, given that only the basic rate of tax can be varied and any increase would fall hardest on the poorest taxpayers? Does  not that reinforce the point that we need proper powers over taxation in the Parliament—powers of independence?

Notwithstanding the current economic situation and Murdo Fraser's campaign to have a heritage centre for Scotland's Roman history located in Perthshire, does the minister agree that a far more sensible location for such a centre would be in the vicinity of the Antonine wall, which is in my region of Central Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to protect Scotland's built heritage. (S3O-11688)

Is the minister aware of the situation at Cumbernauld house, which is an important building that was designed by William Adam in the 18th century, and where there are plans for luxury flats to be developed? Will the minister send her best wishes to the Cumbernauld House Trust, which is campaigning for a public  use for the building, perhaps as a national Roman heritage centre?

Is the cabinet secretary aware that North Lanarkshire Council is considering closing Abronhill nursery school? Will he confirm that, when local authorities are consulting on closures or mergers of nursery schools, they are required to meet the same  improved standards as they must meet when they consult on school closures or mergers?

The minister will be aware that the UK Government has raised the prospect of changing the ownership rules for media to allow an increase in cross-ownership, which could allow for the rise of monopolies. Does she agree that, although we should support the idea for more opportunities for localised broadcasting, as Ted Brocklebank mentioned, that should not be at the expense of having a broad range of media operators, and that we must ensure that no monopolies emerge that impact negatively on impartial coverage?

To ask the Scottish Government what advantages there will be for central Scotland as a result of the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme. (S3O-11335)

One of the lines that is to be electrified is the Cumbernauld line. Does the minister agree that its electrification can allow for and should lead to an increased frequency of passenger services on that line as well as direct services between Glasgow and Edinburgh, so that people who use Cumbernauld, Greenfaulds, Gartcosh and Stepps stations no longer have to  travel to Glasgow or Falkirk to change for services to Edinburgh? Would not such initiatives lead to a vastly improved rail service for people in central Scotland?

Safeguarding the right to housing and ensuring that everyone has access to warm and secure accommodation is one of the most serious responsibilities that can be placed on any Government. Since 2007, the Scottish Government has made it clear that it is committed to living up to that responsibility by improving and increasing Scotland's housing supply. Of course, that task is not without its challenges. The decline in council housing, largely due to the effects of the Tory right-to-buy policy, has made it difficult to ensure that those who want and need council houses can always get them. In 2007, more than 200,000 people were on social housing lists. During the past three years, the SNP Government has worked hard to meet Scotland's housing needs head on. Approximately £1.7 billion has been invested in affordable housing, with the result that the building of affordable housing is now at a 30-year high. Last year, the SNP Government supported the construction of 83 per cent more affordable homes than were built in 2006-07. We should be hearing no more nonsense about a cut to Scotland's housing budget. We know full well that the Scottish Government accelerated money into earlier budgets to support the construction industry during the worst of the economic downturn. It has been instructive to hear Labour members saying how we should welcome the fact that the last Labour Government consented to that acceleration of capital expenditure. Such a supine attitude displays the limitations of their ambitions for Scotland. We should have a Scottish Government that can decide for itself how to set and allocate its budget without reference or deference to Big Brother. That said, acceleration of spending was the right thing to do. However, we should be clear that, over the three-year period, Scotland's housing budget has not been cut: it has increased. Even in the face of the economic downturn, the Scottish Government has worked hard to invest in the housing sector because housing is so crucial to so many different aspects of our society. Decent housing is, first and foremost, about keeping people warm and secure, but investment in housing also supports jobs in the construction industry and beyond. That is  particularly important because of the slowdown in the private house-building sector. As we seek to meet the targets that have been set by Scotland's world-leading Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, making our houses as energy efficient and environmentally friendly as possible will go a long way towards reducing our carbon footprint. It is a virtuous circle that promotes innovation in industry and should help to save householders money by making not just the rent or purchase of a property affordable, but its maintenance as well. One of the most significant policies of the Government, and perhaps of any Administration since devolution began, is the inclusion in the Housing (Scotland) Bill of the end of the right to buy, not just for new-build properties but for all new tenancies. Scrapping the right to buy will give councils and housing associations the confidence that they need in order to invest again in new high-quality homes that will help to produce a housing stock in Scotland that will serve our communities for generations. I also hope that the policy will have a transformative effect on our attitude to housing. Much of what Tricia Marwick said earlier was instructive about that. Let me be clear that I have no objection to individuals owning their homes, and I declare an interest as a homeowner, or at least as someone who is paying back the bank. Since Margaret Thatcher introduced the right to buy, home ownership has become an end in itself. It is less about having a place to live and more about having capital, equity and an unending source of wealth generation. A person's house should be viewed primarily as their home rather than as an investment. Although it would be naive to expect people who own their home to be totally uninterested in its price, it should not be the be-all and end-all. The change in the pattern of tenure has created a perception that someone who rents their home is inferior to someone who owns theirs. That is unfortunate. Social housing has certainly become less accessible, leaving many people with little choice but to pursue the private ownership option, and that in turn has helped to fuel what became the housing bubble that burst so spectacularly in the past few years. It should not be the case that someone who rents their home is somehow a failure. The Scottish Government has acted in advance of the Housing (Scotland) Bill to help and encourage councils to build and attract more social housing to their areas. For example, last year it granted pressured area status to various parts of the Central Scotland region that I represent, including Cumbernauld and Moodiesburn. That has allowed the retention of  homes for rent for people who live in areas that are facing high demand for social housing. There is no doubt that there is high demand for the limited stock in those areas, and the Government's policy gives councils the confidence to plan for the future and invest in new homes. No one can realistically expect local authorities to build new homes that will become liable for purchase quickly thereafter, so the suspension of the right to buy will act as an incentive to build new council houses. I am delighted to see a number of new social housing developments in my home town of Cumbernauld. The minister will recall that he attended the opening of the new development at Lochlea Road in Kildrum and will, as I am, be delighted that the Cumbernauld Housing Partnership is today holding a public event to unveil its plans for the next phase of the Kildrum development at the former site of flats on Ainslie Road and Maclehose Road. The Government has also supported developments elsewhere in the town, thus increasing the availability of socially rented accommodation in an area where it is desperately needed. That is welcomed by people whom I represent who are seeking new homes, and I am sure that it will be welcomed across the board in Parliament. Of course, the private sector has been hit hardest by the recession, and the seizing up of the construction industry has exacerbated the housing shortage in Scotland. I therefore welcome the steps that the Scottish Government is taking or considering to improve the housing situation in the private sector for owned and rented properties. Schemes such as the low-cost initiative for first-time buyers have helped those who are on lower or moderate incomes to get on to the housing ladder. The energy assistance package and home insulation scheme have helped homeowners to make their properties more energy efficient and cheaper to run. The forthcoming private rented housing bill will also introduce new safeguards for private sector tenants, and it will increase landlords' responsibilities to repair and maintain their properties. Those requirements can help to drive up standards, improve energy efficiency, reduce carbon emissions and stimulate jobs in the associated economy. However, as long as we remain with the current devolution settlement, the Government is not in a position to reduce VAT for home repairs and improvements, or to use the taxation system to provide incentives for green and energy-efficiency measures or, most fundamentally of all, to redirect resources to housing from other areas, such as the billions that are to be lavished on a new generation of nuclear weapons. Why do we not spend more on housing than we do on weapons of  mass destruction? In housing, as in so many areas of policy, we reach the limits of devolution and the case for more powers and independence becomes clearer. There can be no denying that significant progress has been made since 2007 in tackling the housing challenges that face Scotland. The Government's consultation on the new strategy is further evidence of its vision and ambition, and of its willingness to find new and creative policies to ensure safe and warm homes for all.

The most enlightening thing that we have learned today is that while we are having debates, Margo MacDonald sometimes hums tunes to herself. Quite why she should choose "In the Summertime", given the almost total absence of a summer for us this year, is, however, beyond me. I congratulate the Government on its programme as we enter our final year of this parliamentary session. The legislative agenda before us demonstrates that, far from having run out of steam, this Government still harbours great ambition for our country, in tune with its stated ambitions of a Scotland that is wealthier and fairer, smarter, healthier, safer and stronger, and greener. I disagree with those who suggest that the programme is unambitious, just as I disagree with Hugh Henry's assessment of the First Minister as Chic Murray, which I thought was a bit rich coming from a man who puts me in mind of the Rev I M Jolly, minus his sunny disposition. The proposed legislation that we are debating is wide and varied. I do not have the time to focus on each bill, so I will focus on just a few. Given that Stuart McMillan has already reminded us all of our own mortality, members might be relieved to hear that the proposed health (certification of death) (Scotland) bill will not be one of them. The bills on double jeopardy and forced marriage will strengthen Scotland's legal system and ensure that justice is served more fairly and effectively. The forced marriage bill in particular will help to ensure that Scotland lives up to its moral obligation under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We can always do more to realise the full vision and implications of that document. In the case of the bill, we know that article 16 states: "Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses." Providing civil remedies will ensure that those who are trapped in a forced marriage will have the greatest possible opportunity to escape and seek and receive appropriate support. The double jeopardy bill seems to be a matter of common sense. Where is the logic in a system that means that those who are found innocent but subsequently admit their guilt are allowed to remain free? Where new evidence comes to light in a murder or rape case, is it not right that it is heard before the courts? Those changes will ensure public confidence in Scotland's justice system and reflect what the public believe should be part of that system. I understand that some civil  libertarians have been concerned about the introduction of such measures. Such concern should not be treated lightly. However, given that the measures will affect so few cases and that cases will be brought back on the basis of the available evidence, such concerns are surely outweighed by the public interest. Some of the Government's greatest achievements have been in the area of housing reform. The Government has funded many new council houses—the first since devolution, in many places—and it has reformed social housing legislation, including by ending the right to buy in certain circumstances. In proposing a private rented housing bill, the Government has acknowledged the need for improvement in the private rented sector, which accounts for about 8 per cent of housing in Scotland. By providing protection from rogue landlords and giving local authorities powers to tackle overcrowding and antisocial behaviour, the bill will help to ensure that all elements of Scotland's housing sector provide accommodation that, first and foremost, meets the requirements of the people who live in it. The electoral administration bill will implement the recommendations of the Gould report, which have consistently and, I think, unanimously been backed in the Parliament. We have legislated to ensure that elections to the Scottish Parliament and local authorities do not clash in the way that they did in 2007, and the bill will enhance the scrutiny and robust procedures that are in place to ensure that local democracy can be conducted with confidence and consistency. As the Scottish Government acts to implement all Gould's recommendations, it is unfortunate that the Government in London insists on scheduling two polls in Scotland on the same day next year . A referendum on the alternative vote system, which I do not think any major party supports, should not and does not need to clash with next year's elections to the Scottish Parliament and the National Assembly for Wales. The so-called respect agenda that we heard about seems to be a one-way street. I hope that all members will continue to endorse the Gould report and say that no other election should be held on the day of elections to the Scottish Parliament. I was particularly pleased to hear the First Minister announce plans to enhance and expand the powers of the publicly owned and operated Scottish Water. Scotland's abundance of water has always been one of our biggest assets. In the modern world we have, more than ever, the knowledge and ability to maximise the use of that resource. I look forward to seeing how the plans progress. There is an opportunity for Scottish Water not only to promote new environmental  initiatives and reduce its carbon footprint but potentially to generate income streams, at a time when Scotland's budget is under more pressure than it has ever been, which I am sure members of all parties will welcome. It is extremely welcome that that can happen while Scottish Water is retained in public sector ownership.

Presiding Officer, do I have the flexibility that other members had?

Scottish Water's overall performance has contributed to the current situation, in which charges are lower than the UK average. We should celebrate that. The willingness of an organisation in public hands to move forward and reduce the burden on the public purse while generating a stream of income is to be welcomed. The proposals for mutualisation that have emanated from Mr Purvis's party and its coalition allies in Westminster the Tories would ultimately lead to privatisation. There is a degree of ideological obsession in that regard, which has been demonstrated to be a sideshow. We do not need mutualisation for Scottish Water. Some members focused on the independence referendum—

It has been interesting to witness the faux outrage of the unionists in the Parliament and their incredulity at the Government's preferred way forward for the independence referendum. When Iain Gray quoted Burns, I thought that, in respect of my party's desire to put the independence question, the best laid plans gang aft aGray, because it is the intransigence of unionists such as Iain Gray that has led to the Government's decision. How can the unionists be so publicly disappointed that a referendum bill will not be introduced this side of the election, when we all know that they have set their faces against such a bill? I will resist the temptation to extend the Burns reference by referring to wee, sleekit, cow'rin, tim'rous beasties, for fear of falling foul of a ruling on the use of unparliamentary language.  Tavish Scott said that he is looking forward to a debate on independence between now and the election. I too am looking forward to such a debate. However, at no stage have those of us who believe in this country's independence claimed that independence will create a "land of milk and honey", as Mr Scott said. His question about levels of MRSA was almost snide. That aside, it is clear that independence would empower the Scottish Parliament to decide whether Scottish soldiers should be sent abroad to face conflicts and whether nuclear weapons should remain in Scotland. Independence would give us the power to introduce decent pensions for our older citizens and allow us to make greater efforts to help our planet's poorest citizens. It would give us the powers to create a fairer economy—[ Interruption ]—not a land of milk and honey, Mr Rumbles, but certainly a Scotland that is better to live in. As Margo MacDonald said, the country would be better equipped to deal with its own economic regulation and would come through the recession strongly. I welcome the debate and the legislative agenda. I could say much more, but I do not have the time. I thank the Presiding Officer for the time that I have had.

To ask the Scottish Government how it expects the privatisation of various public services proposed by the United Kingdom Government to impact on Scotland. (S3O-11136)

Does the cabinet secretary share my concern about the decision by the Tory UK Government to revive the previous Labour  Government's plans to part-privatise the Royal Mail? Will he restate the Scottish Government's support for a publicly owned and operated postal service? In light of the plans, is it not the case that the Scottish Government's post office diversification fund is more important than ever?

The minister will be aware that, as a result of Tuesday's budget, NHS Lanarkshire will have to pay its share of NHS Scotland's £26 million extra costs in VAT from next year. That will remove potential national health service capital funding for Cumbernauld and Kilsyth and beyond. Does she share my disappointment that one reason for that was the Labour Party's refusal to countenance the formation of an anti-Tory coalition in London and the subsequent infliction of a Tory Government on the people of Scotland?

As the cabinet secretary has said, the GERS report sets out the case for independence, and I agree. Does he agree with me that that case is further strengthened by the figures from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, which show that the UK's national debt is 59 per cent of GDP this year? It is only 1.6 per cent in Denmark. Sweden has a 13.1 per cent surplus, Finland has a 46.4 per cent surplus and Norway has a 143.6 per cent surplus. Is it not the case that Scotland could not only survive but thrive with independence?

I am sure that Irene Oldfather, too, will begin by saying that, in the European year for combating poverty and social exclusion, it is right that we should have this debate. Poverty is a scandal wherever it exists. In this world of plenty, and our land of plenty, the fact that any human being—let alone the estimated one fifth or so of people in Scotland who are defined as being in poverty—should go without the means to meet their basic needs shames us all and is an issue, above all others, that cries for justice. Tackling and eradicating poverty should be front and centre of the policy agenda of any Government, of any colour—not simply because it is morally the right thing to do, but because it is in the enlightened self-interest of society as a whole to narrow the gaps between the rich and the poor. With poverty and deprivation come challenges of ill health, crime, antisocial behaviour and lower  educational attainment that impact on society as a whole and end up costing us more. All of us benefit from a more equitable society. I welcome the approach that is taken in the poverty and income inequality framework, which was published less than 18 months ago. In the framework, the scale of the challenge that faces this country in tackling poverty is set out clearly. Ambitious targets to meet that challenge have been set. In addition to backing the UK-wide target to eradicate child poverty by 2020, the Scottish Government has established its solidarity target of increasing the proportion of income that the poorest 30 per cent of households receive by 2017. The Government's framework uses the powers that are available at present to make what progress we can. A total of £435 million has been invested in the fairer Scotland fund over three years, £60 million has been invested in measures to tackle fuel poverty, and wide-ranging support for credit unions and the third sector has been made available.

I will take a brief intervention, as we are tight for time.

We should always be willing to assess the impact of any measure. I will come on to the issue of how we can tackle poverty really effectively. The motion recognises the importance of being able to work as a means of lifting individuals and families out of poverty. That is confirmed by the most recent report of the growing up in Scotland study, "The Circumstances of Persistently Poor Children", which finds: "Being without paid work, and in particular regular work, is often cited as the key influence on poverty." For that reason, I welcome the Scottish Government's continuing commitment to supporting jobs in our economy, the number of apprenticeship places in recent years and the announcement earlier today by the Minister for Skills and Lifelong Learning. The poverty framework demonstrates the Government's commitment to tackling poverty and inequality. I note that some progress is being made. Absolute child poverty has fallen, but rates of relative poverty remain too high. Currently, 16 per cent of pensioners live in relative poverty. That is an improvement on the situation previously, but  the figure is still too high. The task now is to speed up the rates of progress—a task that is all the more challenging, as the motion suggests, because of the economic circumstances in which we find ourselves. It is also challenging because of the limited powers that are at the disposal of the Parliament and the Scottish Government. Johann Lamont talked about the powers to tackle poverty that are at our disposal. I accept that those powers exist, but they are limited in relation to the challenge. Although we can and must make inroads to mitigate the effects of poverty, the powers to tackle the root cause of poverty—the unequal distribution of wealth—are not particularly in the hands of the Parliament or the Scottish Government. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation's recent report "Devolution's impact on low-income people and places" reflects that fact when it concludes: "Support for tackling poverty in the devolved countries came ahead of powers to act". Although I accept that the political will to act in Scotland is real—and I think that that is the case across all parties—the ability to act is constrained. I believe that small, independent countries have consistently been able to demonstrate that poverty reduction and better social equality are not only possible, but compatible with economic development. That brings me to the exchange between Alex Johnstone and Patrick Harvie. I agree with Patrick Harvie's point that the generation of economic growth does not necessarily lead to a more equal society. The converse can be true: more equal societies can generate growth. For example, Norway has been ranked among the five most highly developed countries in the world—the UK, incidentally, ranked 21st—and it is a regular top performer in the United Nations human development index. Looking beyond crude economic measures, the New Economics Foundation, in its index of human wellbeing and environmental impact, ranks Belgium, Finland and Sweden above the UK in its ranking of western nations. Given his previous criticism of me, Murdo Fraser might be interested to know that Venezuela ranks 38 places above the UK in that table. Sadly, he is not in the chamber; he will learn about that when he reads the Official Report . In September last year every member of the Parliament was presented with a copy of "The Poverty and Justice Bible" by the Scottish Bible Society to mark its bicentenary. Throughout that edition of the bible, injunctions to end poverty are especially highlighted. I was drawn, in particular, to Isaiah's call, echoed by John F Kennedy in his inaugural address some 50 years ago,  "to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free". That is the challenge that we must constantly strive to achieve. To do so, we need to rise above petty party-political differences, and we need the powers that best come with independence.

To ask the First Minister what matters were discussed at the most recent meeting of the joint ministerial committee. (S3F-2462)

I welcome the achievements of the Scottish Government in getting the JMC structure to deliver some positive changes for Scotland. Is there a lesson in the outcome of this week's meetings that the devolution settlement must never return to a situation in which any UK Government treats Holyrood simply as a department of Whitehall, to be bullied or ignored as it sees fit?

I remind colleagues that, in the debate on the committee's report, and in the stage 1 debate on the bill, I suggested that fresh faces would be required for further consideration of the issues. It is clear that my purchase with my party hierarchy is no greater than it was previously. Gratifyingly, it is obviously no greater than Jackson Carlaw's purchase with his party hierarchy, given his similar return to the subject matter. Against that backdrop, I say that I speak with considerable relish. I echo Trish Godman's comments and thank committee colleagues, the clerks and the witnesses who contributed to the committee's work. I echo Jackson Carlaw's tribute to the convener. She kept us in order and we were all glad that she bore the burden of dealing with the bill, although I was slightly concerned when she informed me that, if she fell under a bus, it would fall to me as deputy convener to deal with the bill. I am glad that she has taken care of herself. The proposals that are before us were considered in microscopic detail. I cannot quite say that it will be a lifetime achievement if the bill is passed today, although the committee deliberations often felt as though they took a lifetime. [ Interruption .]

I do not think that it is my BlackBerry. I believe that it is off—I thought that it was off, anyway. It is important to emphasise that the suggested changes in the bill do not threaten the quality of service that is delivered by the bodies that we considered and they do not compromise the bodies' independence. The various office-holders to whom we spoke were content with the current arrangements and confirmed to the committee that the SPCB's measures protect office-holders' functional independence and ensure that proper  accountability does not encroach on their operational independence or cause any problems. The committee was content with that approach. However, we ensured that the bill provided for adequate parliamentary scrutiny and recommended that SPCB-supported bodies should be subject to monitoring by committees, to increase their transparency. The creation of the new commission for ethical standards in public life in Scotland will ensure the on-going accountability of elected representatives, that is, MSPs and councillors. Given the limited time available, I will focus briefly on the proposals to secure better value for money, which is imperative, as the Minister for Parliamentary Business said. The committee's remit was not particularly to achieve financial savings, but we managed to do so through, for example, the early transfer of prisoner complaints to the SPSO, with anticipated savings in the region of £37,000 this year and considerably more thereafter. We will also see expected initial savings of around £10,000 a year through the creation of the commission for ethical standards in public life in Scotland and, in due course, there might be further savings for the Scottish Government. Like Trish Godman, I commend the bill to Parliament. It simplifies the public bodies landscape, making it more readily understandable by the public. A key point is that it protects the functions and independence of the affected bodies while improving this elected Parliament's scrutiny of their work. It will also lead to public moneys being saved. I am sure that those objectives are shared by all members.

As Linda Fabiani said, on the day the report was published, I led a members' business debate to mark the 200th anniversary of the Scottish savings bank movement and the 175th anniversary of the Airdrie Savings Bank. In that debate, I and other members reflected on the fact that—as Linda Fabiani spelled out—the Airdrie Savings Bank has much to teach the rest of the banking sector about community involvement and the true purposes of banking. The committee's report dwells in some detail on the true purposes of banking and what the banks and the financial services sector should be seeking to achieve. I welcome the committee's finding that we must develop a "sustainable financial services industry that supports the rest of the Scottish economy both as an employer and as a provider of capital and other financial services to consumers." The committee is right to suggest that the true purposes of banking were lost in the headlong rush for quick gains and unrealistic never-ending expansion. The focus now must be on the lessons that we can learn and the practical steps that we can take to sustain and develop our financial services sector. Those steps must meet Scotland's needs, support sustainable economic growth and militate against the turmoil that we have experienced in recent years recurring. The report calls for reform of the regulatory framework, for a fairer approach to remuneration and bonuses, and for genuine competition in the commercial sector. All those recommendations are sensible and welcome, although, under the current devolution settlement, neither the Scottish Government nor the Parliament has the necessary control or decision-making powers to act on them directly. The committee is right to emphasise the limited nature of the powers of Scotland's Parliament and its Government over economic and monetary policy, including the currency, financial services and the financial markets. Those powers and the power to reform the regulatory framework of our banking sector remain the preserve of the UK Government.

The Government can develop a strategy, but we would all agree that it does not have the requisite powers to see that strategy through to its logical conclusion. Those powers remain with the UK Government. Although the  report recognises that fact, I was disappointed that it makes no specific recommendation that any of those powers should be devolved, despite its very clear message that Scotland's wider economy could benefit from a regulatory system that more closely matches and can be adapted to meet our circumstances. The signs are that the committee's recommendations will go sadly unheeded at Whitehall. Through UKFI Ltd, the UK Government—and therefore the taxpayer—owns 84 per cent of RBS and 40 per cent of Lloyds Banking Group, which now includes the Bank of Scotland. Despite those stakes, it seems as if business as usual remains the default position of the UK Government. Bailing out the banks was simply a reset switch to allow the banks to continue as normal. Indeed, an official of HM Treasury told me in a letter in January of last year that UKFI's "overarching objectives are to protect and create value for the taxpayer as shareholder" and that "UKFI works to ensure management incentives for banks in which it has shareholdings are based on maximising long-term value and to restrict the potential for rewarding failure." In other words, the UK Government is adopting a deliberately arm's-length approach to the ownership of the banks because it wants to maximise their profitability for the day when they are eventually sold back into private hands. How that is to be done with any guarantee that there is to be no recurrence of the financial crisis is unclear, especially if the UK Government is unwilling to use its position as a shareholder and the highest executive authority of the state to demand reform now. Instead, the taxpayer has in effect been helping to provide capital for American companies such as Kraft for its purchase of Cadbury's. Through the Lloyds Banking Group, we part-own the Porterbrook Leasing Company, which rents out rail rolling stock in Scotland to rail franchise holders that are already subsidised by the taxpayer. RBS, which is funded by the taxpayer, is part of a consortium that is facilitating the privatisation of the UK's search and rescue helicopter operations. And, of course, the Scottish Government and local authorities up and down the country continue to pump billions of pounds in private finance initiative and public-private partnership repayments into the coffers of publicly owned banks. However, in the letter to which I referred earlier, the UK Government stated that it would not demand that the banks it owns improve the terms of PFI/PPP payments that they charge interest on, nor will it seek better value for the public purse in the cost of leasing rail rolling stock. Public money is invested  directly in those banks, and little is asked for in return. Public funds swirl round in circles and it is the management and private shareholders that seem to emerge as winners. That is to say nothing of the appalling investments to which the publicly owned banks commit overseas. Since 2007, RBS has financed companies that are exploiting the Alberta tar sands in Canada, to the detriment of the local environment and people. Almost $14 billion has been spent by RBS on a project that will by 2020 result in the annual emission of more than 140 million tonnes of carbon, which is almost twice the annual emissions of New Zealand. Local wildlife has been affected, and local—mostly indigenous—people claim that there has been a detrimental effect on their health. That this is perpetrated by a bank that is essentially publicly owned is nothing short of a scandal. The previous UK Administration missed its chance to seize the opportunity presented by its investment in the banks to demand root-and-branch reform. The committee's report talks at length about the need for banks to provide more flexible and favourable support to struggling smaller businesses. I am probably not alone in being contacted by constituents who are making every effort to pay back debts to the banks that they own, and yet find themselves threatened, pressurised and subject to ever-increasing costs and charges. I hope that the report will encourage the current UK Administration to look seriously at what influence it can exert over the banks it owns or holds significant shares in, although I will not hold my breath. The ultimate lesson from the experience of the past few years is that, if we are ever to achieve a properly regulated banking sector in Scotland, we must have the requisite powers to do that. If we are to end the greed-is-good culture that is the heart of what is now an utterly discredited Anglo-American model of capitalism, as the report rightly identifies, we must have the requisite powers to do that. If, as Linda Fabiani mentioned, we are to protect our banking sector as other small countries, such as those of Scandinavia, have sought to do with greater success, we need the requisite powers to do that. We need the powers of independence to do that.

The cabinet secretary might be aware of proposed changes to out-of-hours services in parts of the NHS Lanarkshire area. She might also be aware of the proposed removal of X-ray services in Cumbernauld. Given that total expenditure in NHS Lanarkshire in 2005, under Labour, was £650 million, whereas total expenditure in 2009, under the current Government was £850 million, does she agree that such changes cannot be justified on a financial basis?

Does Pauline McNeill not accept that there is equally a substantial body of opinion that counters that argument? Is the extension of her logic not that England and the rest of the United Kingdom would have to reapply?

Does that mean that the member is rebuffing the friendly advances of Murdo Fraser and that he does not like him after all?

I apologise for not pressing my request-to-speak button and I thank the clerks for reminding me to do so. I appear to have forgotten what to do in the Scottish Parliament, after the campaigns of the past few weeks. I would have regretted not being able to participate in the debate—I am sure that members share that sentiment. I am glad that our Parliament has an opportunity to debate the forthcoming work programme of the European Commission. The debate provides us with an opportunity to push forward Scotland's interests and ensure that we play a more active role in the Europe of the future. My party has long argued that the people of Scotland should have a stronger voice in Europe, and the next work programme provides another reminder that Scotland's interests need a Scottish voice to stand up for them in Europe and the world at large. I take the opportunity to correct Murdo Fraser who, in a fit of excitement at recent events—it is clear that the excitement is palpably shared by his new-found colleagues Mr Smith and Mr Hume—got his facts wrong. Murdo Fraser argues that the SNP wants Scotland to be a new member of the European Union, but we want nothing of the sort.  Scotland is already a member of the European Union. I am sure that he appreciates my correcting his facts for him. [ Interruption .] The work that the European and External Relations Committee has carried out in examining the work programme has been productive and has emphasised the importance of the Scottish Government and our Parliament being more greatly involved in how the programme affects Scotland. Given our present status as a sub-state actor in the EU, we should welcome the suggestion for further involvement of sub-state entities in the 2020 strategy and the Commission blueprint for moving the EU forward more generally. However, we need to see further detail of what that will entail to ensure that mere rhetoric does not take the place of effective engagement with Scotland, the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament. Most of all, we need the UK Government to ensure that the Scottish Government is permitted to engage fully in the decision-making processes of the EU, particularly now that we have a Conservative Administration south of the border, given that such Administrations have failed Scotland's interests in the past. We should also welcome the fact that one of the work programme's main aims is to put "people at the heart of European action". Given the vivid demonstration of the democratic deficit in Scotland by the result of last week's election—after which, with a solitary Scottish representative, the Tories find themselves in government—it is right to consider the empowerment of the people, whether in the business of the EU or elsewhere. We must welcome any moves to improve people's participation in the EU. In that regard, the European citizens initiative that will shortly be implemented is a useful model that we should encourage Scotland's citizens to take advantage of where appropriate. The Commission also aims to modernise the way that the EU works. Our Parliament has been expressly geared up to fulfil the standards that a modern political system requires, with openness and transparency at the heart of our processes. With a direct line to the EU, we might be better placed to use our experience to influence the direction of the modernisation of the EU's procedures. Even within the confines of devolution, we should seek to do that anyway; of course, we should also be prepared to learn from our European neighbours about how any positive changes can be applied to our processes at home. It is worth mentioning that this is the EU year of combating poverty and social exclusion, as my colleague Sandra White stated. We should  concentrate our efforts on ensuring that assisting the many people in Scotland, throughout Europe and beyond who experience poverty or exclusion is always at the top of the political agenda. It is unfortunate that, at a recent meeting of the European and External Relations Committee, we learned that some member states do not think that that should be a priority for the EU. Against the backdrop of the year of combating poverty and social exclusion, it is all the more important that we redouble our efforts and come together to seek solutions to the social and economic factors that often contribute to poverty and social exclusion. With the EU 2020 strategy and the Commission's work programme having sustainable economic development and jobs growth at their heart, I hope that we can grasp the opportunity to eradicate poverty in the areas of Scotland and elsewhere in Europe that suffer from severe deprivation. Of course, we cannot rely on economic growth in and of itself. We must direct our efforts simultaneously at reducing inequality and seeking economic recovery. I hope that that will be at the heart of the EU 2020 strategy and the Commission's work programme. I welcome the Commission's work programme for 2010 and I hope that Scotland is able to play a key, active part in the direction taken by the programme and EU policy making in the future. However, members do not need to be told that we can only ever reach our full potential when we have full independence and a direct line to Europe. I very much look forward to that day.

Will the member give way?

It is with considerable delight that I rise to speak in this debate. Unlike every other speaker thus far, I do so from the back benches, to which I am well accustomed. In the debate on the committee report on 18 June 2009, I, and other members, said that the matters that we were discussing would have to be considered further at a later date—and here we are doing so today. I suggested at the time that fresh faces would be required, but it is clear that the various party whips disagreed, because many of the members who spoke in that debate, including me, find themselves doing so again today. I served as the deputy convener of the committee and, like other members, I thank colleagues on the committee, the clerks and the witnesses for making the inquiry process good, thorough and rigorous. The work continues; it is in  the good hands of the committee convener, who is gracing the front bench today, instead of sitting in her usual spot in front of us. We are now considering the bill. It is clear that the bill and the committee process build on work that went before. The committee considered a number of previous inquiries and reports, such as the Audit Scotland report "Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Ombudsman/Commissioners Shared Services", the previous Finance Committee's inquiry into accountability and governance, the Crerar report, the Sinclair report and the Scottish Commission for Public Audit's "Review of the corporate governance of Audit Scotland"—all very catchy titles. It is clear that the process has not taken place in isolation and that it continues work that has been done before. It is important to make clear that, although the committee and the bill propose some structural changes, there will be no significant changes to the service that the proposed new bodies will offer, notwithstanding the merger of the Scottish Prison Complaints Commission into the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman's role. It is clear that, under the proposals, there will be no dilution or diminution of the service that the bodies offer. However, some sensible changes are proposed. They include harmonisation of the terms and conditions of the various office-holders. It was clear to the committee that, because the commissioners were created in legislation one by one, there were significant differences in their terms and conditions. The committee did not think that that made sense, so terms and conditions will be harmonised. That is a sensible position. Office-holders' work should also be subject to greater and more rigorous scrutiny—without interference—by committees of the Parliament. The Parliament pays for that work, so it is right that the Parliament should scrutinise it. It is worth reflecting on the circumstances in which we are debating the bill. Tomorrow we will debate the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill, so there is a wider context to the provisions of this committee bill; other work is being done on the landscape of public bodies. We welcome the fact that, as Bruce Crawford indicated, the Government will co-operate with the committee on the bill. I intended to say a little about cost savings, but I am swiftly running out of time.

Members will be delighted to hear that I have additional time. The main thrust of the committee's review was not to achieve financial savings, but we should reflect on the fact that there will be savings. It is anticipated that the early transfer of prison complaints to the ombudsman will produce  savings of around £37,000 in the financial year 2010-11, £163,000 in 2011-12 and £174,000 annually thereafter. In addition, it is anticipated that there will be on-going savings of approximately £10,000 per annum when administrative support for the public standards commissioner for Scotland is provided by the staff of the new commission for ethical standards in public life in Scotland and the part-time posts of the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner and the chief investigating officer are merged into one full-time post. Those savings may seem small within the overall landscape of public spending in Scotland, but they are welcome nonetheless in an era when every penny counts. There has been a good start to the bill process at stage 1. I look forward to the continuation of that process and to concluding the committee's work, but I suggest that fresh faces will be required at the stage 3 debate. I hope that I will be listened to this time.

As Aileen Campbell said, we were told at the conclusion of last week's debate on education that, if we waited patiently until today, we would have the chance to discuss the Swedish education  model. I have waited with eager anticipation since then, so it was with a sense of anticlimax that I noted that, for some reason, the Conservative party's motion does not even mention Sweden. Suffice it to say, however, that that absence has not prevented us from considering the lessons that can be learned from that country—or indeed from being put through Christina McKelvie's litany of ABBA-related puns. We should be prepared to learn lessons for our education system from elsewhere but, as well as considering what we can adapt and imitate, we must be prepared to learn what not to copy from other countries, as the cabinet secretary said. We should reflect on the fact that, in the OECD programme for international student assessment, Sweden lies below Scotland for maths and science. The much-referred-to Swedish model is not the panacea for Scotland's education system that it has been presented as. Entry criteria for schools in Sweden have a less residential focus. As Aileen Campbell said, that can mean that schools have less of a community character. One of the strengths of our system is the community aspect of our schools. The fact that pupils are drawn from a local residential catchment area is hugely important to the contribution that schools make to wider society. It is right that the cabinet secretary should visit Sweden and Finland to find out what can be learned from them, but he will not see educational utopias in those countries. The motion refers to East Lothian Council, which has been prepared to think a little outside the box. Despite the best efforts of some people to argue otherwise, that council has made no final decisions on future models for the running of its schools. Whatever models may be considered and implemented, democratic accountability through the council and the schools' position in the state sector will remain. Having that is surely an absolute must for Scotland's education system. We are, of course, only weeks away from a UK general election. The Tories' position on the future delivery of education in England has been instructive. If the Tories are returned to government, they plan to compartmentalise education and undermine the sustainability of many schools with the greatest challenges. From that perspective, at least we can be grateful that Conservative ambitions to privatise our education system in Scotland will remain simply ambitions that are evidenced in debates and speeches in the Parliament but which have no chance of being realised. Elizabeth Smith's opening speech was instructive. I want to refer to two things that she mentioned in it. She said that politicians have direction over schools, not headteachers. That is hyperbole. It may read well in a press release and  make a good soundbite, but it does not reflect reality. Headteachers are in charge of their schools, not individual politicians.

I suppose that that is a matter of individual perspective. There should be a form of democratic accountability. I am sure that Elizabeth Smith recognises that that headteacher will take charge of the day-to-day running of that school, although I do not know which school she is referring to. Elizabeth Smith talked about a socialist love affair with comprehensive education. Unlike some other members—members should take a cursory glance around the chamber—I was educated in a comprehensive school. Such schools work. They allow for different talents to come to the fore and provide a rounded educational experience. If the socialists have such a love affair with comprehensive education, one wonders why the Conservatives did not legislate to change the comprehensive system in 18 years of government. Elizabeth Smith spoke about how wonderful our schools are, but she then damned them. Education is a right, not a privilege. It is important not simply because of its benefit and value to the individual, but because of what it contributes to the common weal. Society as a whole will benefit if more of our young people receive the best possible education. As the Government amendment suggests, there is already much to be proud of in our state education system. Bill Aitken's suggestion that the state education system is broken is nonsense. I do not always agree with Jeremy Purvis, but at least I agree with him about that. The 2009 Scottish survey of achievement in schools focused on reading and writing. Some 13,000 pupils in P3, P5, P7 and S2 in 400 local authority and independent schools throughout Scotland were assessed, and it was found that performance in reading was up on 2005 and 2006 at all primary levels and that a significant proportion of children were performing above the expected level. That demonstrates that the idea that Scotland's education system is broken is ludicrous. However, challenges were found in levels of attainment in writing. The areas of Scotland in which that problem is greatest are not without wider challenges. Those areas are invariably among the poorest in the country. That was found by the OECD, as Shirley-Anne Somerville stated.  The answer to tackling the problem does not lie in changing the education system alone and changing things for the sake of change—Margaret Smith accurately put it in that way. It is important to embed literacy skills across the curriculum, as is happening. The goal remains to have a system that will provide relevant, inspiring and engaging education for every child and young person in Scotland. I admire the Conservatives' willingness, as expressed in their motion, to learn from other European countries, but why should we confine our horizon only to the continent of Europe? I can think of other places in the world where huge strides have been taken to tackle historical levels of illiteracy by making huge strides in educating people. I will leave it to Conservative members to guess where I am talking about; the pages of yesterday's Scotsman provide a suggestion. I welcome the debate and look forward to hearing what the minister has to say.

I will begin by focusing on the efforts that are under way to teach our children the concepts of global citizenship, before turning later to educational attainment in the traditional subjects. I was struck by Ken Macintosh saying that we are debating a vague motion. The work on the internationalist agenda that is taking place throughout our schools is excellent and worthy of our consideration today—I will come on to some of the work that is going on in the area that I represent. In that regard, it is appropriate that we discuss the issues.

Given that my point was about the excellent work that is going on in international education, I have not had any e-mails to complain about it. I have had some e-mails from teachers who are concerned about their employment situation, and I have dealt with them as any MSP would. It is appropriate that we have this debate during Fairtrade fortnight, as it is through fair trade in schools that many children learn about their rights and responsibilities as citizens of the world. The basic principles of fair trade—paying producers a fair price for their goods and ensuring that funds  are invested to benefit the whole community—are readily understood by even the youngest of our schoolchildren. In the Central Scotland region that I represent, I can think of a number of schools where global citizenship is embedded in the curriculum. Those efforts emphasise the importance of the part of the motion that refers to our children "learning about Scotland and its place in the world". Whitelees primary school in Cumbernauld has worked hard to promote fair trade, and the staff and headteacher Ann Kay deserve great credit for those efforts. Indeed, Whitelees provides wonderful examples of citizenship education across the curriculum. Much work has been done to raise awareness of climate change, and the school is on track for its fourth eco-flag award. I also spent time with the pupils of St Helen's primary school in Condorrat, discussing the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It was inspiring to see the pupils respond so positively to the concepts and ideals contained in that document. I think also of the time that I welcomed a group of primary 5 pupils from Carron primary school to the Parliament. I was inspired by some of the questions that they asked me; it was a tribute to the pupils and their teachers that they were prepared to think about and discuss a range of issues and ideas about how our society works and how we interact with the wider world. There are many other examples. I was pleased to welcome a group of pupils from Nkhamenya girl's school in northern Malawi, which is in partnership with St Maurice's high school in Cumbernauld, to this Parliament in the past year or so. The examples that I have cited are all evidence of how Scotland's education system can equip our students with a greater awareness of the world in which we live and the responsibilities of being citizens of not just Scotland but the world. We must also ensure that Scotland's pupils are endowed with the skills that they need to lead happy, successful and productive lives. After all, Scotland has a long and proud history of providing education for all and of understanding education as a force for breaking down social barriers. Of course we should be concerned about illiteracy and the number of students who leave school with poor numeracy skills. Where we once led the world, we have some more work to do, but we should take note of our pupils' many achievements and keep the situation in some context. With an internationalist approach, we should rightly, as part of our country's future development, look at the policies and decisions  that have made some of our near neighbours the most progressive and well-balanced societies in the world, particularly in education. Countries including Finland and the Netherlands and, further afield, New Zealand have recently been ranked above Scotland in the OECD's programme for international student assessment for science, maths and reading. It makes sense for us to look at those countries, as they are of comparable size to our own, to see whether there are lessons that we can learn. I was struck by the many exchanges that Margo MacDonald has had about the value of modern languages, and I note the Liberal Democrat amendment, which is constructive and states that we should pay attention to the importance of modern languages. I noticed Margo MacDonald's rhetorical flourish in French, and I was tempted to respond by saying, "Civis Romanus sum," which translates as, "I am a Roman Citizen." As Christina McKelvie said, Latin was once the foremost language of the known world. Although there are advantages to being endowed with the English language today, it is still relevant to learn other languages, because the situation changes. Perhaps we should learn other modern languages, those of the emerging economies, such as Portuguese for Brazil, Cantonese for China and Spanish for Latin America and much of the USA. We should not say that modern languages are not relevant in the modern world. I regret the fact that I do not have much grasp of a foreign language. I conclude by focusing on one other area of international comparison in education. The Tories have of late stated that we should imitate elements of the Swedish model of education provision and funding, although they do not say anything about that in their amendment. I am a great admirer of the Scandinavian model, but it is surely worth mentioning that, in the OECD rankings, Sweden lies below Scotland for maths and science and is only slightly ahead in reading—to say nothing of the less residential-based criteria for entry to its schools, which result in schools having less of a community character, and the fact that less emphasis is placed on keeping siblings together in schools in Sweden. We should also be prepared to learn what not to copy from other countries. I am sure that the minister will have comments to make on that.

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government plans to tackle the problem of alcohol consumption during pregnancy. (S3F-2251)

The First Minister will be aware that Dr Harry Burns, the chief medical officer, has said that he believes that the incidence of foetal alcohol spectrum disorder in Scotland has been significantly underestimated. Given the impact that the condition can have on the unborn child and noting the report from Children in Scotland on the matter, does the First Minister agree that the problem demonstrates yet again why all parties represented in the chamber should be united on taking action on alcohol abuse?

To ask the Scottish Government what action is being taken to reduce littering in public places. (S3O-9746)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that littering blights many communities. A recent survey that I conducted among my constituents in the Greenfaulds area of Cumbernauld showed that 98 per cent of the respondents felt that littering was a problem. Many people suggested that the ready availability of fast food in the vicinity of the local high school was a major contributor to the problem. Does the cabinet secretary agree that it is important for local authorities to work with local businesses, schools and other community organisations to promote a sense of civic awareness and pride that encourages local residents to keep their areas clean?

What responsibilities do contractors for road projects, such as HMC at the A80, have to communicate local residents' rights to them, including their legal protection rights?

Respect for the dignity of every individual and the rule of law is the foundation of every free and fair justice system in the world. It is from that fundamental position that each democratic society has to determine the most appropriate and effective methods by which to protect the rights and security of its citizens and how to establish policing and judicial systems that uphold the rule of law. I am confident that our legal traditions and justice system continue to provide a balance of rights and responsibilities that keeps the public safe while respecting the human rights of those who are accused or suspected of committing crimes. Nevertheless, society does not stand still, and it is vitally important that procedures are constantly reviewed in the light of the changing nature of public order situations and the challenges that our police officers face day in, day out. It is in that context that the use of Tasers by police officers should be carefully, critically and cautiously considered. Let me be clear that my starting position is that I share many of the concerns that have been legitimately expressed about the use by Scotland's  police of Tasers. Although Amnesty International—I declare my membership of that organisation and the fact that my wife is employed by it—is not aware of the misuse of Tasers in Scotland, it reports that a Taser was used against a man in a diabetic coma in Leeds in July 2005 and that an 89-year-old man with Alzheimer's disease was Tasered in Wales in February last year. Those instances strike me as clear misuses of Tasers and fuel concerns about them. I understand where Bill Aitken is coming from, but those instances also demonstrate that the "Don't do anything wrong and you won't get Tasered" school of thought is simplistic. It is an undisputed fact that police officers in Scotland already use Tasers in certain circumstances. Each year, thousands of police officers are assaulted while they are on duty, and the police often have to respond to difficult and testing circumstances. Balancing the need to ensure that the police and public are adequately protected with the legitimate concerns about Tasers is not easy. That said, Amnesty International and Epilepsy Scotland, which are cited in the motion, accept that there are situations in which the use of Tasers by our police forces is appropriate. Epilepsy Scotland suggests, however, that all officers who are equipped with a Taser are given proper epilepsy training.

I am afraid not. I am very short of time. If the member wanted us to have more time because she thinks that the issue is so serious, perhaps the Liberal Democrats should have debated it for all their time this morning. Epilepsy Scotland's request is not unreasonable. I would be interested to hear from the cabinet secretary in his closing speech what information he has had from the chief constable of Strathclyde Police in that regard. Amnesty International also accepts that Tasers are a positive addition to the options that are available to the police because they reduce the use of other, more fundamentally lethal weapons. Under United Nations obligations on the police, the use of lethal and non-lethal force is accepted as long as it is proportionate to the threat that is faced and there are systems in place to ensure accountability and transparency. Stephen House has said that, in using a Taser, "Officers must perceive that either they or a member of the public is going to be subject to violence". That clarification is welcome, but while we hope that Tasers will not be misused, we must know how allegations of misuse will be dealt with and, if they are proven, what the sanction will be. Again, if the cabinet secretary has any information on  that, it would be useful to hear it in his closing speech. I would like to turn to other areas such as legislation and the devolution of firearms powers, but I fear that I do not have time. I close by reiterating my general concerns about Tasers but also by stating my concerns about our police officers' ability to undertake their duties as safely as possible. I hope that those concerns can be balanced as we seek a modern and effective police force for the Scottish people.

I think that we have learned a little too much about Jackson Carlaw's holiday experience and I am sure that his wife will thank him for passing on the full details. I congratulate Christopher Harvie on lodging his motion for debate this evening. I cannot boast his intricate knowledge of trains—it is clear that, as ever, he has an enthusiasm for the subject matter. I should probably begin with a confession similar to Jackson Carlaw's: I have, shamefully, not visited the museum, although I am sure Cathy  Peattie will be relieved to know that I have visited Bo'ness many times. The Scottish railway museum in Bo'ness is an important tourist attraction in the Central Scotland region, which I represent. The Bo'ness and Kinneil railway, which has been developed since 1979, and the museum play an important part in preserving our country's rail heritage. I always note with some sadness that too much of Scotland's railways now have heritage status. The savage Beeching cuts decimated our rail network. I should of course point out that that was way before my time, although I am sure Professor Harvie recalls it well. It is ironic that much of the Bo'ness and Kinneil line and museum are on a line that was closed so many years ago. It would be fantastic if Bo'ness still had a station on the wider rail network. However, that is not the case and it is right that the line can be utilised by the Scottish Railway Preservation Society today. The society's efforts extend much further than the Bo'ness and Kinneil railway; it has the Scottish railway exhibition, which was opened in 1995 in a purpose-built, 15,000ft 2 exhibition hall beside Bo'ness station. I was intrigued to learn that it has built an extension, which seems to be through co-operative work with institutions such as the Heritage Lottery Fund, the European regional development fund, Scottish Enterprise Forth Valley and others. That type of joint working is to be commended. It is important to talk about some of the Scottish Railway Preservation Society's work with the local community. I was heartened to learn that the society seeks to work with the local authorities, community planning partnerships, local business community groups and representatives of other visitor attractions to create initiatives to raise the profile of the town of Bo'ness and the Falkirk local authority area. The society encourages people to come to the area and visit other tourist attractions, and it has been playing its part in the regeneration of the town of Bo'ness. It is clear that a lot of good work is going on at the museum and the society, and they are to be congratulated. The motion refers to John Burnie. I cannot profess to have known Mr Burnie, but the regard in which he was held was quite clear when I welcomed his family to the Parliament today. I am sure that the Scottish railway museum's work will continue as testament to his devotion. Like Jackson Carlaw, I look forward to visiting the museum some time in the future.

As the minister is aware, the Lisbon treaty sets out the subsidiarity principle—the idea that decisions should be made at the appropriate level—but there is no direction from the European Union on how the principle will work in each member state. How will the Scottish Government ensure that the UK Government will not overlook the Scottish Parliament and Government in the EU decision-making process?

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government responds to reports that only 17 of 2,806 bids from Scottish-based firms for contracts relating to the 2012 Olympic games have been successful. (S3F-2185)

Does the First Minister agree that the situation is a further demonstration that the supposed benefits for Scotland of the 2012 Olympics are somewhat ethereal? Will he outline what steps the Government will take to redress the imbalance, particularly with regard to contracts that will be awarded for events in which the Government will have a more direct role, such as the 2014 Commonwealth games?

To ask the Scottish Government when Transport Scotland expects to publish the results of its developing rail freight in Scotland consultation. (S3O-9340)

The minister will be aware of the existing heavy freight traffic on the Cumbernauld to Falkirk Grahamston line. Given the plans to electrify that line, the long-standing hopes of local people to see an increased and improved passenger service, and the campaigns to create Abronhill and Grangemouth railway stations, will the minister guarantee that increasing freight traffic on the line will not impinge on any possibility of future improvements to passenger services?

As other members have done, I congratulate Christine Grahame on securing an important debate. It is important to reflect on the fact that it does not take place in a vacuum. We have had other debates about the future of Royal Mail and the Post Office. I secured a members' business debate on the UK Government's plans to part-privatise the Post Office, which was held on 7 May last year. About a year ago, on 9 January, we had a debate on the UK Government's rationalisation programme for the Post Office and, in particular, how it affected the south of Scotland. That forms part of the context for this evening's debate. That context is about a sustained assault on the Post Office and Royal Mail. Over the past few years, Her Majesty's Government in London has dithered over awarding the contract to sustain the  Post Office card account to the Post Office. The ability of post offices to make benefits payments has been removed and, as Jamie Stone said, people can no longer pay for their television licences at the post office. There has been a stripping away of services, which has undermined local post offices. In addition, we have had the UK Government's unnecessary part-privatisation proposals for the Royal Mail, which have thankfully been delayed. They should be shelved permanently. I hope that they will be, whatever the political hue of the Westminster Government. Christine Grahame and John Lamont mentioned the rationalisation programme that saw the closure of 2,000 post office branches across the UK, which had a disproportionate effect on Scotland. I want to take the local angle. Like Christine Grahame, I consulted local people about some proposed closures in the area that I represent. The proposals related to the post offices in Kildrum, Banton, Queenzieburn and Plains, and to the Grangepans post office in Bo'ness. The response that I received to those consultations was overwhelming. In each case, at least 99 per cent of the people who responded said that they wanted their post office to remain open. That is understandable because, as Jamie Stone rightly said, the post office is often the hub of the community that it serves. I wanted to go back to the people whom I had consulted to find out how their communities had been affected by what happened, so in October last year I wrote to all the people who responded to my original consultation. Of those who replied, 95.6 per cent thought that the closure of their local post office branch had had a negative impact on the community and 82.4 per cent believed that the quality of postal service that they received had worsened in the past year. Tonight's debate is highly relevant. We need to consider a diversification fund such as Christine Grahame spoke of, but although I welcome her suggestion and support it in principle, I am somewhat reluctant to throw it back at the Scottish Government, given that such matters are still the responsibility of the Westminster Government. As a Scottish National Party member, I believe that our Government should have the relevant responsibility, but given that the Welsh Assembly Government has introduced such a fund, there is merit in at least considering the proposal. Consumer Focus Scotland supports the idea. It recognises that the public sector faces significant pressures because of the economic downturn and suggests that consideration of the proposal should take place in that context. That is a reasonable approach, and it is one that I urge the minister to take. We want the post office network in Scotland  to have a bright future, and a diversification fund such as the one that exists in Wales may have a role to play in that. I very much look forward to hearing what the minister has to say in that regard.

In welcoming the opportunity to debate the issue, I draw very different conclusions from those drawn  by the Conservatives. I am puzzled by the terms of the motion. On reading it, one is led to think that the NHS is in some form of crisis and that, of necessity, we have to make some kind of choice between the Government's policy of phasing in free prescriptions and continued investment elsewhere in the NHS. That is particularly peculiar given the greater number of doctors, nurses, midwives and other health professionals who are now working in Scotland—the number is greater than ever before. Indeed, the latest statistics show that the total NHS workforce has risen by 2.1 per cent in the past year. I accept that there has been a slight decline over the past year in the number of health visitors, but it is likely that that is the result of recruitment issues and not any planned reduction by the Scottish Government. In 2008-09, the proportion of overall NHS expenditure on prescribed drugs was 15 per cent, down from a figure of 16.1 per cent in 2005-06. The phased introduction of free prescriptions is entirely cost effective.

As I said clearly, the figures show that the cost of prescribed drugs is going down. Improved procurement could be part of the equation—I do not knock it. We should, of course, look to make things as cost effective as we can, wherever we can. Free prescriptions, which—if I hear them correctly—those on the Labour benches support, are entirely cost effective. The Tories are trying to make political capital by pretending that investing in NHS staff and reducing prescription charges are mutually exclusive. In fact, both are necessary for building the fairer and healthier Scotland that we all should want to see. As other members have said, the Tories are rarely in touch with reality in Scotland. As we have seen in the debate, its health policies vividly demonstrate that. Indeed, the Tories may have lost touch with themselves. Are they not supposed to be the champions of low taxation? We call them prescription charges, but they are officially termed a prescription tax. It is not simply a euphemism to say that those charges are an attack on people who suffer from ill health; it is literally the case. Why, then, do the supposed champions of low taxation want that tax to be reintroduced? That is beyond me—I cannot understand it. Perhaps it is because the tax penalises many poorly paid people and families who are at the margins and who do not qualify for free prescriptions—people for whom the Tories traditionally have not had time.

As a new father, I sympathise entirely with Mary Scanlon's point. The quality of care that my family has received has been excellent—we have not wanted for any care. Her point reflects Ross Finnie's suggestion that we rebalance or reorder priorities. However, at this time of economic difficulty, it is right that we should take forward the policy of phasing out prescription charges, because that will put money back into people's pockets. It is the right type of priority for us to have at this time. I turn to the principles of the matter. Two years ago, the Parliament held a debate to mark the 60 th anniversary of the NHS. The SNP Government's policy of reducing and abolishing prescription charges reinforces the founding compact of the NHS that health care should be free at the point of access, although Christine Grahame's point that we all pay for the NHS through taxation was well made. There is a further reason for welcoming the Government's commitment finally to abolish prescription charges.

There have been moves to reduce dental charges. Dental check-ups are now free. There are far more dentists in Scotland and there is greater provision of dental services. I am intrigued by Jeremy Purvis's approach to the debate, as he keeps intervening on this point. Given that he does not even accept the premise that prescriptions should be free, it is somewhat phoney for him to decry the fact that dental care is not free. The facts are that prescription charges were never part of the original vision of the NHS and that the SNP Government is committed to using its powers to do all that it can to realise the vision of the NHS's founder, Nye Bevan, and many others who worked to introduce a national health service free at the point of access. Many generations of the Tory party have never reconciled themselves to that concept. I do not doubt Nanette Milne's long-standing commitment to the NHS, but many in her party are content to see people left behind in health care, as if the market's invisible hand has determined their lot. Her colleagues have no objection to the kind of health care companies that we see in the United States exploiting the most  vulnerable sectors of society to make massive profits, which they go on to use to manipulate the wider political system to their advantage. David Cameron's promise to protect the NHS has a hollow ring to it.

I would have given way to the member, but I am afraid that I do not time to do so. On at least one occasion, the Tory deputy leader, Murdo Fraser, has accused me of trying to appease a lunatic fringe in the SNP, admittedly on matters that are not related to today's debate. Surely there can be no more of a lunatic fringe than those elements of the Tory party that publicly criticise our NHS and call for a return to a privatised system of medical care—a system in which families scrimped and saved and feared the day when one of their own required medical treatment. "We can't go on like this," says David Cameron. I entirely agree with that sentiment. We should have the powers of independence—the full control of our resources that will allow us to transform the national health service and to ensure that it remains free at the point of access for all those who need it, including through free prescriptions.

Is it not the case that the major domestic market of both RBS and HBOS is south of the border and that the UK Government would have had a role to play even if Scotland had been independent?

The pre-budget report is a relatively recent innovation in UK politics. It was introduced by Gordon Brown when he was chancellor as, in his words, a way to "help build the foundations of a shared understanding and sense of national economic purpose between Government, business and individuals." It is clear that we all share the understanding that we find ourselves in difficult economic times. What has been announced in the pre-budget report will have a clear impact on the decisions that will be  made here in Scotland. Whether the report creates the desire for "a shared ... sense of ... purpose" about the way forward for the economy is another question. The pre-budget report that was delivered by Alistair Darling last week suggests that the boom and bust that had allegedly been banished from the economy has at the very least been transferred to Government finances. The Institute for Fiscal Studies suggests that the effect of the pre-budget report will be to reverse "All the increase in central government spending on public services over Labour's second and third terms by 2013/14." I do not say that to make a party-political point; I say it merely to illustrate the severity of the decisions that have been announced by the chancellor and the scale of the consequent challenges that will face the Scottish Government, and the public sector throughout Scotland and the UK. As we know, the Scottish Government is faced with a budget cut of some £800 million in real terms—the first real-terms cut in Scotland's budget since the beginning of devolution. We can argue about the cause, but it is the case that this coming year the Scottish Government will have £800 million less in real terms than was previously forecast. That will be felt throughout the country. In the cabinet secretary's preparatory budget announcement earlier this year, he outlined some of the consequences of those cuts. As Linda Fabiani set out, it is particularly disappointing that calls to bring forward capital spending in Scotland have not been heeded. Last year's decision to do so protected some 5,000 jobs throughout the country. It kept people off the dole, saved social security costs and provided stability to employers that could help them to emerge from the downturn less damaged than they might otherwise have been. That stability has been put at risk by the failure to introduce further capital expenditure, and an important opportunity has been missed. I hope that when the budget is presented in the new year, that decision will be revisited. Other decisions in the pre-budget report will be felt less directly, including the decision to increase national insurance. It will, for example, take £44 million out of Scotland's national health service as it pays the employer's contribution—the equivalent of over 2,000 nursing posts. It is interesting to consider the case of NHS staff, given the report that was published by the New Economics Foundation earlier this week, which found that for every £1 that is earned by hospital cleaners, society benefits by the equivalent of £10. Can the same be said of the city bankers who  continue to enjoy such largesse through extravagant wages and excessive bonuses? Derek Brownlee is absolutely right that the blame cannot be laid entirely at the door of bankers—I agree with that. However, the New Economics Foundation found that city bankers are reckoned to destroy £7 of value for every £1 they create by encouraging people to go into debt and through the environmental effects of the overconsumption that they encourage.

I am, of course, grateful for that clarification as, I am sure, are other members. The pre-budget report will perhaps claw back some of the bankers' continued largesse through the tax on bonuses, although I note that Linda Fabiani said that the tax is easily evadable. There was a chance to go substantially further. Given the unprecedented nature of the current global economic circumstances, the decisions that were taken to bring banks into public ownership to the tune of £850 billion, as Wendy Alexander was so explicit in setting out, presented the chancellor with the opportunity to make some bold choices. However, instead, the choice was taken to tinker at the edges and the opportunity for a wholesale change in banking culture has been missed. The pre-budget report gives no hint at a change to the planned £100 billion that the UK Government continues to commit to the Trident replacement programme. That is an opportunity missed. In an age in which we should commit to nuclear arms reduction, the Prime Minister and the chancellor remain wedded to that massive and unnecessary drain on public finances. In fact, a recent report by the Scottish Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament found that, far from creating employment and economic benefit, the Trident replacement programme could cost 3,000 jobs in Scotland's public sector, because finances are being diverted to it, rather than going to front-line public services. Other decisions will have serious impacts on the Parliament and the Government. The UK Government is discussing the devolution of fiscal powers to this Parliament. Of course, I favour independence for Scotland. No country is immune from the effects of global recession; indeed, many of Scotland's small independent neighbours have felt the chill of economic downturn, as has been set out quite clearly by some of our colleagues. Andy Kerr suggested that we in the SNP do not want to talk about our neighbours. Let us talk about one of our neighbours—Norway. Perhaps I want to bleat about Norway, as Wendy Alexander said. What Wendy Alexander failed to mention  was that Norway has the highest standard of living in the world. Its oil fund remains in surplus to what might be called an embarrassing degree. Independence would, of course, give Scotland the opportunity to establish its own oil fund, and to benefit from that natural resource in the same way that Norway has. I am probably running out of time. Until Scotland has the powers that it needs to make all our resources work for the benefit of its people, we have a duty to scrutinise the impact of UK Government decisions on the Scottish Government's budget and to call for choices and alternatives that contribute to a fairer and more equitable society.

Presiding Officer, is there still some leeway in the time that you are allocating to speeches?

Thank you. In that case, I will declare an interest. I recently became a father—[ Applause. ] The debate seems to have greater relevance for me than it might have had had it taken place a few weeks ago. I place on record my thanks to members—including you, Presiding Officer—for the good wishes that they have expressed, which my wife and I have sincerely appreciated. I welcome the broad consensus on the getting it right agenda that has been demonstrated in the debate, even though there might be differences in some areas. It should be acknowledged that work on developing the principles behind GIRFEC began before the 2007 election. The Parliament has demonstrated that it is at its best when parties work together towards a common goal. There is considerable positive feedback on how the getting it right agenda has worked in the pilot areas, in particular the Highlands. We hear much talk about the need for joined-up government, and it is clear that GIRFEC provides a positive example of what that means in practice. One of the biggest causes of frustration that constituents describe to me is the feeling that complaints and concerns, which are often to do with health and social services, are passed from pillar to post. People are frustrated by the difficulty of making headway in situations that seem intractable. Under the getting it right principles, all the different services and agencies that are concerned with the wellbeing of an individual child are brought together and there is a clear focus on the child's needs and rights. Although a range of providers and agencies continue to be involved, services are presented to the child and their family or carers as a single service, through which it is hoped that the child will be listened to and helped to understand the decisions that affect them. Families in the pilot have reported that they feel that one team supports them and their children. The evaluation of the pilot in Highland identified other achievements. The proportion of children who are seen by supervising officers within 15 days is now 100 per cent. The length of time that looked-after children wait for permanent and adoptive placements has fallen during the past four years. There has been a significant decrease  in exclusions from secondary schools. Workers are reporting that there is better information, greater trust, more advice and greater capacity for early intervention. Those achievements demonstrate the potential of the GIRFEC approach. A pathfinder initiative on domestic abuse was undertaken in Falkirk, in Central Scotland, which is the region that I represent. The aim was to inform our understanding at a national level. The Falkirk project was established to address the effect of domestic abuse on children, by intervening at an early stage to provide children who experience domestic abuse with the help and support that they need. In the report of its June 2009 joint inspection of services to protect children and young people in the Falkirk Council area, HMIE cites the pathfinder as an example of good practice and highlights the way that the pathfinder group, "comprising staff from police, health, social work, education, the Children's Reporter, Women's Aid and" the Camelon and Larbert support to parents group, "met on a weekly basis." The report found that "Support was provided quickly and impact was monitored. By adopting Getting it Right for Every Child ... principles, children affected by domestic abuse and their parents, in the Denny area of Falkirk, were provided with help and support much more quickly when they needed it most." That is an excellent example of the GIRFEC principles literally getting it right, so I congratulate those involved on their success and look forward to other parts of the country learning from it as the agenda moves forward. There is some discussion about the best way to ensure that the agenda is implemented effectively at a national level. There have been calls for fresh legislation, but the Scottish Government's approach so far has been proven correct. The point of the GIRFEC principles is that action be taken on the ground. Guidance, regulations and legislation can achieve only so much; individuals have to put them into practice, and the strategy is about doing that as clearly and consistently as possible. As the motion makes clear, getting it right for every child means ensuring that all aspects of public policy that affect young people work to the same principles. It means ensuring that the goals of the early years framework, the poverty reduction strategy and the approach to tackling health inequalities are also joined up and put child wellbeing front and centre.  Getting it right for every child means not simply protecting children from harm but actively investing in their future potential. That is why I welcome the Government's continued commitment to rolling out free school meals. All parents want their children to have the best possible start in life and the best possible education. Ensuring that our younger pupils are provided with sufficient sustenance for a day's learning is important. That is why I was disappointed by the remarks of the man who would be king of Labour in Scotland—Steven Purcell—who has called into question the need for free school meals. I trust that that stance is not shared by his colleagues in the Parliament. The need to ensure that our children are sustained was illustrated starkly by the depressing cover story in the recent edition of Third Force News , which reported that 10 per cent of children who are admitted to Yorkhill hospital are malnourished. That such a thing occurs in the 21 st century is a salutary reminder of the work that is to be done. Parents also want their children to be educated locally—in their communities and among their friends—by teachers who have the knowledge and experience that come from working in that community. That is why I have been concerned by proposals to close schools and nurseries in North Lanarkshire—proposals that I will work against. As I said in my introduction, we often hear about the need for joined-up government. Sometimes the expression can sound like the kind of jargon that it is supposed to represent a move away from but, when we consider the success of the pathfinder projects, we see that joining up the services that are delivered by local and national Government, as well as the third sector, is eminently achievable. I agree that the frightening statistics that Duncan McNeil laid out—as Hugh Henry rightly stated, they are shocking—demonstrate why we must not be complacent about getting it right for every child. When we get it right for every child, the benefits are felt throughout society. Part of the human impulse is to seek better for our children; getting it right for every child can be a key component of achieving that. If children can avoid health problems and a propensity to crime or antisocial behaviour, and if they can lift their heads and aim for the highest educational attainment and excellence throughout their lives, that will reduce costs elsewhere in the community and raise standards across the board. I hope that, from getting it right for every child, we will soon reach the day when we—politicians, the Government and society as a whole—get it right for every person in Scotland and make our country the best that it possibly can be for future generations to inherit.

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government's response is to the findings in the University of Milan study indicating that Scotland has the highest rate of deaths in Europe from throat cancer. (S3F-2059)

The president of the Royal College of Physicians is quoted today as saying that there is "compelling evidence" that abuse of alcohol and the harm that it causes are linked to price. With alcohol being identified in the Milan report as a leading cause of oesophageal cancer—the incidence of which the World Health Organization estimates will increase by 64.3 per cent between 2000 and 2020—does the First  Minister share my hope that all parties represented in the chamber will put aside political advantage, in the same way as was done for the ban on smoking in public places, and work constructively towards measures that will change Scotland's relationship with alcohol?

To ask the Scottish Government what support exists for the creation of new railway stations not identified in the strategic transport projects review. (S3O-8100)

I thank the minister for that reassuring answer. He will be aware of my calls to open stations at Abronhill in Cumbernauld and Grangemouth and Michael Matheson's calls for a station at Bonnybridge. I realise that the minister might not be able to commit to supporting those projects here and now—although he is welcome to do so—but is he able to assure me that he and  Transport Scotland will keep an open mind on those requests?

To ask the Scottish Government what consideration it has given to proposals to give parents control over their children's individual  education budgets from local education authorities. (S3O-7832)

Does the minister share my concern that the proposals would increase polarisation in our school system and does he agree that there is no place for Tory-inspired market fundamentalism in the education of Scotland's children?

To ask the First Minister what consideration the Scottish Government has made of the call by Stewart Sutherland for the reintroduction of university tuition fees. (S3F-1879)

Does the First Minister share the concern that has been expressed by the rector of the University of Edinburgh, Iain Macwhirter, that some are attempting to paint Scotland's system of free education as a dangerous  anachronism? Does he agree with Mr Macwhirter that the introduction of uncapped fees for tuition would turn our great egalitarian seats of learning into anachronistic bastions of privilege?

I welcome the opportunity to debate the Government's draft fire and rescue framework. Like other members, I pay tribute to Scotland's 8,310 firefighters and control staff, particularly those who serve the area that I represent in the Strathclyde and central regions. It is impossible to overstate the importance of their work and the passion and devotion that they show, day in and day out, in providing a rescue and response service that keeps people safe in often very difficult circumstances. I join all my colleagues in paying tribute to firefighter Ewan Williamson, who was tragically killed in the line of duty earlier this year. We owe it to those who have given their lives or sustained injury in the course of duty to ensure that fire services throughout Scotland are equipped and resourced for the challenges of the 21 st century. Tomorrow marks the eighth anniversary of the terrorist attacks in New York and Washington DC,  which killed nearly 3,000 people including 343 firefighters and paramedics. Watching footage of that day that shows firefighters making their way through the crowds of people escaping the turmoil and chaos behind them, I noted that there has never been a more vivid demonstration of the saying that firefighters run into buildings that other people are running out of. As John Lamont said, Scotland's fire and rescue services played an important role following the terrorist attack on Glasgow airport in 2007. I pay tribute to the work carried out on that day and since to keep Scotland's civilians safe from real and threatened attacks. The need for resilience against such threats is rightly identified in the draft fire and rescue framework that is before us today, and I am sure we all agree that it must be taken seriously. I thank the FBU for the briefing papers that it provided, which are marked by its usual candour, as Angela Constance noted—although her description was more polite than the west of Scotland terminology that I might have used but for fear of using unparliamentary language. The overriding aim of the draft fire and rescue framework rightly remains the elimination of preventable fire-related deaths, injuries and damage. Sadly, there is still work to be done in that regard. The motion mentions Scotland's poor record of fire fatalities, and it is certainly true that we have the highest number of fatal casualties per million of population, and the highest rate of non-fatal casualties per million of population, in comparison with the rest of the UK. I am glad that those statistics show a downward trend, but it is clear that there is still work to be done. I am pleased, as I am sure other members are, that there has been a 12 per cent funding increase during the past three years for Scotland's fire services, and total revenue funding for Scotland's eight services of £331 million in the 2009-10 financial year. The Government continues to review and update the training that is available to firefighters to reflect changes in equipment and operating practices. Although the content of such training is of course the most important aspect, I nevertheless welcome plans for an extra week to be added to the current 12-week programme. Another important aspiration of the draft framework is ensuring our preparedness to deal with floods and other environmental emergencies. As the minister said, the importance of that work has been illustrated all too starkly in recent days, with the flooding in Moray and the A83 landslide. It is important to stress that the role of dealing with emergencies that nature throws at us is one that fire services have undertaken for some considerable time, although it was not formalised until the Fire (Scotland) Act 2005.  I remember well the inquiry into flood prevention from my time on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, and the widespread belief that multi-agency guidance on responding to and co-ordinating flooding incidents needs to be improved. That point is accepted in the draft framework document, and the need to prioritise that work has become even clearer in light of recent events. The 2005 act requires the Government to keep the strategic framework within which our fire services operate under review, and I welcome the fact that the Government is doing so to take account of the changes that have taken place in Scotland since the first framework document was published in 2005. I am also glad that, notwithstanding Jim Tolson's cynicism, the Government is undertaking the review in what the motion describes as "a spirit of partnership with COSLA and all key stakeholders". I am sure that members across the chamber expect nothing less. Getting the partnership approach right is hugely important, and I welcome the Government's consultation on the framework document with a wide range of organisations and bodies that represent those who are involved in our fire and rescue services. The Government's concordat with local authorities has had an impact on the way in which decisions are made and co-ordinated among Scotland's eight fire and rescue services. I broadly support the concordat and the emphasis that it places on giving local government the autonomy and flexibility to make decisions that are based on local need, but I recognise that the FBU has concerns. I accept that each fire and rescue service should be able to deliver services flexibly, but that flexibility needs to exist within a set of national parameters to ensure that there is essential consistency throughout the country, particularly in resilience preparation. In that regard, I welcome the minister's indication that the integrated risk management planning guidance that was established under the 2005 act will be re-examined. I know that the FBU feels that the remit and powers of the ministerial advisory group could be strengthened, and I am interested to hear the Government's response to that. I accept that, under the terms of the concordat, the Government does not want to micromanage decisions that are rightly made at a local level—indeed, that would be inappropriate. However, I hope that it will be possible to address concerns about consistency in standards and procedures between services,  especially in the area of national resilience and preparedness. I commend the Scottish Government for its willingness to engage regularly with the FBU. My contact with FBU representatives indicates that there is an on-going and open dialogue, which is to be welcomed. Some of the concerns that the union and members in the chamber have expressed today—with which I have great sympathy—could perhaps be addressed more easily if local fire boards were to replicate that openness and ease of communication in their relationship with the FBU and, indeed, all unions. I fear that I am probably taking up too much time, so I conclude by welcoming the minister's announcement today of further funding for firefighters' pensions and the Scottish Government's commitment to maintaining the existing control room structure. I welcome the opportunity that today's debate has presented, and recognise the Scottish Government's on-going commitment to ensuring that our fire and rescue services have the support and resources that they need to carry out what we all acknowledge can be a dangerous but vitally important role.

To ask the Scottish Government what support in  the community the national health service provides for people affected by multiple sclerosis. (S3O-7530)

I thank the minister for her answer. Recently, I met members of the Cumbernauld and district branch of the MS Society, and they informed me of their intention to establish a drop-in centre for local people who are affected by MS. Does the minister agree that that type of initiative has an important role in community support for people with MS and their families? What support might be available to assist with the initiative? Will the minister agree to visit the drop-in centre with me when it is established?

I thank the convener of the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee, Trish Godman, my other colleagues on the committee and the committee clerks. I also thank the people who submitted evidence to the committee and members who have spoken in the debate. I am glad that there is widespread support from members of all parties for the broad sweep of our proposals. That reflects the manner in which the committee worked. Disagreements about the wider issues that we considered were relatively minor, and there are points of detail that we will consider further if the Parliament agrees to the proposal to introduce a committee bill. Overall, the committee has made sensible and measured recommendations for change. I encourage members to support the motion. Bruce Crawford talked about the impact on Government bodies of proposals that arise from committees' work. I hope that the Government's work to reshape the parts of the public landscape for which it has responsibility will tie in with the committee's work. I was glad to hear Mr Crawford and Mr Russell suggest that that would be the case. Mr Crawford and Mr Russell reiterated the Government's belief that the functions of Waterwatch Scotland should be transferred to the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman and Consumer Focus Scotland. The committee considered such a transfer of functions and thought that the issue was finely balanced, as Joe FitzPatrick said. I look forward to hearing the Government's arguments as it pursues the issue. Johann Lamont made the point that the argument for creating one-stop shops is not convincing—there must be a coherent rationale for moving to merged bodies. Overall, the committee took that approach—Jackson Carlaw and Ross  Finnie articulated well the committee's thought process on that—which is why we recommended the merging of some bodies but not others. However, as Trish Godman said in her opening remarks, some rationalisation is proposed. The committee considered 10 bodies, including four that the Government supported. Of those 10, we recommended that five be merged, which would reduce the number of bodies to seven. That would be achieved largely by the creation of a new body called the public life and appointments commission Scotland. I was disappointed that my committee colleagues did not share my enthusiasm for the alternative title of the Scottish public life and appointments tribunal—SPLAT for short—but I forgive them. The committee's merger proposals would affect 50 per cent of the public sector bodies that we considered and reduce their number by 30 per cent, so there would be some rationalisation. Gil Paterson spoke about the creation of the public life and appointments commission. The key question is whether merging existing posts into that new body would improve the accountability of elected members, councillors and parliamentarians to the public. The underlying tasks of the posts that would be involved in the merger are similar in that they are to investigate admissible complaints that members of the Scottish Parliament, councillors or members of devolved bodies have breached their respective codes of conduct or other applicable rules on behaviour and standards. I therefore believe that the proposed rationalisation is sensible, and I was glad to learn from Gil Paterson that the Standards and Public Appointments Committee seems to concur with that view. Jackson Carlaw spoke about the decision to retain Scotland's Commissioner for Children and Young People and the Equality and Human Rights Commission as separate bodies. We were presented with a valid argument for merging those bodies, but the committee considered that the SCCYP has undertaken valuable work in support of children's issues, which has been recognised internationally, and that there was no case at this stage to merge the bodies. I am inclined to agree with Jackson Carlaw's observation that our decision might have been different if we had started with a blank page, but of course we did not. However, it is worth saying, as Mike Russell did in a similar vein, that the committee's position is that future proposals for new offices—there are current proposals in that regard—should be accommodated within the current landscape, if possible. I turn to previous reports that the committee considered and which informed much of our work. We agreed with the recommendations of the  Finance Committee's 2006 report "Inquiry into Accountability and Governance". Our proposals include implementing those recommendations as they relate to the accountability of the bodies concerned. We also noted the Audit Scotland 2006 report "Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Ombudsman/Commissioners Shared Services", which recommended that the SPCB should retain responsibility for the bodies concerned. Again, we seek to implement that recommendation for holding the bodies to account for the effective running of their business operations. However, we are clear about the need to protect the office-holders' independence in undertaking their functions. I think that that deals with some concerns that Des McNulty raised. If Parliament agrees to the motion, the recommendations requiring legislation will be incorporated in a committee bill that should be introduced by the end of this year, accompanied by a financial memorandum that will cover all the costs involved. Not all the recommendations require legislation. The report highlights those that we consider do require legislation, but other recommendations are directed at a range of bodies. For example, the SPCB is recommended to use the services of its audit advisory board to determine and review the salaries of office-holders; recommendation 12 suggests a close working arrangement between parliamentary committees and office-holders; and, as a matter of best practice, we recommend that there should be at least annual scrutiny. I trust that the Parliament will welcome the committee's report, which is based on substantial amounts of evidence gathered during our deliberations and informed by previous committee inquiries. The committee's deliberations have, if nothing else, served as an audit of the operations of the various SPCB-supported bodies that the Parliament has created. It was right to do that and it is clear from the work that was undertaken that the framework that the committee report proposes will ensure a series of offices that are fit for purpose for Scotland in the coming years. I agree that matters may have to be considered further, but I also agree with Joe FitzPatrick that fresh faces will be required to do that. However, I have no hesitation in commending the committee's report "Review of SPCB Supported Bodies" to the Parliament.

I, too, congratulate Michael Matheson on securing the debate. As he said, people in Larbert are facing serious problems as a result of the introduction of heavy coal freight on the rail line. It is important and right that we discuss that in Parliament. The first members' business debate that I secured was on the development of the rail network in the Central Scotland region. The Scottish Government's efforts in that respect are to be welcomed. I refer to the electrification of the line from Glasgow to Edinburgh via Falkirk High—I am sure that Michael Matheson and other members support that—the work on the Airdrie to Bathgate link, and, of course, the opening of the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line last year, which, as Richard Simpson said, most people welcomed. That development and the rerouting of freight trains on to that line and through Larbert have led to the difficulties that we are debating. Let me be clear. I support the Scottish Government's efforts to encourage more passengers on to the railways and warmly welcome the reopening of the Alloa line. Indeed, in recent months I have undertaken my own surveys in Central Scotland to determine the levels of support for new passenger railway stations at Grangemouth and Abronhill—I know that Michael Matheson has done the same at Bonnybridge. Those ideas have proved overwhelmingly popular, and I am pursuing them with the relevant  authorities. I think that there is scope to develop our railways further and to encourage freight traffic. It is important to increase and improve the use of rail for freight transportation, but that does not have to be done at the expense of the quality of life of people who live near rail freight lines, especially when the introduction or increasing use of freight trains was not anticipated when residents chose to make their home in the area. That seems to be the case in Larbert. Michael Matheson made it clear that people who live in the vicinity of the line there are realistic about what it is like to live next to a railway. People lived next to the line long before freight trains were introduced on it. He also said that it is a long-standing line; its history stretches back to the mid-19 th century. The people of Larbert were used to living next to the rail line and then found that the use of the line changed significantly—they think that it has done so to their detriment. That is disappointing. My understanding is that the problem is not insurmountable. All sides—residents, their elected representatives, Network Rail, Transport Scotland and the transportation companies—need to be willing to work together to find a solution. I know that Michael Matheson has been progressing the matter assiduously on behalf of the people of Larbert, whom he represents, and I wish him well in that task. I am sure that finding a solution that allows freight services to continue on the line and involves greater sympathy for local residents is not beyond the parties involved. It is important to mention several wider issues. One reason why we want to encourage improved freight transport by rail is that there are obvious environmental benefits. It is ironic that the cause of the disruption that we are discussing is the transport of coal, which is, of course, one of the most polluting forms of energy generation. I accept and agree with the Government's position: we will continue to need traditional power generation techniques until Scotland's renewable potential is fully realised. However, I hope that, in the longer term, the need to transport coal in such a way will be reduced as our dependence on fossil fuels declines. I realise that that will be of little immediate comfort to people in Larbert who are experiencing difficulties at the moment, but the point is still worth making. I reiterate my support for the Government's efforts to improve Scotland's railways. I restate my belief that further improvements are possible. Although we should welcome increased freight traffic by rail, it should not be at the expense of the quality of life of the people who live along our railway routes. I wish Michael Matheson well as he seeks to resolve the situation in Larbert.

I join other members in congratulating my friend Aileen Campbell on securing tonight's debate. Although she of course wanted to focus on the town centres in the region that she represents, I am glad that the motion refers to the importance of town centres and high streets across the country. The economic downturn has affected every sector of our economy, and town centres in all parts of our country have a role to play in helping Scotland to make it through these difficult times and prosper once again. There is no doubt about the impact that the downturn is having on local communities, but it is important to be clear that although the current economic situation puts into clear focus the challenges that are faced by our high streets, many of us know that, sadly, the struggle to develop and strengthen our town centres has been perennial. Even during the supposed years of plenty, many town centres suffered from underinvestment and neglect. Towns in the Central Scotland region, which I represent, are no exception. The wasted years of previous Administrations have allowed too many of our urban communities to come under pressure from out-of-town centres and unimaginative and unambitious planning regimes that are more interested in gleaming trophy developments than a genuine urban renaissance. That is why many members and, more important, people in communities across Scotland have been encouraged by the Scottish Government's introduction of the town centre regeneration fund, to which the motion refers. It is particularly welcome during this time of economic difficulty, but I stress that such investment has been badly  needed, regardless of the prevailing economic climate. A total of £60 million is available through the fund. It has been suggested to me in conversations with interested parties that a total redevelopment of Cumbernauld town centre would cost around £60 million. I strongly encourage the minister to take that into consideration when he comes to disburse the funds, although I appreciate that other members might take a different position. Should the minister not choose the investment that I have suggested, I hope that he will look favourably on bids from Central Scotland. I understand that North Lanarkshire Council has taken a lead in preparing a bid for towns in its boundaries. The minister represents the same area as I do, so I am sure that he will be equally interested in that bid. The proposals for the regeneration of Cumbernauld and Kilsyth are especially welcome. Both will help to improve the amenity of the central areas of those towns, making them attractive not only to residents, people passing through or visitors shopping, but to new businesses or enterprises that may choose to locate there. I hope that investment can ensure that the town centres can function properly as civic cores that local communities can be proud of. The challenges in Cumbernauld are especially well known. Surely the notoriety of the town centre is unsurpassed. In many ways that has resulted in the entire town being pigeonholed in a manner that I do not think it deserves. That pigeonholing fuels views of the town that are invariably born of ignorance. Such views are often held by people who have barely visited Cumbernauld. Cumbernauld's town centre is compartmentalised and there are various private owners. It has suffered from underinvestment over a significant period of time, which is a real cause for concern. Every day, I see the challenges and opportunities that Cumbernauld faces. There is no doubt in my mind that the town can benefit from the regeneration fund. I have been in touch not only with the local authority but with the private town centre operators, to encourage them to apply for support. Although the first deadline for applications is already behind us, there is a bid from the local authority and I understand that the second deadline is in August. I hope that, in the time remaining, the different stakeholders can work on some imaginative and ambitious proposals to breathe new life into Cumbernauld town centre, over and above what will be done with the bid from North Lanarkshire Council. Our town centres deserve support and investment to ensure that they continue to provide  residents, visitors and businesses with an attractive and sustainable focus for social and economic activity. With the right support, a town centre can be the beating heart of any community. I look forward to hearing what the minister has to say, not only today, in reply to our deliberations, but in the near future once he is ready to announce the result of his own deliberations on the applications to the town centre regeneration fund.

To ask the Scottish Government when it expects the first tranche of funds from the town centre regeneration fund to be disbursed. (S3O-6952)

Does the minister agree that the very process of applying for those funds is of benefit to any towns that choose to do so, because it encourages them to think about how their area can best be improved? Does he agree that towns should also seek to build on such plans by identifying a range of funding for growth and regeneration?

Labour members keep referring to the part-privatisation of the forests. Does Mr Whitton not accept that there is a world of  difference between a proposal that would have involved the leasing of parts of Scotland's forests, the ownership of which would have been retained by the Government, and the proposals that we are debating?

For clarity, I should point out that not a single Tory MSP signed the motion, either.

Will the member give way?

Let me state my gratitude to members who have supported the motion and allowed it to be brought for debate. I am also grateful to the members who have stayed this evening to participate. I look forward to their contributions—I even look forward to hearing the case for the UK Government's plans if anyone is prepared to make it, although looking at the Labour benches I am not sure there will be. Control over postal services may remain reserved to Westminster, but concern about the future of the Royal Mail is shared by many of my constituents in Central Scotland, and by others across the country. In recent years, Parliament has been no stranger to the fight against decimation of our mail and postal services. There have been many motions, debates, questions, briefings, lobbies and discussions about the network change programme that has led to the closure of so many Post Office branches across the country. Just last year, I ran surveys which showed massive opposition to the closure of branches in Kildrum, Banton, Queenzieburn, Plains and Grangepans—opposition that went ignored in the face of the UK Government's determination to rid the Post Office of what it saw as burdensome and unprofitable branches. To many of my constituents, who used those branches daily and saw them as providing not just a commercial service but a social and economic heart for their communities, the question was, simply, "Why?"

Frankly, that is news to me. I have met the man who runs the post office branch in Kildrum—that message was not communicated to me, although I thank David Whitton for passing it on. Just when we thought the worst was over, Peter Mandelson was resurrected, with his plans to part-privatise the Royal Mail. We hear a lot in the chamber about broken promises, but these proposals do not simply tear up what was in new Labour's 2005 manifesto—they drive a delivery van through the commitment to keeping the post public. There is rightly outrage at the proposals—not only in this chamber, but in communities throughout Scotland that are already hurting from the network change programme, among the 5,500 people who have signed the petition on number 10's website, and on the Labour benches in Westminster, where more than 140 Labour members of Parliament have signed an early day motion condemning the proposals, joined by all seven Scottish National Party MPs and members from other parties. The defence against that massive opposition is the Government-commissioned Hooper report. The only way to protect the Royal Mail's pension fund is, apparently, by privatising the Royal Mail, yet in a devastating critique, the Communication Workers Union says that the report "fails to provide any new data or analysis of the postal industry. It proposes the privatisation of Royal Mail although it provides no convincing arguments for this." It is hardly surprising that many people view the Hooper report as a fig leaf for an ideological decision that was already made by Peter Mandelson before the report was even commissioned, and the pension fund argument as a red herring. Such is the opposition and disarray surrounding the plans that we have today heard that Deutsche Post DHL has decided to pull out of any possible bid for a privatised part of the Royal Mail, and that TNT is apparently losing interest, as well. Not only is the idea not attractive to parliamentarians, the workers and the public, but it now seems that not even the prospective bidders have any confidence in Brown and Mandelson's great sell-off. The concern that exists about the proposals is based on principle and on a strong practical case. First, there is the simple principle that the Royal Mail should remain part of the public sector landscape, with the ethos that serving people comes first. The Royal Mail would be closer to the communities that it serves, and would be able to cross-subsidise and provide a universal service. A public sector ethos recognises that delivering services is about more than just making money.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. On a practical basis, we have only to look at the rail network to see what a botched privatisation—trying to create a market where there is a natural monopoly—looks like. Only the dogma of new Labour can square the circle of nationalising banks on one hand while insisting on privatising the mail infrastructure on the other. Perhaps it is an underhand ploy: given that the UK Government has taken over the banks and bought back Network Rail and the London underground network from private hands, perhaps it wants to sell off the Royal Mail just so that it can buy it back in a few years' time. The practical reasons, however, go deeper than that. This week, the Communication Workers Union stepped up its campaign against the UK Government's proposals to part-privatise the Royal Mail. We have probably all seen photos of the giant post box that is currently making its way from John O'Groats to Land's End—I believe it has been in Glasgow today and will visit Edinburgh tomorrow. As the motion notes, the Communication Workers Union is to be commended for its work in keeping the pressure on the UK Government, and for reflecting the very real concerns of postal workers and customers about the consequences of privatisation.

No—I am afraid I have given way more than enough times. The travelling campaign reminds us of the universal nature of our postal service. The universal service obligation keeps the cost of postage the same no matter where a letter or packet begins and ends its journey. That, as we know, is particularly important for people and businesses in rural areas, but it works both ways. People in the urban areas of central Scotland and beyond depend on receiving goods and services from remote parts of the country, just as much as people in rural areas depend on deliveries from our towns and cities. People in the Royal Mail workforce are concerned about the future of their jobs if part-privatisation goes ahead. I share those concerns. In the face of a recession, the introduction of a  private operator leads to fears of declining wages and poorer terms and conditions, if not outright downsizing and redundancy. Perhaps the greatest irony is that many workable alternatives exist to take our postal services forward. Nobody disagrees that the Royal Mail and the Post Office need to adapt to declining letter numbers and changing demands from businesses that are using the internet to buy and sell goods. The service is functional; it makes a profit of over £1 million per day, which is more than can be said for the nationalised banks. It contributes to UK Government funds and yet, as the Communication Workers Union says, the UK Government wants to privatise the profit while nationalising the pension fund debt. As such, it is clear that the measures are motivated by Peter Mandelson's ideological obsession with privatisation. The motions that other members have lodged on the subject give an idea of how we can revitalise our postal services for the 21 st century. They include the idea of a people's bank, using the Post Office network—an idea that could help to boost the sustainability of the Royal Mail Group as a whole—which Hugh Henry set out in a motion that he lodged. Also, as Cathy Peattie has set out, the UK Government agreed to a £1.2 billion loan facility on commercial terms to modernise Royal Mail operations in 2007 and yet, only two years later, just half of the money has been spent. I was delighted to add my name in support of those motions. It is a pity that, as of this morning, no Labour MSP saw fit to support my motion. For the purpose of consensual debate, perhaps that fact is best glossed over. There are options for modernising the Royal Mail but retaining it as part of the public sector. What seems to be lacking on the part of the UK Government is political will. I return to the question that so many of my constituents ask me: why? Doubtless, other members are asked the same question. Why close all these post office branches, given the lifeline services that they provide? Why part-privatise the Royal Mail when so much else has been brought into public ownership. I think that I am not alone in wondering whether there is a hidden agenda behind the proposals for the part-privatisation of the Royal Mail—

If we look back at the post office closure programme, it all becomes clear: the branches that were deemed to be unprofitable and unattractive to private investors were the ones to be closed. If all the reasons against privatisation that we hear this evening are not enough, one reason alone stands out: the Post Office network may be next. I hope that the UK Government  listens to the public, the Scottish Parliament and its own back benchers and scraps its plans to privatise the Royal Mail.

The cabinet secretary told BBC Radio Scotland yesterday that those who had developed symptoms of the illness had had "close contact" with Iain and Dawn Askham. That included work colleagues. I wonder what concern there might be that the wider Polmont area, where Mr and Mrs Askham reside, is at particular or greater risk of infection compared with the rest of the general population. Should local people be taking any additional precautions?

I thank the minister for meeting Councillor Tom Johnston and me yesterday to discuss the matter. Is he willing to accompany Councillor Tom Johnston and me on a visit to Cumbernauld house to learn about some of the potential uses for the site?

To ask the Scottish Government what it considers the implications to be for transport policy, tourism and the economy of the recommendations in the Competition Commission's report in relation to the future of BAA airports in Scotland. (S3O-6494)

The minister will recall that I have written to him on the issue on a number of occasions. Does he share my concern that every  opportunity to ensure that local authorities and other parts of the public sector that have an interest in having at least an equity share in any BAA airport that is sold should be explored? Does he agree that their having such a stake might allow for the greater pursuance of strategic transport, tourism, environmental and economic objectives?

Last November, when the Parliament debated the state of Scotland's economy, many members, including me, were able to reflect on the fact that what was then being euphemistically referred to as the credit crunch had come to dominate the news headlines across the various media forms and had eclipsed practically every other issue of note. Nearly six months on from that debate, we can all agree that that remains the case, even if the terminology has changed from credit crunch to recession. The state of the global economy and the latest indicators and announcements from Government and industry continue to be the dominant stories of the day. In the intervening period, we have witnessed too many businesses closing their doors for the last time and too many people losing their livelihoods. That reflects the real and immediate impact that the recession is having on the everyday lives of individuals and families.  Public concern is widespread and real. Although we hope that that does not manifest itself solely in the form of grievances against private citizens—the results of which we have seen in recent days—we ignore that concern at our peril. That is why it is right for Parliament to have this debate today. There is now no question but that we are in this for the long haul. Figures that were released this week might have contained conflicting evidence about inflation, but other indicators show that unemployment in Scotland is up and economic output is down. The many and varied solutions and steps to recovery have been occupying some of the greatest economic minds throughout the world. Answers are sought to questions about how we got here in the first place. We are right to assess the role that bank bosses played and to be concerned that they can draw pensions of hundreds of thousands of pounds even as their methods of running the banks are discredited, but we must also assess the role that was played by those who allowed the framework to be put in place that let the bankers operate in such a fashion. All those who quietly assumed that limited regulation of financial markets was an appropriate driver of economic growth must critically assess their role and consider more appropriate models for sustainable economic recovery.

That intervention comes very much from the he-said-she-said school of political debate, in which Mr Kerr seems to be engaged. I am not particularly interested in engaging in that. If I was, however, I suppose I could turn to the speech that Gordon Brown made at the CBI conference in 2005, in which he called for limited regulation and even questioned the need for regulation at all. He said: "we should not only apply the concept of risk to the enforcement of regulation, but also to the design and indeed to the decision as to whether to regulate at all." As I said, however, I am not interested in the he-said-she-said school of political debate. At present, the various roles that were played is largely a matter for the United Kingdom Government. I turn to the Scottish Government's efforts to help to put Scotland's economy on the road to recovery. Because the Scottish Government has been committed to the sustainable development of Scotland's economy since the election, it has been well placed to react quickly and mobilise resources to counteract the  effects of a general economic slowdown. Bringing forward capital investment has helped to create a positive spiral, ensuring not only that jobs are created but that we gain all the benefits that flow from those jobs, such as the wider demand that is created in the economy. I warmly welcome, for example, the extra money that was announced on Monday for Scotland's colleges, including a funding increase of £132,000 for Cumbernauld College in the Central Scotland region, which I represent. Staff and students will feel the benefits of that immediately, but so will the workers who are employed to improve the college's infrastructure, and, in turn, so will their families and wider communities. The Scottish Government is accelerating £120 million of investment in affordable housing. That is helping the construction industry and is delivering affordable homes for people, such as the 76 new homes that will be built at Carbrain in Cumbernauld and the 32 that will be built in Grangemouth. When we also consider the widening of entitlement to free school meals, the freezing of the council tax, the reduction in business rates, the scrapping of tuition fees in the form of the graduate endowment, and the phasing out of prescription charges, we can see that the thread of working for economic recovery runs throughout the Scottish Government's work. Those measures put back into the pockets of the Scottish people money that they can then spend to aid economic recovery. Of course, I wish that the Scottish Government could do more. In recent times, Norway has established two funds that are worth £10 billion to help to improve access to loans for companies and households and to stabilise the financial market. That is not borrowed money. Rather, it flows directly from Norway's decision to establish a sovereign oil fund in 1990—the kind of fund that Scotland has never been given a chance to establish. When we discuss economic recovery, it is important to consider what kind of economy we want to be recovered. Sometimes, it seems that we are seeking a reset switch, or that we want to wave a magic wand that will make the problems disappear and put everything back to the way it was. I do not think that that is the way that things can be. We need to consider how we can measure quality of life and economic success with a range of measures and not simply through gross domestic product. When I spoke in our debate in November last year, I quoted the late Robert Kennedy, who spoke of how we measure material gain. I quote again from his words of 18 March 1968. He said: "Gross national product does not allow for the health of our children, the quality of their education, or the joy of their  play. It does not include the beauty of our poetry or the strength of our marriages; the intelligence of our public debate or the integrity of our public officials. It measures neither our wit nor our courage; neither our wisdom nor our learning; neither our compassion nor our devotion to our country; it measures everything, in short, except that which makes life worthwhile." Those words should stay with us all as we concentrate our efforts on rebuilding our economy so that it truly meets the needs of the years and generations to come. GDP is an important measure of our economic performance, but, more fundamentally, so is our people's general wellbeing. That is another lesson that we can all learn from the current economic situation.

I join my colleagues in congratulating John Wilson on securing tonight's debate. The supply of social rented housing is an important issue in Cumbernauld and Moodiesburn, and it is to the Parliament's credit that it is debating it. I also congratulate Margaret Mitchell on presenting the only alternative view tonight. She did so valiantly but, if I may say so, somewhat unconvincingly. I would never, as Hugh O'Donnell did, describe Elaine Smith as being on the new Labour benches, but I look forward to hearing what my friend and old boss Alex Neil has to say when he closes the debate. There are long waiting lists for homes for social rent in Cumbernauld and Moodiesburn, so I was pleased that the Scottish Government has taken action to ease the pressures on social housing in those areas, particularly given the massive demand for rented accommodation. The move will allow a long-overdue start to tackling the problem of affordable accommodation for local people. I think that I am right in saying that the move affects 1,596 tenancies, which means that nearly 1,600 homes are now protected for social let in Cumbernauld and Moodiesburn. That is good news indeed. I will quote article 25 of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights—the UDHR—which people perhaps did not expect me to do in the debate. Article 25 states: "Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing, and medical care and necessary social services". We are therefore born with the innate right to a roof over our heads. The UDHR sets out that housing is a human right, but all too often it is not fulfilled. That is certainly the case in Cumbernauld and Moodiesburn—too many people there cannot get a home, and the housing list for social lets is too long. Like Hugh O'Donnell, I live in Cumbernauld, so I suppose that I should declare an interest too. I certainly agree with his sentiments about those who malign Cumbernauld: the fact that it is a growth area where demand for housing often outstrips supply gives the lie to those who talk down the town of Cumbernauld.  I quote Councillor Barry McCulloch, convener of North Lanarkshire Council's housing and social work services committee, with reference to the decision to grant pressurised area status to Cumbernauld and Moodiesburn: "The demand for rented housing in these areas is very high and this decision will go some way to addressing the issue of providing affordable accommodation to local people." I do not always agree with Barry McCulloch—in fact, more often than not I disagree with him—but I agree with those words entirely. The new policy is hugely popular in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. Even those who bought their council house many years ago now recognise the limitations of the right to buy because they see their children and grandchildren caught in a trap and unable to get on the housing ladder. They cannot buy or rent a home because, as I said, demand outstrips supply. I have not had a single complaint about the new policy from any local constituents. The move to pressurised area status is not the only aspect that I welcome in relation to local housing in Cumbernauld, Moodiesburn and North Lanarkshire as a whole. I was delighted that the Minister for Housing and Communities was able to announce this week £17.6 million of investment in affordable housing across North Lanarkshire in the next year. It is therefore clear that pressurised area status is not the only good news for housing in Cumbernauld and Moodiesburn. Indeed, we have already seen some of the benefits of the new investment because 76 new and improved homes for rent will be built in Carbrain, which points to a better future for housing in Cumbernauld, Moodiesburn and North Lanarkshire as a whole. I do not have much time left, but I will say a little about the philosophy behind the introduction of the right to buy. I think that it led to the private ownership of housing being not only a fashion but a fetish. I sympathised with Elaine Smith's assessment of the philosophy behind the right to buy. We should not criticise those who choose to own their own home, but let us not pretend that it is the be all and end all. I am probably running out of time, so I will close by saying that I look forward to hearing what the minister has to say. I watched an interesting programme the other night on the life of Nye Bevan. When he was the health and housing minister, he had plans to build a million homes in two years after the second world war. I do not expect the same from Alex Neil, but I am keen to hear his plans on housing, especially any further moves the Scottish Government might make on the right to buy.

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Government what concerns it has for the Scottish economy and wider society in relation to Her Majesty's Government's proposals to part-privatise the Royal Mail. (S3O-6242)

I thank the minister for that answer. Does the minister share my view that the fact that more than 130 Labour members of the UK Parliament have indicated their opposition to the UK Government's plans indicates that there is little support in the UK's governing party, as well as no real support in the wider country, for the move? Does the minister agree that the UK Government should swiftly reconsider its proposals?

The cabinet secretary might be aware of the situation in Cumbernauld and other new towns, where the town centres are essentially owned by private companies. The compartmentalised ownership of those town centres gives rise to problems in regeneration initiatives. Will the cabinet secretary explain how the town centre regeneration fund might benefit Cumbernauld town centre and other similar town centres?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with Her Majesty's Government regarding its recapitalisation of the banking sector and any impact that this might have on Scottish Government spending. (S3O-5891)

Although I agree that we should all be concerned about those impending  cuts, I would like to explore another issue relating to the recapitalisation of the banks. The cabinet secretary will be aware that private finance initiative payments between now and the end of 2033-34 across the UK come to £216 billion. Does he agree that, in the interests of securing better value for the public purse, the recapitalisation of banks that are involved in public-private partnerships or PFI consortia could be renegotiated? Is he as concerned as I am that, in a letter to me, the Treasury ruled that out on the basis that it would undermine the share price of those banks?

I congratulate Murdo Fraser on lodging the motion. The gravity of the subject makes it all the more appropriate that Parliament has this debate. I, too, place on record my congratulations to the International Justice Mission. I have not worked with it as closely as Murdo Fraser has, but I have met its representatives in the past. I also place on the record my apologies for being unable to attend the briefing that it gave earlier today. It is right to praise and commend its work. In Scotland, the UK, Europe and beyond, we rightly show contrition for our role in the slave trade of centuries past. It is rightly described as a stain on our collective history. Just as we show contrition, we commend the abolition of the slave trade and those who worked for its abolition, whether it be Robert Wedderburn in Scotland, William Wilberforce in the UK or Abraham Lincoln and his emancipation proclamation of 1863. For all that, we should not become lax in our attitude to slavery. Modern-day slavery exists in Scotland and beyond, but we just refer to it euphemistically as human trafficking. I note that an Amnesty International briefing—I put my membership of Amnesty on the record—says that trafficking is the third most lucrative black-market trade in the world, not far behind drugs and arms. It is a serious problem. Just as the IJM undertakes good work in this area, so does Amnesty International. Last year, Amnesty International Scotland published "Scotland's Slaves", which reports that Scotland has 13.5 per cent of the UK's trade in trafficking. Trafficking cases were found in Edinburgh, Glasgow, Dumfries and Galloway, Falkirk, Grangemouth, Stirling and Tayside, and they involved victims from across the world. I have some reports with me. One from 2006 is about a 17-year-old African girl being rescued by the police in Dumfries during a major vice investigation. Another, from The Scotsman of July  2008, reports that 15 sex slaves from south-east Asia were found working in Scotland's sex industry. Another case was reported by the BBC in May last year: the Gangmasters Licensing Authority revoked the licence of a company that used forced labour. I welcome the fact that the licence was revoked but wonder whether a more severe punishment might have been appropriate on that occasion, and whenever this issue rears its head. As Amnesty International's report noted, most attention is focused on trafficking for the sex trade. I place on the record my disgust for that so-called industry. We should prosecute to the fullest extent of the law those who procure the services of a woman who has been forced into prostitution. However, we should also focus on the problem of the trafficking of people into Scotland for the purposes of forced domestic or agricultural labour. We need to publicise that issue and to prosecute people who use forced labour. As always happens during members' business debates, time is running out. I will end by quoting article 4 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which had its 60 th anniversary in December last year. It says: "No one shall be held in slavery or servitude; slavery and the slave trade shall be prohibited in all their forms." We have a long way to go to achieve that goal. I hope that we in Scotland can play our part in that process. I look forward to hearing what the minister has to say.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made by the working group on Scotland without nuclear weapons. (S3O-5730)

Will the working group commit to work with those at an international level—such as President Obama's Administration—who have called for work to halt the progress of nuclear proliferation? Does the minister agree that recent press reports about the huge annual cost of maintaining Trident, and the reports from senior military officials who have called it "irrelevant", make the case for a new generation of nuclear weapons very weak indeed?

It is a little over six weeks since the Scottish Government announced in the chamber the results of the strategic transport projects review. Like many members, I welcomed the minister's statement and the scale of the review's ambition and vision. However, I noted in the debate on the review that "In some ways, I wish that the Scottish Government could go further."  As they have done today, members around the chamber on that day "described projects that they want to be implemented and which were not in the statement. Of course, they must tell us how those projects could be achieved; often, our hands are tied by the frustrations and limitations of the Scotland Act 1998."— [ Official Report , 10 December 2008; c 13241.]  Members will not be surprised to learn that the position has not changed in the intervening period. What has changed is that we now know about the Labour Party's lack of commitment to making the Parliament and devolved government work—yesterday's events demonstrated that vividly. Under devolution, the budget is the only document in which any Government can make exact spending commitments. Where were Labour's budget amendments to finance the projects on which Labour members have focused today? In bringing its critical and carping motion to the Parliament, the Labour Party is suffering from a political reality bypass rather than showing a genuine interest in building transport bypasses.

No, I will not take an intervention from Des McNulty, given the lack of interventions that members of his party seem to be taking. It is in the nature of strategic documents that they do not—indeed, cannot—contain spending commitments: "Scotland's transport future" in 2004 and "Scotland's National Transport Strategy" and "Scotland's Railways" in 2006 did not contain such commitments. The reality of the situation remains that the Government's hands are tied. Even if Labour had lodged amendments to yesterday's budget to pay for the projects that its motion names and they had been agreed to, the finance would have had to come from cuts elsewhere. Labour trusts the Government in London to borrow billions of pounds to bail out banks and the automotive industry, but this Parliament's lack of borrowing powers and its limited fiscal levers inhibit the range of action that the Scottish Government can take. I would have thought that it would be welcome that the Scottish Government has, within 18 months of being elected, put in place an ambitious, coherent and workable plan for the major development of our strategic transport network. The plan is the launch pad for transforming the travelling experience for people in Scotland, but just because a project is not in the STPR does not mean that it is not a good idea or that it is not worth fighting for. As for the specific projects that the Labour motion mentions, it is clear that investment is  planned in the A9, the A82, the A77 and the A96. On a bypass at Elgin, the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change said at question time last week that he is "confident that we can work with local interests to develop new proposals".— [ Official Report , 22 January 2009; c 14301.]  That demonstrates that work can be undertaken on projects that are outwith the STPR. People will welcome a Government that continues to listen to their concerns and wants to work with them to find suitable proposals rather than close the door to their transport needs. That is why the other implication in the motion that support for a project that has not been included in the STPR is a breach of collective responsibility or a betrayal of constituents' trust is incorrect. I am sure that members who argue the contrary will understand that individual MSPs can hold opinions and campaign on local issues while still supporting the Government. The fact that those members present their case as if that was not so ill-serves them and, worse, ill-serves political discourse. If the transport projects detailed in the motion are of such fundamental importance to those who are calling for them today, why have they not called for them in the past? On 23 January, in commenting on the A96, The Northern Scot stated: "Pity these opponents were not as voluble for the bypass campaigning which has been going on for years. A Labour Transport Minister visited Elgin but failed to offer any glimmer of support for the bypass call, a Lib-Dem Transport Minister, as part of the same ruling coalition, did likewise". That is more evidence, if any were needed after yesterday's events, of the descent of the Labour Party into the realm of student politics.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government has undertaken any early consideration of the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland's proposal that juries should be dispensed with in the most complex or lengthy of cases. (S3F-1383)

Does the First Minister agree that trial by jury is one of the most fundamental aspects of the judicial system in Scotland? Can he assure us that if the Scottish system should ever change, the Scottish Government will ensure that individuals would be denied the right to trial before a jury of their peers only in the most exceptional or extraordinary of circumstances?

The minister might be aware of the on-going problems that many of my constituents in Cumbernauld who are owner-occupiers in multistorey flats are having in respect of their dealings with the Cumbernauld Housing Partnership, which acts as their factor. What support is available to housing associations in respect of their role as factors for many owner-occupiers throughout Scotland?

I congratulate Jim Hume on securing this debate. All members here have concerns about the closure programme. We are all concerned that there are to be about 2,000 post office closures across the United Kingdom and we are especially concerned that it seems that a disproportionate number will be closed in Scotland. Ultimately, we are concerned not only about the effects of closures but about the process that leads to them. I will turn to that a bit later. Obviously, I am not a member for the South of Scotland. I do not have any particular links to Greenlaw, but my wife's family are from Kelso in the Borders. I understand—at least, I think I do—some of the problems that are caused in distinctively rural settings by post office closures. I can also well understand the problems that are caused by massive round trips to buy a stamp or post a letter because of the closure of a local post office. That situation is not, of course, peculiar to the South of Scotland or to rural Scotland, but I can understand such areas' distinctive problems. When a post office closes in Greenlaw or in other communities across Scotland, each community is affected in its own peculiar way. I  was involved in a campaign to save five local post offices in my area. I found that, although there were differences between the post offices, a common theme was the real fear that removal of the post office would rip the heart out of the community. My experience in Central Scotland was that the consultation left a lot to be desired. From what other members have said, the experience in the South of Scotland was similar. I found the process to be hugely flawed. John Lamont fairly described it as a sham. I found that it was invariably a pre-destined matter in that when a post office was proposed for closure there was no real consideration of local concerns—the vast majority of proposed closures went ahead anyway. I found the consultation to be a con in that when one branch was saved, another would close elsewhere. That might not have been a literal equation, but it was invariably the case that when one branch was saved, another would close. I was concerned that no consideration was given to the environmental impact of the closures. A Post Office official confirmed that position to me during my campaign, when she said that the Labour Government in London had not requested that the Post Office undertake any environmental impact assessments. When post offices close, increased use will be made of the car and bus, especially by elderly and vulnerable people, to reach the nearest alternative post office and that will have an environmental impact. It is a shame that Royal Mail did not consider that during its closure process. Of course, the real blame lies not with Post Office but with the UK Government. When Labour came to power, the Post Office was profitable. The Government now claims that there is a £100 million shortfall each year and that the Post Office is losing profits, which shows that the UK Government views it as a business rather than as a public service. However, I believe that one can no more say that the Post Office is losing profits than one can say that our schools or our hospitals are. I would like to be able to talk about some of the services that are being stripped away, but I do not have the time. I conclude simply by saying that I look forward to hearing what the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism has to say.

Today's debate is an important part of the parliamentary scrutiny process, providing the forum for detailed democratic debate about the way in which funds are allocated to Scotland's vital public services. That is one of the reasons that the Parliament was established. The work that the Finance Committee has undertaken—the evidence that it has sought and analysed, and the report that is before us—represents the kind of scrutiny that was simply not possible in Scotland before devolution. Westminster's archaic processes and the massive pressures on parliamentary time meant that Scottish business was, all too often, relegated to late-night or poorly  attended sessions that were squeezed in among debates on all other kinds of legislative and financial instruments. Here, in Scotland's own Parliament, we are able to undo that democratic deficit. I commend the Finance Committee for its diligence and the detail that is contained in the report. Our budget process is often compared to the cutting of a cake, but I wonder whether a more accurate comparison might be made to the spending of pocket money. Although the Parliament has a process for spending its budget, it has no system for setting that budget. The money that the Parliament and the Government have to spend on all the different services and priorities that we have heard about in the debate so far is handed down to us from on high by means of the increasingly discredited Barnett formula. We are given no chance to determine or influence the size of the cake that we are cutting through the means that are open to normal, independent countries. As Alex Neil correctly stated, we have a fixed budget. Therefore, although I welcome the fact that the Parliament has the opportunity to debate the budget process and to reflect on the recommendations of the Finance Committee, at the back of our minds is another committee—the five lords, two knights and sundry professors and appointees who make up the Calman commission. The commission has told us, in its interim report, that constitutional perfection has been achieved in Scotland and that no further significant powers are needed for the Parliament—certainly not any control over the fiscal policies that would allow us genuinely to debate Scotland's budgetary needs. Nevertheless, we are where we are, and I believe that the report recognises some of the progress that Scotland's Government is making towards delivering its manifesto commitments and helping families and individuals throughout Scotland to deal with the current economic downturn. The committee welcomes—as do I—the fact that the Government is bringing forward some £260 million of capital spending, which will be spent directly to safeguard jobs in the construction sector, in housing and in education. It will have the added bonus of making major improvements to infrastructure in those areas available to the people of Scotland earlier than was planned.

Much as I welcome the fact that the money is being brought forward, I would prefer the Parliament to have the full gamut of powers over the economy so that it would not have to rely on money being handed down from  on high or have to go to Westminster with a begging bowl. I particularly welcome the extra £10 million that is being brought forward this year for the affordable housing investment programme. That will help social landlords to meet demand for decent rented accommodation at a time when that demand is increasing as the private home ownership bubble bursts. The Scottish Government is doing all it can, with the limited powers that are available to it, to help Scotland during the economic downturn. At times like this, the limitations of the devolution settlement are thrown into the sharpest relief, because although the will to do more is there—on the part of our Government and the Finance Committee—the power is not. The committee notes that inflation is rising well above the predicted rate, and that that is having a knock-on effect on the prices that public bodies pay for fuel and raw materials. The Government recognises that, and is taking steps to meet the challenge, such as authorising the bulk purchase of electricity from autumn 2009 and allocating £15 million for health boards to meet energy costs and improve energy efficiency. However, the Government will always find it difficult to deal with the consequences of inflation while the powers to do so are not in its grasp. On the other ways in which the Scottish Government can help people in these difficult economic times, I am sure that the ministers will listen carefully to the committee's suggestions on the effective resourcing of Skills Development Scotland, as well as debt and money advice services. Of course, much of that is already happening, as anyone who has seen the adverts for the national debt line knows. I welcome other aspects of the committee's report, including the endorsement of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee's recommendation that a climate change commentary be introduced to budget documents as soon as that is practical. That will no doubt be important as our Government moves towards the introduction of some of the most ambitious climate change legislation on the planet. The committee welcomed the acceleration of the reduction of business rates for small and medium-sized enterprises in Scotland. In doing that, the committee aligns itself with the many high street enterprises and family-owned firms that have benefited from that policy and are able to face the recession with greater resolve because of it. There is much to commend in the committee's report. However, we must bear in mind that our budget process is not fully in our own hands. Although we can slice up the cake, only the full  powers of independence will give the people of Scotland the kind of governance and budget that they need and deserve. I welcome the scrutiny that the Finance Committee has provided, and I am sure that the minister will respond robustly to the points that have been raised.

I thank those colleagues who signed my motion to enable the debate to take place. I put on record my particular thanks to Michael McMahon, who readily agreed to give up this spot, which had been allocated for Labour Party members' business, to enable the debate to take place tonight. I am especially grateful because that has allowed the debate to be held on the anniversary of the signing of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adding to the pertinence or purpose of tonight's exchanges. I am also grateful to colleagues who have stayed behind to participate in the debate. I look forward to hearing what everyone has to say. This year is the 60 th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The anniversary is being marked in different ways by various organisations. I was delighted to receive today, among the growing number of Christmas cards that I am getting, a birthday card for the declaration from the Equality and Human Rights Commission—I remind the commission that that does not mean that it should not send me a Christmas card as well. I also welcome the booklet "My Rights Passport", which is published by Amnesty International and which underlines its commitment to educating people about the declaration. I should declare that I am a member of Amnesty International and that my wife works for the organisation. I also note that the Scottish Human Rights Commission has published the declaration in Scots Gaelic. The cover of the document is illustrated with 30 concentric circles of light, which symbolise the 30 articles of the declaration.  Clearly, a lot of work is going on to acknowledge the anniversary. The declaration, which is often called the world's best-kept secret, was adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 10 December 1948. It is easy to see how the world leaders of the time, emerging from the years of horror and terror that the second world war represented, felt that was important to create a document that would set out the basic rights with which we should all be endowed due to the simple fact that we are human beings. The principal mover behind the declaration was the person who was chosen to head up the UN Commission on Human Rights, which drafted it: Eleanor Roosevelt, to whom I shall return later. I was privileged to be able to attend, along with our Presiding Officer and other colleagues, the launch event for the Scottish Commission for Human Rights earlier this year. At that event, Mary Robinson, the former Irish President and former UN human rights commissioner, was able to inform us that the declaration has been translated into more languages than any text other than the Bible. I was delighted to learn that today, Amnesty International was able to present to the First Minister a translation of the declaration in the Scots language. Added to the Gaelic translation, that is a welcome demonstration of Scotland's commitment to human rights, and I hope that it is not long before the Scots translation is listed among all the other language versions on the UDHR website. However, the fact that the declaration is one of the most translated documents in the world does not make it one of the most widely read, and it is certainly not one of the most implemented. That is why, even though it is in its 60 th year, the declaration remains important to us today. The significance of civil liberties and broader concepts of human rights is all too often maligned and downplayed, but I can think of little that is more important to the human experience than the rights and freedoms that we all too often take for granted. We should not take them for granted, for many of them were hard fought for and hard won by our forebears many years ago. It is true that ideas of human rights and civil liberties are misunderstood by many. All too often, people seem to imagine that those rights exist only to protect the worst among us. Although it is true that they are indeed designed to protect such individuals, we should recognise that those rights are universal and apply to us all—that is why we call them human rights. However, all too often, the human aspect is forgotten as we read stories in the popular tabloid press about the application of  rights. That is why the declaration of human rights is as important today as it was 60 years ago. There exists a long global tradition of the declaration of rights. The American declaration of independence set out that "all men are created equal"; the French revolutionary Assembly set forth fundamental rights, not only for France's citizens but for "all men without exception"; and our own declaration of Arbroath helped to build the idea that sovereignty is invested in the entire people of a nation, and not in one individual alone. The declaration of human rights draws on that fine tradition, but, in a sense, is of even greater importance than any of those documents, for it sets out rights for us all on a universal basis. Its universality—the fact that it is for everyone on the planet—makes it unique and capable of superseding those other documents. Article 1 of the declaration reads: "All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood." Those are fine words, but they are more than that; they represent a fundamental right that everyone here and across the world is endowed with. However, I am afraid that, in many ways, they represent ideals much more than reality. We are all aware of human rights abuses around the world. None of us can fail to be aware of the detention without trial that Guantánamo bay has come to represent. We all know about China's continued suppression of Tibetan national identity. We know about the sweat shops of the far east, where many children are forced to work to the exclusion of their education. We know about the appalling situations in Zimbabwe and the Democratic Republic of Congo, and across much of the world. The declaration stands against those abuses. We can bemoan the fact that they happen, or we can work—using the declaration as the basis of that work—to end those abuses. It is better to light a candle than to curse the darkness. I turn to the part of my motion that states that the Parliament "believes that the principles of the UDHR should continue to serve as inspiration for the future development of Scotland." Members might have heard me in the chamber, on occasion, state my belief that Scotland's future is best served by independence. I am proud that at my party's most recent annual conference, we were able to pass a resolution that stated that the declaration should serve as the inspiration for any founding declaration, bill of rights or constitution  adopted by an independent Scotland. Whatever our beliefs about the future constitutional direction of travel for our country, we should always emphasise the importance of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. I close by quoting Eleanor Roosevelt, whose words demonstrate why the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is important. She was once heard to say: "Where, after all, do universal human rights begin? In small places, close to home—so close and so small that they cannot be seen on any maps of the world. Yet they are the world of the individual person; the neighbourhood he lives in; the school or college he attends; the factory, farm, or office where he works. Such are the places where every man, woman, and child seeks equal justice, equal opportunity, equal dignity without discrimination. Unless these rights have meaning there, they have little meaning anywhere." I could not have put it better myself.

I welcome today's debate, just as I welcome the minister's statement. The Central Scotland region, which I represent, is one of the most densely populated in Scotland and its residents depend on an efficient and effective public transport system. The first members' business debate that I managed to secure was on the subject of the vastly important rail improvements that the Government has planned across Central Scotland and ways to encourage greater use of rail travel through effective ticket pricing. I therefore welcome the part of the minister's statement on smarter ticketing. Years of underinvestment have left not just Central Scotland, but the country with an inadequate transport system—I hope that we all agree about that. In the current economic climate, an efficient, up-to-date transport system to move  people and goods around is vital in order to ensure sustained economic development in Scotland. We cannot afford to have our national transport infrastructure sidelined as it has been in the past. That history of neglect is why the Government is, rightly, addressing the issue of transport infrastructure directly with a degree of diligence that was previously lacking. The strategic transport projects review outlines a number of key developments that will benefit people not only in the region that I represent but across the country as a whole. As I have said before in the chamber, I warmly welcome the Government's policy of electrifying the main rail route between Glasgow and Edinburgh, which will increase the number of services from five or six services to 13 services each and every hour. That will transform the region even more than the introduction of the quarter-hourly service did several years ago.

The point that I was making was about ambition for our country. The review sets out clearly a level of ambition for infrastructure that has been sadly lacking for so long. As I was about to say, users of the Glasgow to Edinburgh service, particularly Central Scotland's commuters, will benefit from a timely and reliable service as a result of those improvements. Improved services in terms of journey time, reliability and perhaps even frequency at Croy, Falkirk High and Polmont stations in the region that I represent, will be welcomed. So, too, will the potential for direct services from Edinburgh Park, given that many people across the central belt now work within the vicinity of that station. Many of my constituents travel to Glasgow and Edinburgh for purposes of work and recreation, so improvements to the rail services between the two cities are to their benefit. Of great importance is the fact that the move will create more economic opportunities for the place of my birth: Glasgow. So, too, will the other improvements that are planned for the city. Patrick Harvie and others seemed to be dismayed about some of the improvements that are being outlined for Glasgow; I think that they represent the  greatest potential investment in the city's transport infrastructure in my lifetime.

I am about to discuss that, so that intervention was timely. I particularly welcome the suggested construction of a new city centre station for Glasgow, as outlined in the review. That would link rail networks to the south and the east and to the north and south of the city, alongside the proposals to increase capacity and reduce journey times between the city, Inverclyde and Ayrshire. For too long, the lack of capacity at Central and Queen Street stations has held back our rail network, not just in Glasgow, but throughout the country.

No—I am afraid not. The demolition of former main line stations in Glasgow under the so-called Beeching axe has been shown to be short sighted. The proposal can put that right. I also welcome the potential development of a metro or light rapid transit system across Glasgow, as that would improve transport within the city. The people of Central Scotland will welcome other aspects of the minister's statement and of the review, such as the introduction of rail access to Grangemouth port and the freight hub, which involves electrification of the railway between Coatbridge and Grangemouth, track modifications to improve access from the west and the east and an increased loading gauge to allow trains to carry larger containers. Such projects help to serve existing and developing industrial and distribution facilities locally. Above all, they help to get freight off the road and on to trains, which I am sure we all support. The proposal to electrify the whole rail network is welcome and is exciting for our country. It confirms the position that the Government previously set out, which means that my constituents who use the Queen Street to Cumbernauld line will be able to rely on improved services in the future. Allied to the improvements to the Glasgow to Edinburgh main line and the Airdrie to Bathgate line, that is good news for Central Scotland. I am sure that members agree that we cannot allow Scotland to be left behind developments in transport infrastructure in the United Kingdom and in the rest of Europe. The proposed projects will ensure that our transport system is modern, quick and efficient and is ready and able to deal with the  maximum economic activity and with moving people and goods around the country. The benefits of the proposals in the review are not solely economic; they extend to the environment, too. The proposals actively encourage modal shift. Park-and-ride facilities are proposed. The minister used the term "park and choose"; I am not sure why we have changed the terminology, but I am sure that he will explain that. Improvements to rail infrastructure are also proposed. Such improvements will lead to improved environmental performance and we would be wrong to discount them lightly. In some ways, I wish that the Scottish Government could go further. Members around the chamber have described projects that they want to be implemented and which were not in the statement. Of course, they must tell us how those projects could be achieved; often, our hands are tied by the frustrations and limitations of the Scotland Act 1998. I am being told to conclude. I welcome the review and I look forward to hearing what the minister says at the end of the debate.

Last week's pre-budget report contained many measures worthy of support. Over the past few weeks, many members of the Parliament have called for an acceleration of capital investment, but many of the same members have failed to mention that such matters are essentially beyond the control of the Scottish Government, which must rely on permission being granted by the UK Treasury. Those members must have been happy when the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced that such leeway would be granted, even though the announcement was unnecessarily delayed. That said, we should remember that accelerated investment is not new funding but merely funding that has been brought forward from future budgets. That will have consequences for future years, as will the draconian cuts that, under Alistair Darling's plans, will form the conclusion of the current spending review period. The possibility of the Scottish budget being cut by £1 billion in just two years presents a challenge of the highest order, to say the least. The fact that that will happen against the backdrop of increased oil revenues, which have poured from the North Sea into the Exchequer at extraordinary levels, is all the more galling. Another part of the pre-budget report on which I want to focus is the decision to lower the rate of VAT to 15 per cent. Such a change can be supported, but close attention must be paid to ensure that retailers pass the reduction on to consumers rather than absorb it as a new source of profits, lest the main rationale for the change—increasing consumer confidence—becomes simply an opportunity missed. Perhaps a further reduction in VAT might have been applied to energy costs at this time of increased fuel poverty. Indeed, perhaps a reduction in VAT for minor home repairs—as my colleague Rob Gibson has called for and as has been provided on the Isle of Man—would have been similarly well directed. While welcoming the decision to lower the rate of VAT, we must bear in mind the fact that the reduction is only temporary. I share the concerns that my colleagues Keith Brown and Alex Neil expressed about the fact that the pre-budget report gives no indication that costly vanity projects, such as identity cards or Trident renewal, might be shelved. However, those are perhaps wider issues for another time. There is no escaping the fact that a major focus of the pre-budget report is the UK Government's proposals for huge levels of public borrowing, much—if not all—of which is being undertaken for the purposes of recapitalising the UK banking sector. As I said in the debate that was held in the chamber a few weeks ago on the economic  situation, such recapitalisation is, in the main, to be welcomed but is also potentially an opportunity missed. I want to explore that issue further today. Although the cabinet secretary has set out how our Scottish Government will work with the banks to help families and small businesses, the UK Government is empowered to act with much greater reach in relation to the financial sector. Given that the banks form parts of various consortia for PFI/PPP schemes, in providing them with funds for the purposes of recapitalisation and in becoming a shareholder in them, the chancellor could have availed himself of the opportunity to negotiate more favourable repayment terms for the debts that the Government owes. This week, it has been reported that the combined level of PFI/PPP debt across the UK will rise to £216 billion between now and 2032. Although the precise amount may be contested, what cannot be argued with is that PFI/PPP repayments will cost the taxpayer tens of billions of pounds. The Scottish Government's liability is likely to reach £1 billion per annum in the next few years. If, on the back of the pre-budget report, the Treasury had struck a deal on PFI/PPP repayments with the banks to which it has offered such largesse, that would surely have represented good value for the taxpayer. This week, I have written to Alistair Darling to inquire about the likelihood of the Treasury's negotiating such a deal, so I look forward to receipt of his response in due course. The UK Government could do more besides. For too long, the banks have been allowed to operate in a deregulated financial sector. Adam Smith wrote of the hidden hand; it is clear that people in the UK banking industry have operated with such a hidden hand for too long.

I have absolutely no awareness of the quote to which Mr Kerr refers, so I cannot comment on it. The UK Government should use the funds that it is directing to the banks through the pre-budget report as an impetus to direct the financial sector to operate in a new fashion. First, it should set strict parameters for those who are eligible for mortgages. The culture of sub-prime mortgages and doling out loans at many times the level of the borrower's income should come to an end, for the borrower's sake as much as the bank's. That principle should also extend to personal credit.  Secondly, the mortgages lent should more accurately reflect changes in the interest rate. I understand that the Government has called for that, and if the banks will not do it, they should be made to by statute or directive. I welcome the news that the Royal Bank of Scotland has announced that it will take a more relaxed position to its customers' mortgage repayment terms. If that has come about because of the UK Government's almost 60 per cent stake in the banks, it serves to illustrate how the UK Government might further use its investment in the banks to good effect. I close by welcoming today's debate, just as I welcome the measures taken by the Scottish Government that will assist people during these difficult economic times. I also look forward to the cabinet secretary's reply, to see how the Government might press the UK Government to use its budget process to implement some of the measures that I have outlined today.

Can the minister state whether one of the Government's more immediate priorities is communicating its congratulations to the people of Greenland for successfully voting in a referendum to extend their autonomy from Denmark? Does the minister agree that that decision by a population of 50,000 people can serve as an example to our population of five million people, and that there is no reason why we cannot move forward constitutionally with confidence at this time?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it supports the learning of Gaelic at pre-school level. (S3O-4823)

The minister might be aware of the Croileagan Bogha Frois organisation in Cumbernauld—I apologise to Dr Allan and John Farquhar Munro for my pronunciation. The organisation was set up by parents to help to teach their pre-school children Gaelic. I urge the minister to visit it, if he can. Does he agree that organisations that have been set up and run by communities have a big role to play in teaching Gaelic to young children?

The global financial downturn—or crisis, as Patrick Harvie calls it with some justification—has come to dominate the news headlines in recent months, eclipsing practically every other issue of note. Indeed, it seems that the only controversy capable of breaking into the news cycle of late has been the decision to kick Laura out of "The X Factor"—a story of international significance on which I have not taken a position but which I am sure has exercised other members. Despite the limited powers at its disposal, the Scottish Government has acted to mitigate the effects of the economic slowdown. The small business bonus, which will come fully into effect next year, is a major boon for the hard-pressed small enterprises that are the backbone of any local economy. The freeze in council tax has offered some relief for hard-pressed families, and the local income tax will go even further in assisting those households that are struggling to get by. Even the abolition of tuition fees, in the shape of the graduate endowment, goes some way to putting money back into people's pockets and aiding economic recovery. With greater powers, I am sure that the response would have reached much further, but we should welcome the actions that have been taken. Slightly more unedifying has been the spectacle of the glee with which Gordon Brown has tried cynically to use people's concerns about their financial prospects as a battering ram against independence for our country. It is somewhat duplicitous to claim, in times of economic growth, that that growth is a reason why Scotland cannot be independent, and then in times of economic sluggishness to claim that as a factor, too. Worse yet are the insults that are hurled at our neighbours that they are somehow insolvent or bankrupt, as part of the onslaught against independence. However, I intend not to reiterate such arguments at length but to consider ways in which our economy has gone wrong and how we might do things differently in future. On 18 March 1968, the late Senator Robert Kennedy was heard to remark:  "Too much and for too long, we seemed to have surrendered personal excellence and community values in the mere accumulation of material things." Those words, uttered more than 40 years ago, are as prescient today as they were in 1968, and have as much meaning. There has been "Too much and for too long" rampant materialism at the heart of our economic system, fuelled by ever-spiralling levels of personal debt. In the UK, the combined level of personal debt stands at almost £1.5 trillion pounds. Over my lifetime, the culture of cheap and easy credit has been actively encouraged by successive UK Administrations. Indeed, the awarding of credit to people who could not really afford it is hugely to blame for the economic mess in which we find ourselves. I hesitate to use the term "sub-prime", as it implies that those who fall into that category are sub-people, rather than unfortunates who bought into the myth that home ownership was the key to their future happiness and who were willingly loaned mortgages by banks who should have known that those people were not in a position to afford them. However, the issuing of easy credit extended further than those mortgages. Paying with credit cards for consumer goods that are often wanted more than needed has become a national pastime. While there is nothing wrong with credit per se, for many people it has far too frequently been the currency of choice. We have to consider how to change what seems to be a cultural norm, in which people readily burden themselves with debt to pay for material things. Yesterday, it was my pleasure to attend the launch at Condorrat primary school in Cumbernauld of the Gaelic translation of "On the Money", a book of four short stories for children that is designed to teach them financial responsibility. No one can deny that that is an important task, but it strikes me that those lessons should be taught to more than just our children; they should be taught to the whole of our society. More than any other group, it is perhaps the banks that must learn those lessons. I am reliably informed—although I confess that this is not my personal experience, having grown up in this age of free and easy credit—that banks used to consider carefully how to lend their money. That might have taken the form of sitting down and discussing with their customers the ins and outs of becoming indebted to them. In the modern world, it seems that banks—or, more correctly, individual bankers keen to secure their next bonus—have been all too eager to hand out loans without first ensuring that they are affordable for the individuals who are securing them.  We are all aware of the billions of pounds of taxpayers' money that have been offered to the banks for their recapitalisation, and we all broadly agree about the necessity of that move, but it is of concern that too few guarantees have been sought by the UK Government from the banks in return. Indeed, the new UK Secretary of State for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform has essentially stated that it will be business as usual for the banks, and given little signal of the regulatory reform that is hinted at in his job title. Regulatory reform is necessary for the banking sector. No more should it be allowed to operate in such a cavalier fashion, jeopardising our economy and people's livelihoods and homes. That will require the sector to operate in a new, more transparent and more responsible way. If it cannot be relied on to do that of its own accord, new regulations will be required to make it do so. This is an important debate, but it is all too short to consider our problems in depth. I, for one, could have expanded on many of the points that I have raised, but I do not have the time to do so. I reiterate my welcome for the measures that the Scottish Government has taken thus far to try to mitigate the worst effects of the looming recession. If we were properly equipped with the powers of independence, the depth and strength of the protection that we could offer could go much further. I suppose that discussion of that issue will have to wait for another time.

An 18 th birthday is often described as a coming of age, so it is appropriate that we hold this debate in the 18 th anniversary year of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, which was designed to protect the rights of all those who are under 18 and which deserves truly to come of age itself. As members might know, I have a strong interest in the role that the Parliament can play in promoting respect for human rights in Scotland and around the world. That is why I am proud to convene the Parliament's cross-party group on human rights and civil liberties. The Convention on the Rights of the Child is not the only human rights declaration to celebrate an important anniversary this year. The overarching global framework—the Universal Declaration of Human Rights—celebrates its 60 th anniversary, which makes it somewhat older than the Convention on the Rights of the Child, but no less important. I hope that the Parliament will have the opportunity to discuss the significance of the declaration in the not-too-distant future, just as we are discussing the convention today. From the universal declaration spring all other UN conventions on different aspects of human rights. It is the foundation stone on which the human rights that belong to groups in our society rest and are built. One such example is the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Members will know that several motions were lodged recently to raise serious concerns about the UK Government's decision to make reservations on key aspects of that convention. I mention that because the UK Government chose for many years to make reservations on aspects of the Convention on the Rights of the Child—particularly on aspects that related to child migrants and asylum seekers. A practical effect of one reservation, which was in effect an opt-out from article 22, was the detention of children in institutions such as Dungavel. I understand that the UK Government is likely to withdraw its reservation of that article, which is very much to be welcomed.  The detention of children of asylum seekers in Dungavel and similar institutions is nothing short of an outrage. The sooner it ends, the better. If we truly believe that children have the rights that are enshrined in the convention and in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, such as the rights to protection against discrimination, to live with their parents in the same place, to health care, to education and to a decent standard of living, none of them can be realised by a child living under lock and key in Dungavel. I commend the work of my colleagues and campaigners to ensure that progress has been made on that. Members will not be surprised to learn that I believe that the best way to prevent Scotland from being affected by UK Government reservations to such conventions is for it to become an independent party to conventions. If Scotland could sign up in its own right to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, we would be in a much better position to implement it fully and effectively in Scotland. However, that is not to say that we can do nothing in a devolved context. I accept that we can act on matters that have been mentioned, such as the imprisonment of young people in adult prisons and the corporal punishment of children in the home. One issue that has not been mentioned is the age of criminal responsibility, which is very low here by international standards. Those are areas that we can, and perhaps should, act on. It remains a fact that Scotland is not an independent party to the convention. The UK Government may have ratified the convention, but it has some way to go before it lives up to the standards that it should reach as a Government. Early last month, the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child published what was in effect a report card on the UK's implementation of the convention. The publication makes for concerning reading in a number of areas including the treatment of children of asylum-seeking families and child poverty. By definition, any child living in poverty is denied the rights that are outlined in the convention. A child who lives in poverty cannot be said to be exercising their right to an adequate standard of living. As we are all too well aware, with poverty comes a poorer standard of health and education, two other rights that are integral to the convention.

Indeed, I welcome that. However, as the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child indicates in its report, there is still a long  way to go before those targets are reached. As Nicol Stephen said, a quarter of a million of Scotland's children live in poverty, 90,000 of whom live in severe poverty. It is therefore no wonder that the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child noted that child poverty is a very serious problem. What it said is a serious understatement: in the context of the debate, child poverty is an abuse of the human rights of those who suffer it. If Scotland were to be an independent party to the convention, we could discuss the issue of incorporating the convention into Scots law with considerably more confidence than we can at present. The idea has merit; indeed, my party approved a motion on the subject at its recent conference. I commend Christina McKelvie for bringing the debate to conference. I will watch the debate unfold with interest. The easiest way in which to get around the complications of devolved and reserved matters is to get rid of the distinction and return to the Scottish Parliament the normal powers of an independent country. This week has been about political change not only in America but Glenrothes where, I am sure, we will see that demonstrated this evening. Surely we can all agree that we must change the way in which children at home and across the globe are treated. The Scottish Parliament can help to bring about such change. The Convention on the Rights of the Child helps us to see exactly how that should be done.

Does the minister agree that the Scottish Government's approach to assisting economic recovery in Europe is far more constructive than that of the UK Government, which labels our neighbours as being somehow bankrupt or insolvent?

To ask the Scottish Government what benefits it believes may be derived from the phasing out of private cleaning and catering contracts in the NHS. (S3O-4645)

Will the minister outline in a bit more detail how the initiative might improve the patient experience in the NHS?

Like others, I welcome the opportunity of today's debate to discuss the importance of the British-Irish Council, or, indeed, the council of the isles. Like Margo MacDonald, my ardour is probably stronger for that styling than it is for the body's official title. However, I welcome the chance to discuss the importance of the council to the current constitutional framework in these islands and to look ahead at the role that the council might play in future. The council is adapting to changing times. New Governments have been established in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, and the Republic of Ireland has a new Taoiseach. More than ever before, a diversity of political opinion is manifested at the council by Governments and legislatures that are determined to move their countries on. For example, the National Assembly for Wales is on the path to becoming a Parliament more like our own, and the British-Irish Council gives its representatives a chance to learn from and about its counterparts in Scotland and the other participating Parliaments and Assemblies. Wales and Scotland are not the only stateless nations at the council. I look forward to the day when there is more wide-ranging representation from England. Of course, that is a matter for the people of that country to decide but, perhaps in years to come, we could look forward to meeting representatives from an English Parliament or some form of regional body, instead of their being subsumed into a delegation on behalf of the United Kingdom Government. I note that it was the Secretary of State for Wales who represented Her Majesty's Government at the recent summit meeting in Edinburgh. Like other members, I wonder when the new Secretary of State for Scotland will be brave enough to show his face at a meeting of the council, given that he will find himself having to explain to the Taoiseach why he thinks that Ireland is insolvent. We are used to unionists such as the new Secretary of State for Scotland and, it seems, Ted Brocklebank talking down the legitimate aspiration of independence for their own country but, in recent weeks, new tactics of talking down other countries, such as Ireland, have been added to the  unionist armoury against Scottish independence. That ties in with the employment against independence of the language of separation, which is used to suggest that independence will result in Scotland somehow being cut off from her neighbours and the international community. However, it is the secretary of state's own Government that helped to establish the British-Irish Council as a valuable and practical example of genuinely international co-operation. When Scotland achieves its independence—

Not "if", but "when". When that happens, I imagine that the council will have even greater importance and stature as a forum for the nation states of Scotland, Ireland and whatever is left of the United Kingdom to discuss and take action on matters of common concern.

I suggest that the member's party should ditch its amendment so that the Parliament can act with one voice at decision time. It is apparent from the council's work to date that it is already taking action on some matters of common concern. In particular, that was demonstrated during its recent meeting here in Edinburgh. I welcome the Government's drive to introduce energy as a work stream of the council and, in particular, the focus on managing and promoting renewable energy among the council's constituent members. I am somewhat at a loss to understand the opposition that exists in the Parliament to the proposition that our Government should lead that work. Scotland is well placed to take advantage of the massive renewable energy potential that our natural environment offers, while ensuring that such developments are in harmony with our landscape and environment. In that area, the council provides a forum in which we can learn from and work with our nearest neighbours for the benefit of all. Another related area in which the Scottish Government is demonstrating that it leads the way among the nations of these islands is that of climate change. Not only is the Government leading the way on renewable energy, but recently the cabinet secretary announced a further strengthening of the climate change bill, which will probably make it one of the most ambitious and exciting pieces of legislation in that area in the world. I have no doubt that at future meetings of the council, ministers from the other  Administrations will want to discuss that important matter. I note the wide range of continuing work that was discussed at the summit. In particular, I welcome the lead that the Scottish and Welsh Governments are taking in the area of social inclusion. The council has examined the different initiatives to tackle child poverty that the various Administrations have adopted. In that regard, I particularly welcome the Scottish Government's commitment to provide free school meals for our youngest children by 2010. Many members of all parties will agree that that is one of the most socially progressive policies that our Parliament has the power to introduce. It will be looked at with interest, if not a degree of envy, by colleagues from other council countries. Indeed, I understand that the UK Government is so inspired by our proposal that it has announced its intention to instigate a pilot of free school meals in England in due course. At its recent meeting, the council discussed the global financial situation, as has been mentioned, and ministers from all sides expressed deep concern about the effect that it is beginning to have on the real economy. It is good to know that the council was able to have a constructive discussion on the issue and to agree on some areas of common concern. Unfortunately, it was disappointing that only a few days later Ireland was derided as being an insolvent country and was cited as a warning to Scotland about what we would face under independence. For the sake of harmony and consensus at future meetings of the council, the Secretary of State for Scotland should think before he speaks. Like my colleague Aileen Campbell, I have had experience of the co-operation that the council aims to promote through my participation some years ago in the interisles forum for the youth wings of political parties across these islands. That indicated to me the positive results that dialogue across these islands—often between people and parties that have traditionally been bitter enemies—can bring. Today's debate has been a useful opportunity for us to look at the positive contribution that the British-Irish Council can make to the relationship between the Governments and Administrations that exist in these islands. In its discussions on energy, social inclusion and the global economic situation, the council has given ministers from our Government and our neighbours a chance to speak candidly and constructively about the challenges that we all face. I look forward to the council growing in stature and importance, just as our Parliament is growing towards having the normal status of independence.

Today's debate is welcome, although much of the ground covered in the Local Government and Communities Committee's report is not exactly new. Scotland's experience of the 2007 elections has been discussed several times in this Parliament. Despite what Michael McMahon seemed to suggest, the subject has been discussed widely by the general public in Scotland, too. After all that discussion, and with the report in front of us, it is clear that, throughout Scotland, a consensus is emerging among our body politic that there needs to be much tighter management of the electoral process and, in particular, that responsibility for elections in Scotland should rest with the Scottish Parliament. Nicol Stephen described the election last year as "a dark day". Given the Government that was elected, I am not sure that I agree with that statement, but I am sure that we can all recall the uncertainty that surrounded the elections of May 2007. I am sure that none of us wants that experience to be repeated. The committee's report, which builds on the Gould report, sets out a number of ways in which we can ensure that it is not repeated. I will focus on a few key aspects of the committee's report. The report states that the post of chief electoral officer has operated successfully in Northern Ireland and considers how that could inform the establishment of a chief returning officer post in Scotland. The concept is not totally unusual: in 1997, in the devolution referendum, a chief counting officer for Scotland was appointed. Of course, we look forward to another constitutional referendum in Scotland in the not-too-distant future—one that will deliver Scotland's independence, which, naturally, would give this Parliament full powers over electoral law and regulation. It would also address Alison McInnes's concern about voter fatigue by removing an unnecessary tier of Government elections in Scotland. Perhaps that is an issue for another day. The report makes it clear that, if we had a chief returning officer for Scotland, that would help to establish lines of accountability among the diverse local authorities in Scotland and provide the oversight that was so clearly lacking in 2007. The decoupling of Scottish parliamentary and local authority elections must not be overlooked. Such a move is extremely important for local democracy and for the mandate of our councillors and the legitimacy of our municipal governments. A separate polling day for local authorities, preferably at the mid-point between two parliamentary elections, will, I hope, provide a clearer focus in communities on issues of  particular concern. It is a matter of realpolitik that decoupled polls can, and do, serve as a mid-term verdict on a national Government, but that is not necessarily a bad thing, or something for a Government of any party—particularly the SNP—to be afraid of. However, the primary rationale for decoupling the elections is, rightly, to ensure that our municipal governments are given the prominence that they deserve as a result of having their own election day. As the committee's report acknowledges, that is a good motivation for us to act. We should look to decouple the elections. One change that has already been made in local government elections is the introduction of the single transferable vote, which has been an incredibly positive move. I have excellent relations with many councillors throughout central Scotland and there has been a positive reaction from constituents who are able to keep their elected representatives on their toes through the multimember system. The introduction of STV has changed Scotland's local political landscape for the better—it has changed beyond recognition—even if it did take a bit longer than expected to realise the extent of what had happened on that day in May last year. However, the introduction of STV as a new voting system in Scotland has not been without its challenges. The committee report comments on the design of the ballot paper for the local elections. It is important to note that, although the rate of spoiled ballots in the local elections was unacceptably high, it was still lower than the rate of spoiled ballots in our parliamentary elections and in STV elections held in Northern Ireland. That suggests to me that ballot design was not the sole reason for confusion and problems. After all, it was the Scottish electorate's first experience of using STV. We can expect the number of spoiled ballot papers to decline in future elections as people get used to the system, particularly if elections are decoupled. The committee report also recommends that we investigate the increased use of postal voting. Postal voting is already under way in Ohio and several other American states four weeks before the United States presidential election. Given that Scotland is smaller than many of those states, perhaps we do not need such a radical move, but we can certainly explore the idea further. I look forward to hearing any proposals that emerge in that regard. There is no single magic bullet in the committee's report or in any of the other reports. The Gould report, which the Parliament endorsed in full, remains the benchmark. Key to Gould was the call for full power over elections to be devolved to Scotland—but only if that power is used to  implement the range of other recommendations that we have been discussing. Voters in Scotland need and deserve an electoral system that enhances our democracy and ensures the legitimacy of those who are elected. They used such a system in 1997 to create their own Parliament. Surely that Parliament should have the responsibility and opportunity to repay the trust of the voters with the power to legislate for and oversee the running of elections in Scotland. I hope that the next time that the issue comes before us in the chamber, we can make a real and lasting difference to the electoral process.

The First Minister mentioned that the Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture had written to the UK culture minister in support of the commission's recommendations, particularly on the creation of a Scottish network channel, and had written to Ofcom to seek independent Scottish representation. Are there any early indications of whether those proposals will fall on sympathetic or deaf ears?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that, last year,  some 6 per cent of the council tax that was billed in Scotland went uncollected. Does he agree that a local income tax is likely to lead to a much lower rate of non-payment, which is one reason why the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities supports it?

As a Fife-trained economist, the First Minister will be aware of the idea of the invisible hand behind the economy, which was promoted by another Fife economist. Does the First Minister agree that it is time for those invisible hands behind the financial sector to be forced out into the open a bit more? Will he spell out how the Scottish Government might press for clearer regulation of the financial sector to that end?

As a new member of the European and External Relations Committee, I have not played a part in the assembling of the report that is before us. I have, however, read it and commend it to Parliament. It is clear from the committee's report that any modern approach to international development should be informed by a desire for justice. Global economic justice has been a modern rallying cry around the globe, with the make poverty history campaign demanding fairer trade, debt cancellation and more and better aid as the building blocks of that economic justice, using the United Nations millennium development goals as the benchmark by which we can judge progress in these early days of the 21 st century. Any international development strategy that is adopted by the Scottish Government or by Parliament needs to have the millennium development goals embedded within it. Those goals are not ends in themselves, but provide the idea of a bare minimum and give inspiration to look beyond what they promise. That thought is expressed clearly in the committee's report and serves as the basis for exploring some of its other themes and issues.  Central to the report is its grappling with how best the Scottish Government can use its limited formal opportunities to promote an international development agenda. There is a clear message that there is no need for the Government to reinvent the wheel—there is already great expertise among Scotland's aid agencies, academic departments and community initiatives. We should continue to encourage and foster those efforts and build on the good will and understanding that already exist in wider society. Scotland does not yet have a fully fledged international development Government department, as many of our similar-sized neighbours do. That means that we are not in a position at this time to commit 0.7 per cent of the value of our country's gross domestic product to the purposes of international development assistance. Incidentally, that target has not been met by the overwhelming majority of countries in the developed world, although it is one that we should work towards. We are in a position to find ways of showing solidarity with people in developing countries, supporting their calls, advocating for justice and, above all, finding ways for the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government to add value to the work that is already taking place in Scotland. I welcome the Scottish Government's increasing of the level of international development fund investment to £21 million over the coming three years. It is clear from its report that the whole European and External Relations Committee does, too. One of the clearest ways in which we have sought to foster international development has been through the links that we have built with Malawi in recent years. I strongly welcome the Government's efforts to expand Scottish international development efforts elsewhere in the world, but it is with Malawi that our international development is most closely associated. The historical roots of Scotland's links with Malawi run deep—indeed, they run very deep in Jim Hume's family, it seems. We should rightly acknowledge those links, but we should not gloss over the legacy of Europe's imperialist past in the continent of Africa—a legacy with which many African countries are still coming to terms. Today, nearly half of Malawi's population struggle to get by on less than $1 a day, infant mortality rates are among the highest on the planet, and there is an AIDS pandemic. It is right that we in Scotland seek to develop links with Malawi. One visible manifestation of those links lies in the many school partnership arrangements that have arisen in recent years. The report deals with that to an extent. Earlier this year, I was privileged to offer a tour of our  Parliament to students from Nkhamenya girls secondary school in Malawi, who visited Scotland under their partnership with St Maurice's high school in Cumbernauld. I was delighted to give the students and teachers a brief tour of the Parliament and to explain some of the work that goes on here. Above all, I was pleased to learn more about their school and their links with St Maurice's. Nkhamenya is located in Malawi's vast Northern Region. The girls secondary school was founded by the local Catholic diocese and is funded by a combination of school fees and a grant from the Malawi Government. That gives the school more stability and resources than many other schools in the country, but it does not bear comparison with schools in Scotland. The resources that are available to staff and students at St Maurice's high and other schools in our country are significantly advanced beyond those that are available to their counterparts in Malawi. The committee report rightly notes the importance of ensuring that any schools partnership project is indeed a partnership and does not simply become an exercise in philanthropy or a simple donor-beneficiary relationship. Visits from either side must be handled with care. Students and teachers coming from Malawi should, I believe, have the opportunity to learn about the poverty and deprivation that affect some parts of Scotland, as well as experiencing the more commercial aspects of our culture. In this materialistic age, it is important to demonstrate to citizens across the globe that our country is not without problems and is far from being a land of milk and honey where every road is paved with gold. Learning should be a two-way street. Schools in Scotland must be able and willing to learn not just about, but from, their partners in Malawi. Students from Scotland who visit Malawi should not come back just wanting to take part in acts of charity, important and necessary though that is; their experience should not have reinforced the stereotypical view that everything here is rosy and nothing works over there. We have to move beyond instilling a sense of charitable good will in Scottish students, to ensure that students have the desire and opportunity to take action for justice. I would have loved to talk about fair trade, but I do not have time. I welcome the report and look forward to hearing the minister's response.

The debate provides members with the opportunity to debate the Government's programme for the coming year and also to reflect on the Government's achievements thus far, a few of which I will touch on. Our Government, in conjunction with our local authorities, has put in place a council tax freeze. The council tax increased by some 60 per cent over the past decade and in the current climate of increased living costs it was surely a relief to hard-pressed Scottish families that their council tax bill did not increase this year. The second achievement is the reintroduction of free university education. The abolition of the graduate endowment was the fulfilment of a long-standing SNP position in favour of free education; a campaign that I have long supported. It is right that a society that benefits from an educated population should provide such support. Last year we welcomed the Government reprieve for Monklands and Ayr accident and emergency departments. Many of the people whom I represent in the Central Scotland constituency rely on the A and E department at Monklands and had serious concerns about the prospects for local health care should Monklands A and E be closed. Those concerns were eased when the Government decided to save the department. The last achievement that I will highlight is the universal free school meals pilot for primary 1 to P3 pupils in five local authority areas.

I am sure that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning can enlighten the member better than I can. I will shortly return to the point.  In its programme for 2008-09, it is clear that the Government is seeking to build on its achievements thus far. As welcome as the council tax freeze is, that unfair, regressive and obscure form of taxation remains in place. The next logical step is its abolition. I am glad that all three candidates for the Labour Party leadership now support that move. Having frozen the council tax, the next logical step is to introduce a fairer replacement—the local income tax. Although the abolition of the graduate endowment was a monumental step in the right direction, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning said at the time that it was a down payment on efforts to increase support for Scotland's students. I welcome the commitment in the Government's programme to consult and develop further student support measures on top of the reintroduction of free education. Having saved Monklands and Ayr A and E departments, surely it was right for the Government to remove the unnecessary and unfair levy on staff and patients that car parking charges at national health service hospitals represented. Earlier, I mentioned the Government's free school meals pilot, on which Johann Lamont intervened. This is another area where the Government is building on its work thus far. I welcome the commitment in the programme to extend entitlement for free school meals to disadvantaged pupils. I also welcome the commitment to provide free, nutritious meals to all P1 to P3 pupils if the evaluation shows that the pilot was a success. I hope that the minister who closes for the Government will tell the chamber when the results of the evaluation will be published and what the prospects are for further expansion of the entitlement to free school meals. It is clear that in its 2008-09 programme the Scottish Government is seeking to build on the work of 2007-08. Both the First Minister and the Deputy First Minister have made clear the nature of the Government's social democratic contract with the Scottish people. Over the recess, I had the very great pleasure of visiting Sweden. This morning, Jeremy Purvis suggested that the SNP had somehow fallen out of love with the Nordic model. I say to him and all other members that I am very much enamoured with the country. In Sweden, I saw a society that is visibly healthier, wealthier and more equitable than ours. It is the embodiment of social democracy in action.

No, I do not. We can learn many things from Sweden, including some things that we should not do. I thank John Park for his kind intervention. Unlike Scotland, Sweden is an independent country. Like Sweden, Scotland needs to be independent to fulfil its potential as a vibrant social democracy. In his statement this morning, the First Minister correctly identified the limitations on our devolved Government in meeting the challenges that face our society, especially in current economic circumstances. We need independence to meet those challenges. However, under this Government there is a palpable sense of optimism among Scotland's people. Work has been undertaken to renew our social democracy. I congratulate the Scottish Government on its programme, which seeks to continue that agenda.

By now, observant members will have noticed that motions have been laid before the Parliament that would mean changes to the membership of various committees. One such change would be my move from the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee to the European and External Relations Committee. I do not want to seem presumptuous by saying that members will support those motions at decision time, but I would like to place on record my thanks to the members and clerks of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee for the—by and large—constructive way in which we have worked together over the past year. In the spirit of harmony, I even extend my thanks to Mike Rumbles, whose single-minded approach to issues has always been interesting. Above all, I congratulate Roseanna Cunningham on the way in which she guided the committee through the flooding and flood management inquiry, on which we worked together in a constructive manner—again, by and large. Our planet's changing climate may make the possibility of flooding more likely for many of our citizens. When it gave evidence in our inquiry, the Met Office talked about the likelihood of more intense rainfall in summer months in future years and the increased risk of flash flooding as a consequence. That is precisely what occurred in England last summer. We have all witnessed on our television screens the devastating impact on individuals and families affected by floods such as those in England last year and others around the world. Some of us may even have witnessed at first hand the more severe floods that have hit parts of Scotland. During its inquiry, the committee visited Elgin and heard from local businesspeople and residents there about the devastating effects of the flooding that has hit that town on more than one occasion. In the most damaging floods, homes, businesses, treasured possessions and—in the worst instances—lives are lost. Most people probably do not believe that they will be affected by a flood, but the figures indicate that a significant number of people are at risk. I represent the Central Scotland region. Nearly 12,500 properties are at risk of flooding in the Falkirk local authority area alone. That is nearly a fifth of all properties in Falkirk. Committee members visited the east end of Glasgow. Those who visit that area will be hard  pressed to identify the rivers and watercourses there, but they do exist, in culvert—that is, they are underground and out of sight. However, because they are out of sight, they should not be out of mind. When heavy rain comes—as it does from time to time in Glasgow—there is a danger that those underground and unseen watercourses will spill out on to the streets and cause them to flood, as has happened in the past. That is the problem of pluvial flooding that Roseanna Cunningham mentioned. That such flooding can happen in an area in which it seems to the naked eye that there would never be a problem indicates the often unknown danger of flooding risk. What I have said illustrates why the committee was right to prioritise its flooding inquiry. The Scottish Government has also been collecting evidence on flooding through a consultation process and town hall meetings. The committee's report, of course, is something of a warm-up act for the Government's forthcoming flooding bill. I have every confidence that the Government will take into account the committee's conclusions and recommendations when it frames that bill—indeed, there has been evidence today that it will do so. The Government should be congratulated on waiting for the findings of the inquiry before initiating legislation. The evidence that the committee gathered shows strong support for a more co-ordinated approach to flood risk management in Scotland and for the appropriate use of resources to support that. Two issues in the report are particularly worth commenting on, the first of which is funding to tackle flooding. It is worth reminding colleagues that the removal of ring fencing in local government budgets does not mean the removal of funding for flood prevention. Indeed, the Scottish Government has budgeted for a 41 per cent increase in funding to local government for flood prevention over the next three years. The Government's approach means that local government now has responsibility for allocating appropriate resources. The committee's report is clear about the effects of increased flood risk and precipitation, and it is in local authorities' self-interest to ensure that there is adequate provision for flood management in years to come. Paragraph 147 of the report states: "In any one spending review period, it is unlikely that Scottish Government funding will be sufficient to cover all the spending needs identified in catchment flood management plans. Therefore prioritisation will be needed to reflect the 25 year national flooding strategy." In other words, the issue goes beyond the lifetime of one Government of a particular party. It is right that we should adopt a long-term approach. The second issue that I want to address is the competent authority for flood management.  Although there was general agreement among witnesses on the need for such an authority, there was not unanimity on whether that authority should be SEPA. As has been demonstrated more than adequately by Mike Rumbles—who should perhaps be rechristened Mike Grumbles after his performance today—the committee was not unanimous on the issue either. However, it was equally clear from our evidence that no suggestion for another body was forthcoming and that, as Roseanna Cunningham said, there was little sense in reinventing the wheel. For that reason, the right approach is to entrust SEPA with the authority for flood management. The committee's report represents an extremely useful contribution to the debate on the future of flood management in Scotland. I have no doubt that the Government will find it helpful when it introduces its flooding bill. I wish my soon-to-be-erstwhile colleagues on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee all the best as they embark on scrutiny of the legislation and look forward to communities throughout Scotland benefiting from a sensible precautionary approach to flood management for many years to come.

I begin by thanking Bill Butler for securing tonight's debate and apologise to members for the fact that I may be unable to stay for the entire debate due to a prior commitment. The national health service is one of our society's best creations. Before its existence, it was all too common for the sick and ill among our poorest citizens to go without treatment, such was the prohibitive cost of seeking medical assistance. As Bill Butler has spelled out, there was a degree of free health care provision, but a system that relied on the philanthropy of individuals and private organisations was never going to serve the people well. That is why it is right to praise the founding fathers of the NHS. It is correct to confer praise on Nye Bevan as a founding father, but we must also pay tribute to the generation of citizens who ensured the birth of the institution. The individuals who brought us through the bad years of the second world war and ensured the creation of a burgeoning welfare state, including free health care, are true heroes. That generation—the generation of my grandparents—ensured that all subsequent generations would not have to scrimp and save just to access the most basic health care, as they had to do. I am delighted that Bill Butler has brought forward the issue for debate. I agree with the part of his motion that states that we should remind people "of the unacceptable state of healthcare available to the vast majority of the population" prior to the creation of the NHS in 1948. However, just as we celebrate the existence of our system of free medical care, we should take stock of the fact that millions of people across the globe lack the basic protection that we take for granted at home. The United Nations declaration of human rights states clearly that everyone "has the right to medical care and ... to security in the event of ... sickness". That noble ideal is the same age as our own NHS, with the declaration having been signed in the same year as the NHS was created. However, for so many people across the world, the ideal  remains a hopeless aspiration—and not just in the developing world. As a percentage of gross domestic product, the United States of America spends around twice as much on health care as the UK does. Despite that, some 50 million Americans are without any form of health insurance, leaving them entirely vulnerable in times of illness. Indeed, the Institute of Medicine estimates that some 18,000 Americans die each year as a result of being uninsured. That is a damning indictment of the system of private health insurance used by the wealthiest nation on the planet. As much as tonight's debate is about celebrating 60 years of the NHS, we should always remain vigilant against any suggestion that we should somehow turn back the clock and move towards a model of private insurance. We should also note that since 1999 health policy has been devolved to the Scottish Parliament, which will result in distinctive Scottish health care policies. In many ways, that reinforces the fact that the NHS in Scotland has always been an individual entity in the United Kingdom context, having been formed by separate legislation from that which created the NHS in England and Wales. We should embrace the fact that distinctive Scottish policies will be brought forward to suit Scottish circumstances and strengthen our Scottish NHS. In 1951, Aneurin Bevan resigned his post as a Government minister, such was his upset at the introduction of prescription charges. In the 21 st century, the Scottish Government of the Scottish National Party is following the positive example of the Welsh Assembly Government in reintroducing free prescriptions. That reintroduction is a vital reinforcement of the founding compact with the people at the creation of the NHS that health care should be free at the point of access. The NHS in Scotland is changing with the times. Bill Butler has campaigned hard for direct elections to health boards. I am sure that he joins me in welcoming the news that we heard this week that the Scottish Government intends to ensure an elected element of NHS boards. That policy signifies just one way in which our 60-year-old NHS is adapting to ensure its fitness not only for the next 60 years but beyond.

To ask the First Minister what discussions Scottish ministers have had with Her Majesty's Government regarding the escalating cost of fuel. (S3F-835)

Does the First Minister agree that there is a bittersweet irony in the fact that Scottish families are struggling to pay utility bills and fill petrol tanks while Scotland cannot reap the benefits of increasing oil and gas revenues as long as control of those revenues remains with the UK Treasury? Will the First Minister outline what steps the Government is taking to remedy the situation and ensure that Scotland does not miss out on the reported benefits of the £4 billion tax windfall that increased oil and gas revenues are set to deliver for Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling?

To ask the Scottish Government what advice and support it is providing to the financial services sector in Scotland, in light of global economic circumstances. (S3O-3498)

I thank the minister for that comprehensive answer. The minister is aware of the setback that the financial services sector in Cumbernauld suffered, with Barclaycard's  announcement about the future of the Goldfish contact centre in the town. Can the minister offer any update as to the reports that potential buyers for the site have been in discussion with Scottish Enterprise? Can the minister assure us that any Government moneys that are put towards securing a new operator for the site will, as far as possible, come with a long-term commitment to the Cumbernauld area?

To ask the Scottish Government how many council houses have been built by North Lanarkshire Council since 1996. (S3O-3226)

Will the minister join me in welcoming North Lanarkshire Council's announcement that it is investigating the possibility of building 150 new council houses? Does he agree that that is a result of the Government's policy of restricting the right to buy on any new social housing? What further benefits for a new generation of council housing does he foresee as a result of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and  Wellbeing's recent announcement of additional funding to assist local authorities in building new council homes?

Will the member give way?

Last week, I welcomed the opportunity that the Conservatives' motion afforded us to debate housing. I welcome the fact that we have another opportunity to debate housing this morning. Last week, I had to temper my welcome by highlighting that I could find little in the Tory motion with which I could agree. Although I can agree with more of today's Labour motion, I still find myself in disagreement with much of it. Stewart Maxwell stated where his opposition to the wording of the motion lies. My opposition, too, relates principally to the part of it that attempts to spin the responses to the Government's "Firm Foundations" document as negative. On the contrary, as the minister set out, it received a positive response. The 387 responses, which came from local authorities, tenants groups, housing associations and other organisations and individuals, were independently assessed and that  independent assessment indicated that, far from "Firm Foundations" receiving a negative response, there was strong support for the Government's proposals. Support was strongest in relation to an issue that the Labour Party has not dared to mention, either in its amendment last week or in today's motion—the right to buy. Bill Aitken suggested that the right to buy is not for debate today, but I beg to differ—consideration of the right to buy is fundamental to determining how we move forward with our housing policy.

The policy is easy to understand: I would have thought that even Johann Lamont could understand it. The policy will eradicate the right to buy for all new-build social housing, which will remove the disincentive for local authorities to build new council homes. Already, proposals have been made to build far more council houses than have been built over the past few years. At least the Tories had the guts to nail their colours to the mast in last week's motion—although they seem more silent on the matter this week. I totally disagree with their position on the Government's proposals on the right to buy, but at least I know where they stand. What is Labour's position on the right to buy? Does it support the continuation of a Thatcher-inspired policy that has led to a chronic shortage of council housing or does it support the SNP Government's proposal to restrict it—which, incidentally, received wide support from respondees to the consultation on "Firm Foundations"? As Stewart Maxwell mentioned, 94 per cent of those who responded to the Government's consultation support that proposal. We need to know what Labour's stance is on the proposal. When it was first mooted, Wendy Alexander seemed to support it but, as recent days have shown, she is not beyond making the odd U-turn now and then. Perhaps we will be enlightened about Labour's position in the course of the debate, but I will not hold my breath. I turn to the other issue to which the motion refers—housing stock transfer and, in particular, second-stage transfer in Glasgow. I hope that Labour members have the good grace to acknowledge that Stewart Maxwell's amendment offers the Government's support for the suggestion that the Mazars report should be "subject to open, transparent and independent scrutiny."  That is what the Labour Party calls for in its motion, and the minister's amendment agrees to precisely that. There should be no suggestion that this Government is afraid of "open, transparent and independent scrutiny." However, Labour members might yet live to regret the call that they have made. After all, their handling of the Glasgow housing stock transfer, and second-stage transfer in particular, was a complete mess. Mazars has already found serious flaws in the process that worked against the interests of tenants in Glasgow. The SNP Administration is having to iron out those flaws and clean up that mess. That brings me to the wider issue of stock transfer in general and the Tory amendment. It seems that the Conservatives are staying true to the position that they adopted last week. They seem to have bought Gordon Brown's stock transfer bribe hook, line and sinker. Last week, the Conservatives told us that we should meekly accept the rules on Scotland's housing debt as they stand, whereby the Treasury will service that debt only if it goes hand in hand with housing stock transfer. The Conservatives told us that those rules were the only game in town. The Tories' acquiescence with the rules of the game as set by Gordon Brown hardly counts as standing up for Scotland's council tenants. Why must we accept those rules? I repeat what I said last week: if the Treasury has the money to take on Scotland's council housing debts, it should do so unconditionally, rather than hold a proverbial gun to the head of Scottish council tenants. We should stand up for that principle. If we do anything less, it will be a sad failure to stick up for Scotland's council tenants. Much remains to be done to address Scotland's housing needs. Too many people languish on homelessness registers. We must ensure that their fundamental human right to shelter and a home to call their own is upheld. We might disagree on how to get there, but I hope and trust that that goal is common to us all. I welcome the Scottish Government's efforts thus far, and I look forward to more progress being made in the coming years.

I am grateful to the Conservatives for securing this debate on housing, although having said that, there is little in the motion with which I agree. The first proposition in the motion pertains to promotion of housing stock transfer by local authorities. I am proud to be a member of a party that does not try to coerce council tenants by way of the bribe that capital debt write-off, in tandem only with stock transfer, represents. If the Treasury is capable of servicing council house debt, why will it do so only under the conditions of stock transfer? Mary Scanlon said that "stock transfer is the only game in town", and David McLetchie said that the present rules are the rules. I say that the rules of the game are wrong.

I wonder whether Johann Lamont is proud to be a member of the party that tries to bribe council house tenants. If the Treasury is able to service the housing debt, it should do so. It is clear that housing stock transfer is little more than an attempt to hammer nails into the coffin of council housing in Scotland. Council tenants in various local authority areas have stood up against such moves—that is to be applauded. They have doubtless been partly inspired to do so as a result of having witnessed the shambolic handling of the housing stock transfer in Glasgow under the previous Administration. The second proposition in the Tory motion is "that the role of social landlords is best undertaken by housing associations and other not-for-profit, co-operative bodies". That is a seemingly innocuous proposition, but it masks what the Tories really mean, which is that there should be no role for local authorities. If stock transfer was meant to be a nail in the coffin of council housing, the Tory-inspired right to buy was designed to be the first blow struck against it. I will qualify what I have said. I accept that many families have benefited by buying their council homes—indeed, many people in my family have done so. Equally, however, others—such as my step-father's father—have on principle refused to buy their council homes because they recognise the value of local authority housing remaining  available for future generations. Individuals have benefited from the right to buy, but we must also recognise the gross failures of the policy. Many children and grandchildren of people who have bought their council homes are now struggling to secure their own roofs over their heads. That is why Wendy Alexander's talk of families aspiring to own a second home is misplaced. Thousands of people still aspire merely to renting their first home, never mind to owning a place in the sun. In 2006-07, there were almost 60,000 homelessness applications in Scotland. Those are the circumstances in which we find ourselves. To respond to the demand for homes, we need a mix of housing tenure, but above all we need a new generation of council housing. The policy that the Government is pursuing of restricting the right to buy in respect of new council homes is a huge incentive for local authorities to build such homes. We are already seeing plans to construct more council homes than have been built for many years. That is another sign of progress in Scotland under an SNP Government.

The cabinet secretary will know that employment at the Grangemouth site contributes significantly to the central Scotland economy. Will he confirm that the Government is committed to the Grangemouth area's continued success and that it will support continued talks between the two sides to reach a resolution that ensures that workers are not disadvantaged?

To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Government is having with management and unions at the Grangemouth oil refinery. (S3F-703)

I thank the First Minister for his answers to my question and to those that have been asked before. I also thank him for the efforts of the Scottish Government in recent days to bring the parties in the dispute together and to allay the concerns of the people of Scotland. The First Minister has confirmed that the constructive offer of the services of Stewart Ritchie, the president of the Faculty of Actuaries, remains on the table. How will the Government encourage the management and unions at Grangemouth to take up that offer?

In the recent parliamentary recess, we learned that change is apparently what the Labour Party does. Nothing signifies the Labour Party's change as a force for social justice to its modern form more than its desire to defend the Tory-introduced council tax. I will dwell briefly on the council tax that Labour wishes to defend, even if it cannot quite bring itself to mention it by name in the motion. That unfair tax hits people on low incomes the hardest, as it bears no relation to their ability to pay. We have heard much wailing and gnashing of teeth about vulnerable groups from the Labour members, but their continued support for the council tax betrays their shallow position. The council tax rose by 60 per cent under Labour's leadership during its time in government, and the most vulnerable and poorest people were the hardest hit. The motion asks us to consider the merits of a local income tax, but the Parliament has already done so, on 21 June last year. Contrary to Patrick Harvie's assertion that there is not majority support in the Parliament for a local income tax, we agreed at that time that a local income tax that is based on the ability to pay is a fairer system of local taxation than the discredited and unfair council tax.

Members can, of course, choose to abstain from any vote. On that day, we secured a majority, which I take to be our agreeing on a starting point, at least.  We know that, out in the country, the people of Scotland are considering the merits of a local income tax. The survey for the University of Strathclyde that my colleague Joe FitzPatrick mentioned showed that 88 per cent of people in Scotland believe that local services should be funded through a tax that is based on income rather than one that is based on property values. The reason is simple—people will be better off. The tax will be a particular help and relief to Scotland's poorest and most vulnerable households and it will make Scotland a fairer place in which to live. We hear an alternative view from the Labour Party, but it is hard to take Labour seriously when it so recently increased the tax burden on hundreds of thousands of low-income citizens in Scotland. Gordon Brown should be ashamed of himself. The perverse tax hike for our poorest citizens—the very vulnerable groups that Labour members go on about—stands in stark contrast to the SNP Government's intention to make local taxation fairer. If the Parliament unites around the proposal and a local income tax is introduced, it will be the single biggest social democratic, progressive change that can be made in Scotland under the powers that are available to us under the devolution settlement. Perhaps that is what the Labour Party fears the most about a local income tax—it represents the radical, progressive social change for which people thought they were voting in 1997, only to be sorely disappointed.

No, I am afraid I will not. The SNP seeks to maximise the Parliament's powers because we believe that that is the way in which to improve people's lives throughout Scotland. We can radically change them for the better. No form of taxation will ever be universally approved of, but we can make tax fairer. To me, doing so necessarily means having taxes that bear some relation to people's ability to pay. That means a local income tax and not the unfair council tax.

The cabinet secretary will be aware that I have written to the chief constable of Strathclyde Police in respect of the law officers passing on a dossier of evidence on allegations pertaining to extraordinary rendition. Last Friday, I met with Strathclyde Police to discuss those matters. Without prejudicing any forthcoming investigation, will the cabinet secretary undertake to ensure that extraordinary rendition is on the agenda for his next meeting with Stephen House?

I have a straightforward question for the cabinet secretary. In light of the situation at Kelvin valley described by Cathie Craigie, would he be willing to take on board further representations for additional funding for the Kelvin valley area?

I echo the tribute that the cabinet secretary has paid to the victim in this case. The cabinet secretary mentioned that in future there will be a presumption against returning to the open estate any prisoner who has previously absconded. What further action may be taken to build on the reduction in recent years in the number of prisoners absconding from the open estate and further to reduce absconding from all prisons? How does he expect that the McLeish commission will consider the matter?

Members will need to forgive me if my voice crackles a little today. It comes from urging Partick Thistle on to its well-deserved draw at Ibrox last night. That is nothing to do with the debate, but it is well worth mentioning. I am sure that Karen Gillon, especially, will agree. The Central Scotland region, which I represent, is not known for its rugged coastline or the views of the ocean that are afforded by its islands and peninsulas, although I heartily recommend to all members a visit to Broadwood loch in Cumbernauld. I leave the more poetic descriptions of our maritime heritage and coastal environments to my colleagues who have the privilege of representing such areas in the Parliament. However, being a member for a land-locked region does not mean that I have no interest in Scotland's marine environment, nor is it the case that the careful management of our maritime resources does not concern my constituents. The motion talks of our "stewardship of the seas", and that responsibility is shared by us all, no matter where in the country we are from. In last week's debate about national parks, I spoke of the importance of preserving our natural environments for the benefit of future generations. That is clearly as true of our marine environment as it is of our environments on land, and our decisions in the Parliament today will leave a legacy for all those who depend on the seas in years to come. I was interested to hear members touch on the idea of a marine national park. I agree that the concept needs continued and careful consideration.  A well-managed marine environment benefits not only coastal communities and those who work at sea, but others as well. The ripples of successful maritime policy can be felt well inland and around the world—from the manufacturing company that supplies renewable energy technology to the seafood restaurant in a city centre; and from tourists building a coastal stop into their itinerary to parents on a school run filling up the car with petrol from the North Sea. The Scottish coastal forum estimated that, in 2000, the annual income from marine activities in the area between 1km offshore and 1km inland was £4.5 billion. Scotland's oil provides at least £23 billion annually to the UK economy. It is worth dwelling for a moment on the significance of the North Sea oil resource. Scotland's oil was described in 1975 as being the "future of Britain" by the then Secretary of State for Energy, one Anthony Wedgwood Benn, who was being fêted by some MSPs yesterday. Scotland's oil now regularly comes in at more than $100 a barrel, despite predictions in 1999 by the late Donald Dewar that the price would remain at $10 to $12 for the foreseeable future. We now know that Professor Gavin McCrone, in his secret report to the UK Government in 1974, argued that an independent Scotland with control of its own oil resource would produce a "chronic surplus to a quite embarrassing degree". Of course, the Government of the day, including Tony Benn, suppressed that report and argued the contrary—that the oil revenue was insignificant for Scotland's future. However, over the past 30 years, some $200 billion-worth of oil has been extracted from the North Sea, yet Scotland—and indeed the whole of the UK—is yet to match the prosperity and quality of life of our Scandinavian neighbours, who have managed their maritime and natural resources so effectively. The debate on Scotland's oil will continue, no doubt, as part of the national conversation on Scotland's constitutional future, so I will leave my contribution on the subject at that—for now. That leads me to the wider substantive issue of the debate: the appropriate place for decisions about and implementation of maritime policy in Scotland. I welcome the Government's commitment to engagement with the communities and interests that depend on the seas, and its determination to ensure that the policy framework for managing the marine environment is fit for purpose in the 21 st century. The Scotland Act 1998 bequeathed to the Scottish Government and its predecessors a complex and conflicting range of jurisdictions and responsibilities over the marine environment. As  was mentioned earlier, Scotland is defined in the 1998 act as the land and territorial waters to a distance of 12 nautical miles, but Scottish ministers have responsibility for regulating fisheries and renewable energy beyond those limits to 200 miles. Even within the 12-mile limit, activities including shipping and navigation and issues such as safety at sea are reserved to the UK Government. I fully support the Scottish Government's call for powers over maritime policy to be fully devolved—along, of course, with all the matters that are reserved in schedule 5 to the 1998 act. Until that day comes, however, I am happy to continue to support the Government's initiatives to make the most of the powers that it has to ensure the best possible approach to marine policy. The impact of climate change brings a particular urgency to the debate. The coastal environment will change, and sea levels are predicted to rise. As a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, which is undertaking an inquiry into flooding, I have heard that Scotland could be better placed to avoid some of the effects of that phenomenon, but we must still consider the impact that flooding will have on our coastal communities. I am sure that that will form part of the Government's thinking on the flooding bill that it will introduce in due course. Our seas have the potential to contribute so much to life, even in the land-locked parts of Central Scotland, and in a way that meets the Government's ambitious aims for our country. For example, the seas can help us to become greener—Scotland has been left too far behind in marine renewable energy. We can become healthier—careful use of our fish stocks should contribute to improving Scotland's diet. Our country can become richer, smarter and fairer as we invest in new technologies for and new understandings of our marine environment. Today's debate has allowed us to reflect on those matters, and I know that the Scottish Government will consider them as it prepares its forthcoming legislation. I commend the Government motion.

Does Gavin Brown accept that the situation that he describes in Iraq was created by one thing, which was the invasion of Iraq in 2003?

I thank my friend and colleague Aileen Campbell for  securing this debate, which, as she said, is timely. It is important and right that the Parliament should have a chance to discuss what is happening in Iraq today and how we arrived at this position over the past five years. My only concern is that tonight's debate may not be long enough to do those matters justice. Although the debate is timely, I imagine that many are surprised that we are in a situation that makes it necessary. The fact that there has been a US and UK military presence in Iraq for five years and that there is no sign that that presence will end any time soon is testament to the lack of forward planning and thinking through of the consequences by those who took us into conflict during the headlong rush to war in 2003. The consequences of the decision have been severe. According to CNN, there have been 4,279 coalition deaths in Iraq since 2003, and approaching 30,000 American troops have been wounded in action. Those deaths and woundings have scarred a generation of young servicemen and women, mostly of my generation, for no considerable good. Nor must we forget the tens of thousands of violent deaths of innocent Iraqi men, women and children since the invasion in 2003. I offer no more specific number because it is impossible to do so, as no official count of the Iraqi dead is made. That is significant, because it sends out the dangerous message that their dead—the dead men, women and children of Iraq—are worth less than our dead. Estimates of Iraqi casualties vary from the fairly conservative 50,000 to more than 1 million, but what are 900,000 or so dead individuals when no one is really counting? We do well to remind ourselves that many of those who have died in Iraq have died as a result of terrorism that was unleashed in the internecine chaos that followed the invasion. One of the great ironies of the invasion is that its main protagonist, the United States Government, invaded on the dubious basis that Iraq was involved in the promotion of fundamentalist, Islamic-sponsored terrorism. The fact that Osama bin Laden was no friend of the Baathist regime and called Saddam Hussein an infidel was conveniently overlooked by, or unknown to, George Bush. As repressive as the Saddam regime was, terrorism was not a domestic problem in Iraq before the invasion of 2003. The lack of forward planning and the dismantling of the state infrastructure of Iraq following the Pyrrhic victory of the coalition of the willing contributed directly to the unleashing of terrorism on the Iraqi people. I have mentioned that the war on terror formed part of the rationale for going to war, but the basis for the war was formed above all by the idea that Iraq was attempting to build a weapons capacity that could strike at our shores within 45 minutes.  The fact that Iraq has been laid waste to for five years and not one scrap of evidence for the existence of such weapons has turned up gives the lie to the idea that they ever existed. We all now know that the war in Iraq was about regime change and the desire to control that country's resources. I had no desire to support the maintenance of the Saddam regime, which was undeniably a barbaric form of government, but Saddam was equally barbaric when he was an ally of the United States and Britain against Iran; he perpetrated some of his worst crimes against the Iraqi people at that time. Where was the moral outrage from the American and British Governments then? There was none—Saddam Hussein was feted as an ally and Donald Rumsfeld was sent to meet and greet him. The old maxim "my enemy's enemy is my friend" held true in relation to Saddam Hussein—until such time as it did not suit. I agree with the sentiments that Aileen Campbell has expressed in her motion. I hope that the legality of the war will, one day, be tested in the courts and that, when it is, those war criminals who are responsible—including George Bush and Tony Blair—are made to pay for their crimes.

I welcome today's debate. Scotland's two national parks are one of the Parliament's most significant achievements. The legislation that created them could only have been passed under some form of home rule. The Westminster Parliament would never have found the time, let alone had the will,  for such reform. Of course, perhaps an independent Parliament would have allowed us to go further and faster in the establishment of our national parks—I mention that as a mere aside. As David Stewart said, the existence of the national park concept is a tribute to John Muir, a Scot from Dunbar who emigrated to the United States of America. His campaigns led to the protection first of the Yosemite valley and then of other great wildernesses in the US. It is a testament to the Scottish Parliament that the ideas of John Muir in establishing national parks have been enshrined in his country of birth. We have two national parks in comparison with the 12—soon to be 13—parks across England and Wales and the many areas of outstanding natural beauty that have been designated south of the border and which are afforded the same protection. It is perhaps ironic that Scotland, which has some of the oldest, wildest and most impressive landscapes in Europe, has had to wait so long for a protection regime that matches European and global standards. When we appreciate those landscapes, we cannot express our feelings more clearly than with the old maxim that we do no inherit the earth from our ancestors, but borrow it from our children. That is why protecting the land within our national parks is so important. Our landscapes and wildernesses have a value in their own right. Even if nobody ever visited them, our national parks would still be important as our country's lungs, filtering our water and purifying our air. That they act in that manner as well as being visited by so many people hammers home their importance to our country. It is right therefore that we should bestow on them a level of protection and management. Doing so will ensure that short-term gain does not mean long-term overexploitation. As the motion before us correctly states, we should commend the contribution of national parks "to the greener Scotland agenda." However, the contribution of the parks is much wider than that. They make a valuable contribution to the Government's aims for a fairer and healthier Scotland. Our national parks can make Scotland fairer, because land is protected for future generations and is understood as being held for the common good. That is in keeping with the traditional understanding of land use and ownership in Scotland. The elected element of the national park boards is a commendable example of participatory democracy. It is a way of ensuring that the voice of ordinary people is heard at the heart of decision making. I am glad that there seems to be such uniform agreement on the issue across the chamber.  Our national parks can also make Scotland healthier, because of the opportunities that they afford for recreation, especially walking, which is one of the cheapest, easiest and most effective forms of exercise. There also provide a wide range of outdoor pursuits from skiing and snowboarding on the Cairngorms to windsurfing on Loch Lomond, in which I am sure Jackie Baillie affords herself the opportunity to participate at every chance.

I assure members that I do not engage in those activities very regularly. However, for those who do, national park status means that the potentials can be maximised at the same time as the activities' impact on the landscape and environment is carefully managed. Our national parks contribute "to the greener Scotland agenda." because they act as exemplars of the changes that we need to introduce in wider society if we are to tackle the causes and mitigate the effects of climate change. National park authorities should be ambitious in promoting the Government's green targets. They should make their parks as accessible as possible to public transport; they should demand the highest standards of energy efficiency in their buildings; and they should minimise and manage waste. In that context, I welcome the Government's commitment to a strategic review of the operation of and future for our national parks. I hope that some of the points that I have made will be considered in the review. After five years of designation, the time is right to ensure that our national parks serve the purposes for which they were established. Discussions have taken place on the effectiveness of the national park boards. It is right that all aspects of their operation should be considered in the review, but the elected element of those structures is of the utmost importance. In that regard, I welcome the minister's conformation that he shares those principles. Given the questions to the minister on the subject, some members appear to have missed that confirmation. As I said, I welcome it. Five years after establishing the national parks, the time is also right to consider their size. I welcome Mike Russell's announcement that the Cairngorms national park will include highland Perthshire. The people of highland Perthshire should be congratulated, not only on voting for the SNP, which won with 60 per cent of the vote in a recent by-election, but on the campaign that they have run to be included in the Cairngorms national  park. I also pay tribute to John Swinney for the campaign that he has run. I welcome the fact that the Government review will consider other areas that may be included in the existing national parks. I hope that the review will also consider other areas throughout Scotland that may be endowed with national park status. For instance, the regional parks that were established long ago could be considered for promotion to full national park status. I ask the cabinet secretary to consider that possibility in summing up the debate. Scotland's national parks are part of a European and worldwide family of designated and protected landscapes. The European Landscape Convention of 2000, which the United Kingdom finally ratified in 2006, reinforces the global dimension. That means that we have a duty not only to Scotland's future generations, but to people throughout the world who benefit from our national parks as tourists, consumers of produce and suppliers of the technology and tools that are used in the parks. We have a duty to preserve and enhance the natural beauty and resources of our national parks and all Scotland's designated scenic areas. Scotland's national parks are a major achievement of devolution and a major responsibility of the Parliament. I hope that the debate takes us some way towards exercising that responsibility. We must realise that, through the careful and strategic management of our finest resources, we are building a legacy that will outlast us all.

Will the cabinet secretary inform members how health board consultations on proposed changes to A and E and other services that boards provide will be improved in the future, and how the improvements will avoid any sham consultations, such as the one in Lanarkshire that led to the initial proposal to close Monklands A and E?

I thank those members who have supported my motion, enabling it to be debated tonight. I would also like to thank the various transport authorities and rail companies that have met me or written to me before the debate. I also thank TRANSform Scotland for its interest tonight and for preparing a briefing for members. I put on record my thanks to the members who have stayed behind to contribute to the debate. In particular, I look forward to any contribution from my colleague Chris Harvie. I always feel as if I should be taking study notes whenever he speaks. My motion has two purposes. They are clear from the text, but I am happy to be up front and clear about them. This is an opportunity to welcome and discuss the improvements to the central Scotland rail network that are being funded by the Government, but it is also an opportunity to open for discussion the idea of a national rail card for Scotland. The rail network has played a significant role in Scotland's history and it has an even more important role to play in our country's future. Rail travel contributes positively to a range of economic, social and environmental ambitions that the Government and the Parliament have for Scotland. The Government's stated purpose of sustainable economic growth will absolutely depend on our having an efficient and environmentally friendly transport infrastructure for moving people and goods around the country. Above all, a modal shift from private car to public  transport is a necessity if targets in the economic strategy and in our efforts to tackle climate change are to be met. Accessible public transport is also important for improving social interaction, which links to the Government's targets on inequality. Indeed, the motion notes that 32 per cent of Scottish households do not have access to a car. For those people, travel of any kind means dependence on public transport. Those challenges and targets help to explain why the Government's plans for improving rail services across central Scotland are vital. I was recently informed by a Scottish National Party councillor from Cumbernauld that the SNP was campaigning for the electrification of the Glasgow to Edinburgh main line in the 1930s. It appears that the SNP's persistence on the matter will finally pay off. I welcome the Government's ambition to achieve a 35-minute journey time between Edinburgh and Glasgow. The electrification of the route will benefit the population in both cities and in the towns of central Scotland, many of which are in the area that I represent. The eventual electrification of lines to Cumbernauld will also be extremely welcome. Users of those services need and deserve a speedy, reliable service that links to other key routes. That our rail network is largely unelectrified—which is remarkable in the 21 st century—works against any ambition for a speedy, reliable service. I am sure that members agree that Scotland must not be left behind with regard to developments in the United Kingdom and the rest of Europe. Another motion that I recently lodged noted the launch of France's latest, all-new super-high-speed train, at a time when the UK has only just completed a small stretch of high speed 1 from St Pancras. Scotland lags even further behind the network serving much of the rest of the UK. That is why I warmly welcome the Scottish Government's commitments to rail improvements in central Scotland. The Government recognises that that investment is a priority for the people of the region and knows the impact that it will have. Once the infrastructure is in place, the challenge will be to ensure that it is well used. Many of the improvements will benefit and encourage the commuter market, which will help to attain the economic targets that I mentioned. I am keen, however, to find ways to ensure that Scotland's people get the most from investments in central Scotland's rail network. One major disincentive to rail travel is the fares that are charged—both the cost and the structure of the prices. There are savers, super-savers, apex, super-apex, cheap day returns, weekend upgrades—the list of options and alternatives seems to go on and on  and presents a cluttered and confusing landscape. At present, some groups benefit from the simplifying effect of a rail card discount. There is a young person's rail card, which I remember from my recent past, a senior rail card, which other members might be able to comment on, and a rail card for young family groups. However, people who do not fall into those groups are left out and might be put off making a train journey by the cost and by the complicated ticket restrictions. Only three respondents to the previous Scottish Executive's 2006 consultation on the rail strategy believed that the fare structure should not be changed. Research on behalf of the Strategic Rail Authority into a national rail card proposal found that, for seven in 10 potential rail trips—that is, those journeys that a person considers making by rail—the main barrier to choosing rail as the mode of transport was price. That is why the motion suggests that we should consider making a discount rail card more widely available in Scotland. If we make train travel more affordable, more people will be encouraged to take advantage of the rail improvements that the Government is bringing about. In turn, that would help to meet the various goals that a modern, efficient rail network can contribute to. It would be a social leveller and an environmentally friendly way of improving rail travel across the country. Research that was carried out in 2003 and 2004 for Railfuture and the Strategic Rail Authority showed that a number of different combinations of up-front price and percentage discounts could be profitable. It is important to state that that proposal could be profitable for rail companies. Railfuture found that a UK-wide scheme could attract 2.7 million users of such a card and achieve an 11 per cent increase in passenger miles, with industry profits of £50 million. Another possible model, featuring a card that would be priced at £30 and offer a 50 per cent discount, forecast a 25 per cent increase in passenger miles. We need look no further than the south-east of England to see a positive example of a rail card in action. The network rail card that is in use there turns a profit for the rail industry while encouraging greater use of the network that connects with central London. In the course of preparing for the debate, I met various transport operators and rail companies. They indicated a certain amount of interest in the scheme and there was certainly no outright opposition. They all agree that we need to simplify fare structures and encourage more use of the rail network. I have talked about a rail card scheme in the context of possible profitability for the rail operators but, to be clear, I do not believe that that is in itself an argument for introducing such a scheme. The social and environmental purposes  of a railway are the most important factors for us to consider in encouraging greater use of the network. Indeed, the treatment of the railway as a profit-oriented business rather than a national public service has in many ways led to years of underinvestment and decline. That decline is only now beginning to be addressed by the kind of improvements to which the title of the motion refers. I have run out of time, so I conclude by saying that we should aspire to excellence for our rail network. The improvements that the Government is making play a huge part in realising that aspiration to excellence and a national rail card has a huge role to play in that regard.

I welcome the chance to debate the position and significance of commercial forestry in Scotland. Many people throughout the country will not realise the significance of the industry, but the minister and others have set out its importance. Forestry and wood processing provide thousands of jobs and are worth hundreds of millions of pounds to the Scottish economy. The industry currently produces some 6.8 million tonnes of softwood round timber a year, which is forecast to rise to more than 8 million tonnes a year over the coming two decades. We are currently pretty good at sourcing material from indigenous sources: it is important that we maintain that, given the forecast rise in production. That is one of the reasons why I welcome the Government's commitment to increasing forest and woodland cover within 25 years. There are other reasons to welcome that commitment, to which I will return. As the industry grows and production increases, it is vital that we ensure that more raw materials for the forestry industry are secured by way of greater forest cover. We should also note that more than 70 per cent of the softwood round timber that is sourced in Scotland is processed in Scotland. Although I welcome the fact that the remainder finds ready markets elsewhere, we should take pride in the large degree of self-sufficiency that exists in the Scottish industry. The fact that the vast majority of timber that is sourced in Scotland is processed in Scotland is good news for the Scottish economy and jobs. The fact that most of the timber stays within our borders to be processed here ensures environmental effectiveness by reducing transport emissions. The environmental angle is important. Our forests and woodlands are important tools in mitigating the effects of climate change. Crucially, the industry itself recognises the importance of that. The Confederation of Forest Industries estimates that tree planting is now offsetting around 8 per cent of Scotland's carbon emissions. I accept that carbon-emissions offset is not in itself going to win the climate change battle, but it has an important part to play, so the Scottish Government's commitment to increasing forest cover within 20 years or so is important in that regard. The more trees that are planted, the greater will be the carbon-emissions offset. Increasing forest cover is good news not just for the industry but for the environment. Increased forest cover is good for the physical environment and combating climate change, but it is also good for our aesthetic environment. Scottish Environment LINK has recently contacted members to set out the importance of Scotland's  landscapes. It states that the value of good landscapes to local economies is shown in tourism surveys, which consistently reveal that scenery and landscape are a key reason for visiting Scotland. Ensuring better forest cover can go some way towards ensuring more attractive landscapes. According to the Confederation of Forest Industries, Scotland has 17 per cent forest cover, which compares favourably with the UK figure of 11 per cent, but lags significantly behind the EU25 average of 36 per cent. At one stage, Scotland was almost entirely covered by forest. I am not suggesting that we will be able to roll back thousands of years of human activity, but the Government's important commitment to increasing forest cover will help to create more attractive landscapes in our country and therefore to assist tourism, which is an important part of the national economy in which, of course, forestry also plays a part. I have not yet mentioned forestry's importance to biodiversity. Only two weeks ago in the debate on the biodiversity strategy, Parliament broadly agreed on the need to maintain Scotland's biodiversity. I think that, this morning, we broadly agree that our forests—and our forestry industry—can also play a role in that respect. As a result, I welcome the Labour amendment. My only hope is that, if and when the amendment is successful, Labour members will, unlike yesterday, not go into hiding when it comes to the vote on the substantive motion.

There you go. I congratulate the Government on securing this debate. Our forestry industry is pretty strong at the moment, but there is scope for growth. After all, the UK currently imports 90 per cent of its paper and much wood-based produce, and the value and cost of those imports amounts to £6 billion. There is no reason why, with continued growth, the Scottish industry cannot replace some of those imports and provide the necessary materials to make many of those products. I am sure that commercial forestry will continue to flourish in Scotland and that the Government's policy of increasing forest cover, which will bring us closer to the European Union average, will play a huge role. I commend the motion to Parliament.

The Labour motion suggests that ministers should review the national concessionary travel scheme with a view to extending eligibility to people who are in receipt of the lower rate of disability living allowance, and that they should do so as a matter of urgency. Like Shirley-Anne Somerville, I find it amazing that the issue is a matter of urgency for Labour only now that it is in opposition—despite what Jackie Baillie said. After all, it was when the national scheme was introduced by the Labour Party, when it was in a coalition Government with the Liberal Democrats, that many disabled people  lost the entitlement to concessionary fares that they had enjoyed under local authority-run schemes. When those schemes were replaced by the national scheme, people on the low rate of mobility disability living allowance were excluded. That happened under a Labour Government, but it is only now that Labour is in opposition that it considers the issue to be a matter of urgency. Jackie Baillie suggests that the issue is not a budget matter, but surely it is, given that it seems to be about money. Where were the Labour amendments to the budget that sought to provide additional funds for the concessionary fares budget? It is only now that we are in the middle of the budget process that Labour's concern about additional revenue for this area has emerged. Some people who are less charitable than I am might suggest that that is more an exercise in grandstanding than an expression of genuine concern. No regard seems to have been paid to the fact that the SNP Government has already moved funds from the underutilised younger persons scheme to fund parts of the concessionary fares scheme that have a high uptake. Is that not to be welcomed? Does the Labour Party prefer baseline figures that bear no relation to need or demand on the ground? Would it prefer moneys to be transferred to end-year flexibility, instead of being utilised to help many of the people for whom its motion expresses concern? That is to say nothing of the increased funding that the SNP Government will provide in the coming year for the smart card programme to allow the delivery of improved ticketing machinery, which will enable efficiency savings to be made in future as a result of improved validation of bus operator claims. Those areas of investment are welcome and show that the SNP Government wants to improve disabled people's access to public transport. It is right that it demonstrates such concern. Inclusion Scotland suggests that a "lack of accessible and affordable transport is a major barrier preventing disabled people living independent lives with access to all the opportunities most non-disabled people take for granted." Help the Aged says that a lack of access to public transport for older people can lead to "isolation, social exclusion and a lower quality of life."

It is clear that much has been achieved. Let us remember that a million Scots—a fifth of our population—qualify for free travel. I congratulate the previous Executive on the role that it played in that achievement.  However, much remains to be done. The minister mentioned that the SNP Government is to review the national concessionary scheme in due course, when proper consideration can be given to including those people who became disqualified when the national scheme was first introduced. I welcome Stewart Stevenson's announcement that additional support will be provided to bus operators. Those measures, combined with the transfer of moneys to deal with the areas of highest demand for concessionary fares and the investment in our rail and roads infrastructure, show that transport is safe in the hands of the SNP Government. As I have mentioned rail, it would be remiss of me not to mention that this week members received the final case for crossrail from Strathclyde partnership for transport. I look forward to ministers making a positive response to that case, particularly the option that includes the provision of services from Croy to Barrhead. However, that is for another—

I thank the Presiding Officer for accepting the motion without notice to extend the debate so that more members could participate in the debate. I am sure that I am not alone in being grateful for that. Like others, I congratulate George Foulkes on tonight's motion. There is much on which George Foulkes and I will disagree, but on this issue we find ourselves agreeing. I feel strongly about this issue. I have a friend who suffers from cystic fibrosis. He is presently in pretty good health and in pretty good shape, but it is quite conceivable that, some day, he will need a lung transplant. At my friend's prompting, I was happy to host an event in Parliament last year on behalf of the live life then give life campaign. Many members attended that event, and some of them are here tonight. Just as we have heard moving testimony from members in this debate, people at the event were able to hear moving testimony from a young woman whose life has been absolutely transformed by a lung transplant. Perhaps even more moving was what we heard from a young woman who was desperately ill and needed a lung transplant. No one at the event could have failed to have the need for change to our organ donation system impressed upon them. I hope that we are all agreed on at least that much. I appreciate that this is an emotive subject. In the debate, and in the run-up to it, I heard the views of those opposed to a system of presumed consent, including members of my party. As sincerely held as those views are, none sway my opinion that the time is right to move to a system of presumed consent. Mary Scanlon and Mike Rumbles suggested that we cannot presume consent. I understand where they are coming from and I accept that, in the short term, presumed consent offers some problems, primarily in the confusion that would arise in the move from the  present system to the new one. However, in the long term, a system of presumed consent will be accepted and readily understood. Christine Grahame and Malcolm Chisholm suggested that a system should be adopted that allows for people to opt in and opt out. That is an interesting idea, but I am not sure that it would work. Members of a certain vintage, including George Foulkes, will recall the 1979 devolution referendum, in which those who did not vote effectively voted no. The statistics show that even though the vast majority of people are happy to donate their organs, they never add their name to the register. In an opt-in and opt-out system, those who do neither effectively opt out. That would be little or no improvement on the current situation. In the run-up to the debate, I heard concerns expressed that doctors would allow certain patients to die in order to use their organs for a patient waiting for transplant. I cannot conceive of a situation in which a doctor would do that; it runs counter to the Hippocratic oath. Why would a doctor, concerned to save the life of one patient, not be concerned to save the life of another? I understand Roseanna Cunningham's point about the incentive to publicise the opt-out. However, it is not beyond our collective wit, as legislators, to devise a system that necessitates such publicity. Indeed, it is the only way in which presumed consent will work with legitimacy. Equally, it is not beyond us to design a system sensitively, taking the interests of the donor family into account. When it is all thrown up in the air, I do not see the strength of the argument against presumed consent. All I see are hundreds of patients slowly dying on the transplant waiting list. We have it in our hands to help save their lives. I hope that when the time comes we will move towards a system of presumed consent and help those people.

Mike Russell said at the beginning of the debate that he was concerned that he might hear a lot of scientific terms and complicated words. I suspect that his comments were directed at colleagues such as Dr Bill Wilson, given his expertise and understanding of those matters, rather than at me, but I give Mike Russell an undertaking that I will keep such references to a bare minimum—for my sake, if not for his. Biodiversity is important, and our Government has certain obligations to meet in respect of it. Those obligations, as set out in the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity and the EU target to halt the loss of biodiversity by 2010, as well as domestic initiatives, are reflected in Scottish policy and legislation. It is important that the Parliament has a chance to scrutinise how well we are doing in ensuring that biodiversity in Scotland is maintained, so I welcome today's debate. It is clear from the minister's opening speech that much has been achieved in the past three years, since the adoption of the Scottish biodiversity strategy. Those involved in that work deserve our thanks. The Scottish biodiversity forum is a clever approach to the maintenance of Scotland's biodiversity, combining as it does the Government and its agencies, representatives of those who work our land and seas, local government and, vitally, the well-established bodies in the third sector that have an interest in biodiversity. Those who invest their efforts in ensuring the maintenance of Scotland's biodiversity are to be congratulated. However, while congratulations on the work thus far undertaken are due, much remains to be done. Members will have received the briefing for the debate from Scottish Environment LINK, which rightly points out that "The loss of wildlife is not just of importance to scientists and enthusiasts. The loss of genetic diversity, species, and damage to habitats and ecosystems affects us all, in many ways we are only beginning to understand".  The first thing that must be done is to build on the good work that the minister has mentioned and ensure the continued rich diversity of our land and waters. I understand that the Scottish biodiversity forum is due to consult on the next three years of the biodiversity strategy. I look forward to seeing what emerges from the consultation, and trust that it will seek to build on what has gone before. The minister set out some of the many challenges that exist for the future. He rightly pointed out that climate change is prime among them. Earlier today, I spoke in Patrick Harvie's members' business debate on the subject. I welcome the Scottish Government's hugely ambitious aim to cut carbon emissions by 80 per cent by midway through the century. I look forward to any marine bill that emerges from the Government. I am interested in how it may play a part in protecting biodiversity. It is clear to me that the task of maintaining biodiversity is taken seriously by our Government, and that, as the minister mentioned, it is building on the work that began under the previous Administration, which also deserves congratulations. I commend the activities that are being undertaken in Scotland to protect biodiversity and I commend the Government motion and the two amendments.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that taxation can be about more than just the economy and that, if it is used properly, it can boost environmental initiatives? He spoke about landfill. Does he believe that control over the landfill tax should be the preserve of the Scottish Government and this Parliament? Does he believe that the unionist parties should consider that issue as part of their tripartite commission that is investigating the devolution of more powers to the Scottish Parliament?

I congratulate Patrick Harvie on bringing the motion to the chamber and facilitating the debate. I was happy to lend my support to the motion. People & Planet has been active since my time at university, although my experience is rather more recent than that of many members in the chamber. That said, one notable exception is Richard Baker, who was the president of the National Union of Students in Scotland when I was the senior vice-president of the University of Glasgow student representative council. Those involved in People & Planet are to be congratulated on their activism. In a day and age when cynicism seems to run rampant, those involved in People & Planet scotch the myth that the young, including students, lack the social concerns of their forebears. I challenge anyone to turn up at an event that it has organised and go on to assert that student activism is dead. The young may identify less with traditional party politics, but the big issues of our time—whether the drive for environmental change or the anti-war movement—continue to attract support. It is important for those of us who went down the traditional party-political route to engage with and support such extra-parliamentary activity. Today's debate is an important part of that process. This Government and previous Administrations have stated their desire to use universities as a driving force for economic development. I have no problem with that—indeed, I support it. However, as much as being drivers for economic growth, our universities must be exemplars when it comes to environmental management. They must make the best use of the resources that are available to them.  Therefore, it is with some disappointment that I note the relatively poor performance of Scottish higher education institutions in the People & Planet green league for environmental performance, which is the league table to which Patrick Harvie referred. The league table is a clever idea: it ranks the performance of universities by traditional university grade. Congratulations are due to the two Scottish universities that achieved a first: the University of Edinburgh and the University of St Andrews. Given the commonplace suggestion that almost all students come away from university with a 2:1—and before any member asks the question, I include myself in that category—it was with some surprise that I noted that no Scottish university achieved that grade. It was also with some disappointment that I noted that my alma mater, the University of Glasgow, achieved only a 2:2, although I take solace from the fact that we finished just ahead of the University of Strathclyde. That should just about see us through. Joking aside, we have to think about why Scotland ranks so badly among United Kingdom universities. Are our sights as a nation lifted high enough? In the past, did our universities not receive the support that they needed? Would it not be better for our university principals to direct some of the thousands that they awarded themselves in the recent pay increase towards ensuring best environmental practice? I look forward to hearing what the cabinet secretary has to say on these matters. Climate change is the great challenge of our time. Nowadays, students may be the ones who rise to meet the challenge. Today, we need to encourage them. I congratulate People & Planet on the positive role that it plays.

To ask the Scottish Government what measures it is taking to promote active and healthy lifestyles among older people. (S3O-1946)

Does the minister agree that older people are a vulnerable group in our society? Of late, we have heard much from certain quarters about a concern for vulnerable groups. Although publicly run leisure facilities are primarily a matter for local government, does he share my concern about the removal of discounted swimming for pensioners by Labour-run North Lanarkshire Council? Does that not undermine the health and well-being of vulnerable older people in North Lanarkshire?

Does the minister agree that decisions by John Prescott and the Labour Government have thus far prevented direct links from Scotland to Europe via the Channel tunnel? Will the Scottish Government continue to ensure that its welcome upgrades to the railway system in Scotland always  take into account the potential for links to the wider European network and not just the UK network?

The Government announced last year that it will set up a Scottish fisheries convention and a Scottish fisheries council. In light of the fisheries talks and the associated agreement, will the minister tell Parliament what those bodies will do and when they will meet?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is monitoring any lessons for Scotland from the Basque Government's political initiative aimed at resolving the Basque conflict. (S3O-1782)

The minister might be aware that the President of the Basque country recently wrote to members of the Scottish Parliament about his initiative to end the conflict in the country. I am sure that the minister wishes the Basque people well in their efforts to forge a peace process. Does she think that such initiatives can help to inform our national conversation on Scotland's constitutional future? Will she ensure that all international representatives whom she meets are aware of the Government's ambitions for the future of our country?

The minister said in his statement that he wants young people in Scotland to be inspired to take part in sport. Given that most young people in Scotland have probably never heard of sportscotland, how does he imagine that the new body that has been announced today might play a role in inspiring young people to participate in sport?

The cabinet secretary may be aware of the Save the Children report "Robbing Peter to Pay Paul", which finds that families who are in poverty have limited access to affordable credit. Of those who are in poverty, 42 per cent report that they are seriously behind with paying bills or meeting credit commitments. "The Government Economic Strategy" seeks to raise the proportion of income that the poorest in our society earn. Will it also seek to ensure that the poorest and most vulnerable in our society can access affordable credit?

Let me begin by praising Margaret Smith for lodging the motion that has facilitated today's debate,  which is on a subject that I consider to be of the utmost importance to our society. The significance of civil liberties and broader concepts of human rights are all too often maligned and downplayed, but I can think of little that is of more importance to the human experience than the rights and freedoms that we all too often take for granted. We should not take those rights and freedoms for granted, because many of them were hard fought for and won by our forebears many years ago. For that reason, I am proud to be the convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on human rights and civil liberties. I am not sure whether that means that I must declare an interest, but I do so nonetheless. It is important that the cross-party group ensures that issues surrounding human rights and civil liberties are kept on the Parliament's agenda, because too many of our basic civil liberties are at risk. I welcome the opportunity for the Parliament to discuss ID cards, the retention of DNA by the authorities and related matters. In that regard, I am in broad agreement with the Liberal Democrat motion. It would be useful for us to consider many of the human rights and civil liberties issues that are not mentioned in the motion, although I note that Margaret Smith referred to some of them in her speech. For example, the attempts by the Government in London to impose lengthy terms of detention on suspects without charge by the police are one of the great challenges to basic civil liberties in our time. I am concerned that the current 28-day period is already too long, so I was delighted when the Government was rebuffed in its outrageous attempt to lengthen that to 90 days. However, attempts are again being made to extend the period of detention without charge. Such a measure will have limited effectiveness and I am concerned that it smacks of the policy of internment that was applied elsewhere in these islands in the past. That policy was counterproductive and failed to achieve its aims. We should learn the lessons of the past and be wary of curtailing one of the most fundamental civil liberties that our citizens enjoy—the right not to be put under lock and key without being charged with an offence. However, that is not what we are discussing today. I am equally alarmed by the advent of the state-led database society that we are rapidly blundering towards. The idea that every citizen in the land might be legally required to carry some form of identity card in what is not a time of national extremity or emergency horrifies me.

No, thank you.  That is what the Government proposes, and that will be the effect of the Identity Cards Act 2006. Much like internment, however, I believe that the measure will be ineffectual. We are regularly told that ID cards are required to stem the great threat that we face from terrorism. I understand that society faces the problem of terrorism, but the notion that we can counter that threat by ensuring that every citizen carries a little card or a bit of paper with their name on it is patently absurd. Hardened terrorists will not be put off by an ID card scheme. They will circumvent it with ease, as they did in Spain when they let off the bombs in Madrid. Spain has an ID card system, but it offered no serious barrier to acts of terror. Nor will an ID card scheme have a useful purpose in tackling identity fraud. However, it will further curtail individuals' liberty to go about their daily business without fear of interference from the state. There is a danger that a culture of fear and intimidation will establish itself at a time when distrust of the police and authorities is already building in certain communities. A national ID database will itself be a security risk, not least if the UK Government accidentally loses the computer disks on which it is held.

The idea of a database of the DNA of those who have committed no crime is also anathema to me. The suggestion that the state should be allowed to hold information on the genetic make-up of people who have committed no crime and done no wrong is outrageous.

I welcome the Liberal Democrats' motion and look forward to supporting it this evening.

The member's party met with others last week as part of a tripartite approach to establishing a commission to review the powers of the Scottish Parliament. Does the member's party support the transfer of legislative competence over ID cards to the Scottish Parliament, or does it believe that the British state should retain the prerogative to impose ID cards on the Scottish people?

Before I speak to the motion, I will deal with the point that Robert Brown made. He suggested that the SNP is somehow trying to hijack the saltire and use it for itself. I find that interesting, because I hold here a postcard with the Scottish saltire on it, emblazoned with the words "It's about freedom." It is produced not by the SNP youth wing—the Young Scots for Independence—but by the Scottish Young Liberal Democrats. It is not only the SNP that lays claim to the saltire. I welcome the Scottish Young Liberal Democrats trying to use it as well. I am delighted that our national Parliament is able to have this debate on the eve of our national day, St Andrew's day. It is surely an opportunity for Parliament to speak with one voice and send out a signal to the country and the world that our national day is of huge importance to us, that we value it and that we want to make the most of it. However, with all the amendments that are before us, it remains to be seen whether we will speak with one voice. I suppose that we will find out at decision time. The debate is important, because Scotland still has work to do to establish St Andrew's day as a national day that is as significant as those of many other countries. National days around the world have different meanings and different historical roots. St Patrick's day on 17 March is a broad celebration of culture that has close ties to the religious significance of the feast, as it usually falls during Lent, which means that those observing Lent can abstain from their Lenten abstinence. However, St Patrick's day now offers huge  commercial and tourism possibilities not only for Ireland itself, but for places wherever parts of the Irish diaspora find themselves, be it Boston, New York or our country. American independence day on 4 July has different origins from St Patrick's day but is just as significant to the American people. It marks the foundation of a nation and the values of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness that its founding declaration boldly set out. I look forward to the day—which is coming soon—when we are able to celebrate our national independence day, too. However, in the meantime, Scotland has yet to establish for itself a national day that has anything like the significance of St Patrick's day, American independence day or many of the other national days around the world. Nobody seems to celebrate devolution day with much fervour, although I like to imagine that, every 12 May—the date on which the Scottish Parliament was reconvened in 1999—wherever he is in the world, Lord George Robertson raises a toast to devolution and the Parliament killing the SNP "stone dead". Perhaps not. We still have to establish a national day that has the same significance as those of many other countries. Burns night unites Scots and other lovers of the bard's works around the world in a celebration of the life, poetry and song of Robert Burns. However, it lacks the potential for the wider exploration and exposition of our culture and society that is found in the national days of other countries. I welcome the opportunity that is provided by the Scottish Government to mark as best we can our national day, St Andrew's day. The wealth of activities that are being undertaken by the Government and others to celebrate St Andrew's day build on what has gone before, and serve to make this year's series of events bigger and better than ever before. We have to build on that and strive for yet more—St Andrew's day has so much unharnessed potential. The debate this morning was about tourism, and the tourist potential of a bona fide national day hardly needs explaining. I have already referred to it, but we need only look at the experience in Ireland: tourists pour into Dublin on St Patrick's day for a glimpse of what is possible. We are moving in the right direction in that regard. The utilisation of St Andrew's day to kick-start a Scottish winter festival is a welcome step. Used properly, that festival can run from St Andrew's day tomorrow, through Christmas and hogmanay to Burns night in January. Taking in those traditional holidays, as well as modern events such as Celtic Connections, provides much-needed coherence and focus, with a continuous celebration of Scottish heritage and culture. St Andrew's day should properly be the  launch pad for that. Such a winter festival will go some way to making it the sort of national day to which we aspire. Noting the context of the debate—Ted Brocklebank mentioned this—it is interesting that Gordon Brown is desperately scrambling around for a date to designate as Britain's national day, although we already have days for each constituent part of the UK, with which people always identify more readily. Gordon Brown would give his eye teeth for a British equivalent to St Andrew's day, St David's day or St George's day, although St Gordon's day does not quite have the same ring to it, I am afraid. Instead of desperately clambering about to create a synthetic British national day, let us get on with the business of establishing St Andrew's day as Scotland's national day. I commend the Government for working towards that aim, with the events that it has set up this year.

The minister will doubtless be aware that this Saturday is world AIDS day. What priority will tackling the HIV/AIDS pandemic that affects parts of the world be given in the international aid budget? What pressure will the Scottish Government bring to bear on G8 countries to ensure that they meet their commitments to fund access to treatment by 2010 for everyone who is infected with HIV or AIDS?

To ask the First Minister what input the Scottish Government will have to the United Kingdom Government's consultation on the future of nuclear power. (S3F-322)

On Monday, the Prime Minister, Gordon Brown, told the Confederation of British Industry that "new nuclear power stations potentially have a role to play in tackling climate change and improving energy security." Does the First Minister agree that what Greenpeace has called the Prime Minister's "obsession" with nuclear power displays an astonishing lack of commitment to renewable energy, which has enormous potential in Scotland? Will he confirm that the Scottish  Government has an on-going commitment to investment in renewables and will he confirm its opposition to a new generation of nuclear power stations? Does he agree that the greenest Scotland is a nuclear-free Scotland and that a greener Scotland is far preferable to a Browner Britain?

The minister will be aware that many of our small businesses are classified as social enterprises. I welcome the £63 million development programme that was announced last week for the third sector, which will support social enterprise. Will Scottish Enterprise be involved in growing small businesses in the social enterprise sector, and the third sector in general, which the Scottish Social Enterprise Coalition estimates is worth £1.25 billion to the Scottish economy?

Unlike Liam McArthur, I shall try not to carp from the sidelines. I promise to make that my last fish-related pun. I welcome this chance for the Parliament to debate the issues surrounding Scotland's fisheries in advance of the latest round of EU negotiations on fishing quotas. The fishing industry is hugely significant to our country and economy, but times have been tough. As has been mentioned, since 1999 more than 1,000 Scottish-based fishing vessels have been decommissioned. The number of people employed in the catching sector has dropped by nearly 36 per cent in the past decade, with employment in the industry dropping from 0.4 to 0.2 per cent of the labour force in the same time. That clearly indicates the difficult time that Scotland's fishing industry has had. Behind those statistics are real people living real lives, and the impact of the decline of our fishing industry on our fishing communities, such as Peterhead, Fraserburgh and other places in the north of Scotland, has been telling. The effect on the morale and spirit of the many people who are no longer able to work in an industry that they thought would sustain them as it had sustained generations before them is devastating. The hope that they could rely on the fishing industry has been swept away from under their feet. The effect on the social fabric of our traditional fishing communities has also been felt. We are all aware of the problems of drug abuse that afflict  the communities in the north-east of Scotland. The problems have been well reported. All too often, they lead to individual human tragedies. That picture is familiar to the many areas of the country that have witnessed or experienced some form of industrial decline. It should be no surprise, then, that the decline of Scotland's fishing industry has had far-reaching consequences. The decline has been a particularly bitter pill to swallow when we consider that while in Scotland our white-fish fleet has been drastically reduced, the fleets in other countries, such as Spain, Ireland and Iceland, have expanded. While our Scottish industry has had to bear the brunt of conservation efforts, others have patently not had to do so to the same extent.

I assure Mr McArthur that I shall turn later to the comments of Bertie Armstrong. We cannot just look back in anger on what has happened to the industry. As cod stocks in the North Sea show that they are recovering and the industry shows that it is beginning to stabilise, now is the time to move our fishing industry forward. Although it has declined relative to its former position, we should take stock of the fact that we are still among the largest sea fishing nations in Europe, with, as has been mentioned, Scottish waters accounting for about a quarter of the EU total. Scottish landings of fish represent more than 60 per cent of the landings into the UK as a whole, and the total value of fish landed by Scottish vessels in 2006 was some £370 million. Although the Scottish fishing industry has declined, it is still in a fairly strong position. It is in a position of greater strength now as we seek to drive it forward following the election of the pro-fisheries SNP Government in May. I return to the comments from the Scottish Fishermen's Federation. We have seen the impact of the SNP Government almost immediately. I am a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, and at our meeting before last we took evidence from Bertie Armstrong of the SFF. He told us that, since the election of an SNP Government, all of a sudden—as if by magic—the UK Government has been prepared to listen to what Scotland's fishing representatives have to say. When I mentioned that in our debate on the Government's EU priorities two weeks ago,  Malcolm Chisholm somehow interpreted it as my vindicating the current set-up and the UK Government. He was wrong: it was a vindication of the election of the SNP Government. By the election of an SNP Government alone, the position of Scotland's fishing industry has been made more secure, but let us imagine how much more secure it could be with Richard Lochhead arguing the case for Scotland's fishing communities directly in the European Union. I do not know whether members are avid readers of The Herald , but in today's edition there is a letter, signed by representatives of the Mallaig and North West Fishermen's Association, that shows why it is a necessity for Richard Lochhead and the Scottish ministers to lead from the front and get right into the heart of the EU.

I am in my last minute. The letter states: "the UK has been conspicuous by its absence in putting forward alternatives" to the policy on discards, "and the UK Fisheries Ministers have voted in favour of every deal to bring about the status quo. The Scottish Government has, by contrast, since May been active in promoting alternatives." Those are not my words, but the words of the Mallaig and North West Fishermen's Association. That is why I support the Government's aim to have Richard Lochhead lead negotiations for the UK in the future, so that he can call for a sensible increase in the quota against the backdrop of a rise in available stocks in the North Sea. It would, of course, be remiss of me not to say that, although I support that effort in a devolved context, I maintain that our position would be stronger as an independent member state of the EU. Our fishing communities, as evidenced by the letter in The Herald today, will be right behind Richard Lochhead in his efforts. I trust that the Parliament will be too.

I will have to curtail what I was going to say. I welcome the fact that the Government has presented the motion to Parliament to facilitate today's debate. I also welcome the publication of "The Government Economic Strategy" last week. I was going to say why I welcome the aims that have been set out for economic growth, but those points have been well made by many other members. Economic growth is hugely important, but it is not the only important target that the Government has set in its strategy. As well as setting targets that will make our country wealthier, the strategy also seeks to make our economy much fairer. In a country with so much potential, it is a disgrace that one in five of our older people lives in poverty, and it is an outrage that one in four children lives in poverty—worse than the level 30 years ago, which was about one in 10. The economic strategy does not hide the fact that income inequality is higher in Scotland than it  is in many other countries of roughly our size, or that it is at the same level today as it was a decade ago when new Labour first came to power. That is why I welcome the Government's commitment, as set out in the economic strategy, to increase overall income and, crucially, to increase by 2017 the proportion of income that people in the bottom three income deciles earn. That is obviously a difficult task. Without all the requisite powers, it will not be easy for any Scottish Government to achieve a fairer economy through redistribution of wealth. Without full control over taxation, benefits and the minimum wage—on which, incidentally, Scotland has the highest non-compliance rate—it is difficult to work toward the fairer economy that our society needs. Implementation of a local income tax that is based on the ability to pay will go some way towards helping, but it will not lessen the need for control over all the levers that manage our economy. That is just one reason why I support independence. We should not underestimate the significance of finally having a Government that is genuinely determined to reduce income differentials, which is why Iain Gray's nonsense about Reaganomics is so fundamentally misplaced. We will take no lectures on the nature of our economic ambitions from a member of a party whose leader invited Mrs T round for tea and who was recently lauded by Norman Tebbit.

No, thank you—my time has been cut. I am glad that the strategy commits us to work toward making Scotland a fair-trade nation, which will extend our commitment to a fairer economy at home to include a fairer economy around the globe. I also welcome the Government's commitment to investment in social enterprise, which is a wholly different way of generating economic activity. Social enterprises can go a long way to making Scotland a wealthier place and, by their nature, a fairer place. The co-operative sector is perhaps one of the best known and longest standing examples of social enterprise. It is clear that "There is no great accumulation of evidence to suggest that co-operatives and employee-owned enterprises are less productive than conventional firms, and substantial evidence that they at least equal, and probably exceed, the productivity of their conventional counterparts." Those are not my words, but the words of a paper that was prepared for the International Labour Organisation in 2005. It is right that the Government supports the social enterprise sector. It is also right for Parliament to support "The Government Economic Strategy", which is  designed to make our economy wealthier and to help us achieve our potential, as we know is possible. It is designed to make our economy stronger and able to compete in an increasingly globalised world. Most important, it is designed to make our economy fairer for the benefit of our most disadvantaged citizens. That is something that we should all welcome.

Unlike Helen Eadie, I shall try to confine my remarks to the Government's EU priorities—rather than rant about the health service. I welcome the chance—

I welcome the chance to debate in this Parliament our country's place and role in Europe. Some members would have us confined to our own kailyard, but I am a member of an outward-looking and progressive party and I think it important that we consider how our Parliament and our country can engage with the rest of the world community—primarily with our fellow European citizens. Despite sharing with Linda Fabiani the perspective of independence in Europe for Scotland, I strongly support her efforts and those of the Scottish Government to represent Scotland's interests in the devolved context. The Scottish Government's long-term key EU political objectives are especially welcome in that regard. The Government has established those objectives clearly, in relation to specific policy areas—fisheries, the EU budget review, agriculture and so on. I would like to focus briefly on an area that has already been discussed at length—fisheries. Members will be aware that negotiations on the common fisheries policy are on-going. I sit on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee and it is my very great pleasure to be involved in considering that policy in some detail. To that end—as Malcolm Chisholm and Mike Rumbles mentioned—the Scottish Fishermen's Federation attended yesterday's committee meeting. However, Malcolm Chisholm and Mike Rumbles did not mention that during the evidence presented by Bertie Armstrong of the SFF, we learnt that, since the SNP came to power, the British Government has suddenly started to listen to the voices of Scottish fishermen, giving them access that they did not have before. We can therefore see that, merely by the election of an SNP Government, the position of Scotland's fishing industry has been strengthened. I am glad to see that Mike Rumbles concurs. By the actions that the Government proposes to take, the industry can be strengthened even  further. That is why I am squarely behind the Government's view that Richard Lochhead should act as the UK's lead minister in the EU fisheries council.

I have just been called a minister by Liam McArthur, so I will gladly take an intervention.

Not necessarily. I will deal with that point later in my speech. It is an incontrovertible fact that the Scottish fishing fleet has the most significant share of the UK fleet. It is also incontrovertible that fishing is of greater significance to the Scottish economy than it is to the UK economy as a whole. Therefore, I think that all Scotland's fishing industry will be behind the Scottish Government's proposal that our minister should take the lead at the fisheries council. I know that my colleagues in the Government will not mind when I say that although I support that measure, I believe that it is only a half measure, albeit a welcome one. As long as we remain suspended in the halfway house of devolution, half measures might sometimes be all that we can take. Any logical analysis of the situation will lead to the realisation that Scotland's position in the EU would be better served by its being an independent, full member state—although logic has always been in short supply among some members of the Parliament. However, that is certainly my position and that of the Government. I note that just last week, on 30 October, Linda Fabiani told the Parliament's European and External Relations Committee that she was not convinced that the UK joint ministerial committee on Europe "is working as it should be in relation to how the UK Government deals with the devolved Administrations."—[ Official Report , European and External Relations Committee , 30 October 2007; c 126.] Only independence in Europe will deliver for Scotland. Only when we have our seat at the top table will we be able to contribute to the EU's deliberations on how to protect the environment, on how countries will continue to trade with one another and on how they will continue to coexist.  Many members, including me, are wearing the red poppy or the white poppy, lest we forget. My grandparents' generation saw our continent being scarred by war—not once, but twice. As Iain Smith and Irene Oldfather said, the EU has ensured stability for our continent. I welcome that—it represents the ultimate success of the EU as an institution—but the EU is changing. Big is no longer beautiful; power does not reside exclusively with the larger members. In July 2006, Margot Wallström, the vice-president of the European Commission, said that big states do not have the same clout in the EU that they once had. Power now resides with small members such as Luxembourg, Malta and Cyprus and with medium-sized members such as Ireland, Denmark and Finland. John Park suggested that Scotland punches above its weight in the EU, but the real issue is that all the countries that I have just listed have greater weight in the EU than we do. I look forward to the day when Scotland joins those states as a member of the EU.

On 5 September this year, in response to written question S3W-3451, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning indicated to me that in 1999 some 20.4 per cent of people aged between 16 and 19 in the NEET category had a disability and that, by 2006, the figure was 21.7 per cent. That suggests that there is a persistent number of people in the NEET category who are disabled. What recognition of the position of those disabled people who are not in education, employment or training will there be in the Government's strategy?

The debate has been interesting, and members of all parties have made constructive speeches. I welcome the constructive approach that has been taken by a former colleague on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, Sarah Boyack, whose amendment we are considering. I would have enjoyed the chance to discuss the finer details of the amendment in the committee, but she has moved on to pastures new. I wish her well in her new role. In particular, I welcome her slight rewording of her amendment, as it may allow the Parliament to speak with a unified voice on the important issue of wildlife crime. Robin Harper spelled out why that is important. Sarah Boyack is  therefore to be congratulated on amending her amendment. I also welcome the Government motion, which has allowed us to have the debate. In addition, I welcome the Solicitor General for Scotland to the slightly different role of opening the debate for the Government. All members have received briefings from various organisations that are concerned with wildlife crime. The information with which we have been provided indicates that there is an enduring problem of wildlife crime in Scotland. Advocates for Animals states that in 2006 alone there were 183 reported incidents of illegal poisoning of birds, and it points to 40 incidents of hare coursing in 2006-07 in Tayside alone. The SSPCA informs us that in 2006 its inspectors responded to and investigated more than 600 calls about wildlife crime. A Government press release earlier this year stated that since May 1999, at least 455 birds and 168 bats have been killed by poisoning in Scotland. Sarah Boyack is probably right to say that the number of crimes greatly exceeds the reported figure, which is only the tip of the iceberg. It is clear that wildlife crime is a problem, and I am glad that we seem to be agreed on that, but the question remains, what should be done to tackle it? We will have to wait and see what the review proposes. I look forward to that. However, in his closing speech, the minister may be able to identify some of the issues that the review will assess. Will they, as I hope, include stronger sentences for wildlife crime, which the Labour Party included in its manifesto and at which the minister hinted previously? I welcome the approach that the minister has taken since coming into office and the measures that have been set out today. Some members have been slightly vexed by comments that Mike Russell has made. John Lamont, a Tory member, said in the Berwick Advertiser on 6 September that the Conservatives "have concerns about the potentially heavy-handed nature" of some punitive measures that Mike Russell has suggested for those who are found guilty of having committed a wildlife crime. John Scott reflected some of that concern today. However, if we are seriously to target wildlife crime, there must be serious repercussions for those who perpetrate it. It is important to remember that it is those who are found guilty of wildlife crime who will have to pay the penalty. John Lamont, John Scott and Mike Rumbles, who was also concerned, can rest easy: only those who have committed the crime will pay the price. The whole chamber will welcome that.

I will take one from the minister.

I am glad that my speech was structured in such a way as to allow the minister to intervene at such an opportune stage. In her intervention during the Solicitor General's speech, Karen Gillon noted the need to ensure that those who are indirectly involved in wildlife crime are prosecuted. She gave the example of an employer who instructs an employee to carry out a crime. I hope that in such cases all who are responsible—both those who instructed the crime and those who carried it out—are prosecuted and punished to the fullest extent of the law. I hope that the inspectorate-led review will consider serious measures against those who are found guilty of wildlife crime, and I look forward to hearing what the review has to say.

I am about to close. I hope that the review will also consider the points that John Scott made about the different reasons for different types of wildlife crime. I join the RSPB and other animal rights organisations, as well as the other agrarian and rural bodies that have written to all members, in welcoming the review that the Government has announced and I trust that the chamber will also welcome it.

I am somewhat disappointed that the Liberal Democrats persist in attempting to mislead the public about the policies that are being pursued for our national health service by the SNP Government. Indeed, as Stuart McMillan said, the Liberals are not only trying to mislead people; they are positively trying to scaremonger on the issue. Ross Finnie's motion is disappointing, although altogether unsurprising, and wrong on many levels. First, it falls down by describing the Government's proposed changes as "leading to a litigation culture in the NHS". That suggestion reflects much of the rhetoric that Nicol Stephen manfully—indeed, painfully—pursued at a recent First Minister's question time. Mr Stephen's more outrageous claims included the suggestion that "The SNP's proposal will mean American-style litigation in Scotland's health service ... it will result in health service staff spending time in the courtroom rather than the treatment room." However, his most outrageous fit of hyperbole was the claim that the proposals will mean "a lawyer by every bedside"— [ Official Report , 6 September 2007; c 1497.]  Clearly, Ross Finnie has not paid attention to his leader's exchanges with Alex Salmond—although who could blame him for not doing so?—because, if he had listened, he would have heard that the SNP proposals are largely based on a Norwegian model. That point has been well made today.

I suppose that the OECD and the Canadian physicians will need to explain that themselves. My point relates to the waiting time guarantee—[ Interruption. ] I ask members to let me continue. On how many occasions have Norwegian patients taken legal action because they have a system of guaranteed waiting times? As Nicola Sturgeon  spelled out earlier, the answer is none—not one single occasion. The claim that the changes will lead to masses of litigation and "a lawyer by every bedside" is simply hyperbole and scaremongering. Therefore, it is nothing short of the stuff of fairy tales—not as entertaining, of course, as Wendy Alexander's very hungry caterpillar tale—for Ross Finnie to claim, as he does in the motion, that the changes will lead to a "litigation culture in the NHS." The Liberal Democrats are scaremongering and they do the debate a disservice by perpetuating the fantasy of lawyers "by every bedside".

Again, Mr Finnie has not been listening. Going through the courts is not the only recourse, although that will of course be the ultimate recourse for a legally binding guarantee. The question that the Liberal Democrats must answer is why they are so scared of legally binding guarantees. Their position highlights the fact that their manifesto commitment was hollow. The Liberal Democrats' hostility to the waiting time guarantee is particularly peculiar in light of their manifesto. Given their attitude today, we now see that that pledge was not worth the paper that it was written on. As has already been pointed out, the Liberal Democrats' shadow health secretary in England, Norman Lamb MP, has called for a patient's contract. Presumably, that would be legally binding. He has said that such a contract would include maximum waiting times. I also note in passing—

No. I have taken enough interventions. Norman Lamb has also called for elections to health boards. That is more common ground with the SNP. What a pity it is that his progressive views are not shared by his party colleagues in Scotland. It is also a pity that the Liberal motion suggests that, under our proposals, doctors will somehow become encumbered by the weight of bureaucracy. The Liberals have not presented any evidence for that suggestion.  In what little time remains to me, I will deal with the part of the motion that talks about the role of the private sector in NHS health care delivery. Although other members have focused on private health care, the wording of the motion is unclear as to whether it refers to private health care or to the private finance initiative. That being the case, I am concerned that the motion, if agreed to, would further entrench the idea of involving private finance in the NHS. Suffice it to say that we are not being dogmatic in opposing that idea. I certainly concede—I make no apologies for this—that ideology plays a part, although I understand that the Liberal Democrats would not know ideology if it bit them. Certainly, principle plays a part, although I understand that the idea of principle is also a stranger among Liberal ranks. However, the SNP position is directed above all by practical considerations. Allyson Pollock has stated that the use of private finance in the NHS involves "diverting revenue from clinical services, staff, and supplies." The private sector is driven by private profit. I make no criticism of the private sector for that, but private profit has no place on the front line of our NHS. In closing, I reject the Liberal motion in its entirety. The SNP Government is delivering on health, from the continuation of the Monklands and Ayr A and E departments to the abolition of hidden waiting lists and the introduction of an 18-week waiting time guarantee. The Liberal motion serves as a useless distraction from those good efforts, so I hope that members will reject it tonight.

Will the member give way?

I recently had the pleasure of attending a briefing by NHS Lanarkshire. Mr O'Donnell was unable to attend the briefing, so he sent a member of staff along. Clearly, they were unable to convey to him what we were told at the briefing. We were told by one of the officials there that the decision to keep the A and E unit open could not be linked to any impacts on other services.

To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to develop the teaching of modern languages in primary schools. (S3O-596)

I thank the minister for her comprehensive answer. Given last night's fantastic scoreline in Paris, it might have been appropriate for her to answer in French—although I am grateful that she did not. I am aware of the Government's commitment to placing modern languages at the heart of Scotland's education system. Will the minister give us a little more detail on what that might mean in practice? Will it—as I hope—involve the teaching of modern languages at the earliest possible stage in schools? The evidence indicates that children's ability to learn a foreign language is at its greatest if they start at an early stage.

I welcome the Government's position as outlined by  the cabinet secretary and I am sure that those who live along the shores of the Firth of Forth—and many others—will do so, too. That the cabinet secretary has acted so swiftly is testament to the gravity that he attaches to the issue and its resolution. I am glad to see how positively the Government's and the cabinet secretary's approach has been received by all the parties. In that spirit of consensus, I say that I, too, warmly welcome David McLetchie's amendment. The occasions on which the Parliament acts with unanimity will be rare so, like Robin Harper, I hope and trust that today will be one such occasion. The pursuit of enterprise is important and I am sure that we all broadly support the growth of the Scottish economy and broadly welcome investment in Scotland that originates furth of its borders. However, the pursuit of economic growth must be tempered by other important, wider considerations. In that regard, the idea that the Firth of Forth is a suitable place for ship-to-ship oil transfers has been shown to be fundamentally flawed. The stretch of water runs beside one of the most populated parts of the country. Should an accident occur, the impact on the communities along the Fife coastline, in our capital city or in Grangemouth and Bo'ness in the Central Scotland region, which I represent, would be enormous. As Jim Tolson said, the firth is home to varieties of seabirds and wildlife that would be fundamentally threatened should an oil spillage happen. To forecast the worst eventuality is not to take an unduly pessimistic line. We all know that such incidents and accidents can and do happen and that, when they occur, the costs—monetary, human and otherwise—are significant. If we fail to act now, not only would today's citizens rightly criticise us, but history would judge us harshly. I therefore trust that the new United Kingdom Secretary of State for Transport will do what her predecessor failed to do and heed the call of the cabinet secretary and, I hope, the Parliament to act with haste and use the powers that are at her disposal to stop ship-to-ship oil transfers in the Forth. I am concerned that Forth Ports stands to make a financial gain and is the arbiter in the decision-making process. It is right that Scotland's democratically elected Government should assume control of the process, as Forth Ports should not have that role. Roseanna Cunningham rather eloquently set out the problems inherent in the present state of affairs. The role of decision maker belongs properly to the Scottish Government. I therefore have no hesitation in commending the Government's chosen course of action, while stating my hope that, in the not-too-distant future, our Government will not have to rely on others to act and will have full control over such  matters. I agree with Roseanna Cunningham's suggested resolution to the situation.

Is Michael McMahon calling for the reincorporation of the Republic of Ireland into the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland?

Will the member take an intervention?

The member is not actually going to get a yes or no answer—

Will the member give way?

On a slightly more detailed point, how will the new Government support volunteer groups and communities in their efforts to stop asset stripping by local authorities and other organisations at sites that were previously set aside for the development of new parks? The example that Cathie Craigie cited—Cumbernauld community park—is a good one in that regard. In 1993, Cumbernauld and Kilsyth District Council set aside land for the park, but since North Lanarkshire Council took over, no progress has been made. Indeed, much of the land has been sold off.

What assistance can the minister give the Friends of Cumbernauld Community Park and other organisations throughout Scotland to protect their parks and prevent them from being sold off bit by bit?

I speak as a representative not of north-east Scotland but of that other great SNP stronghold: central Scotland. It can hardly come as a surprise to our colleagues—although it seems to—that our new SNP Government has serious concerns about the Edinburgh tram and EARL projects. After all, those concerns were clearly and prominently featured in the SNP campaign message in the recent election. The Labour Party might want to remember that election—it is the one that it lost. It seems more than a little disingenuous for the Labour Party to display such righteous indignation now that our new Government is pursuing the agenda that it put to the country. Although I speak in support of our new Government, I am also a great supporter of investment in our rail infrastructure. I believe that one of the greatest misfortunes to befall our country was the savage Beeching cuts to our railways in the 1960s—I point out that they occurred way before I was even conceived of—the effects of which are felt to this day. However, that is not to say that I support all projects blindly. For a project to receive my backing, it has to be right and proper for the country and for the area that it is proposed it will serve.

No. I will not give way, thanks very much. I have serious concerns about both the Edinburgh tramlines and EARL in its current guise.

No. I have already said that I will not give way. Des McNulty's motion seeks to make a virtue of the fact that £100 million of public money has already been spent on the Edinburgh trams project; he turns that into a reason to back it unswervingly. I suggest that such enormous investment without a single piece of track's having been laid is a serious cause for concern. Why does the former Administration support such an expensive rail link to Edinburgh airport? We can all accept the benefits to Edinburgh and Scotland of a rail link to the airport, but why are the Labour group and others determined about the need for a tunnel?

No, I will not. Why not support an overground rail link? Is a new type of tunnel fetishism emerging? I support fully the Government's decision to call on the Auditor General to review the projects. As my colleague Brian Adam did, I note Labour's lack of comment and, perhaps, concern about other vital transport projects for Scotland, many of which would affect central Scotland. Where is its concern for the electrification of the main line between Glasgow and Edinburgh? It is an embarrassment to Scotland that only roughly a quarter of our railways are electrified and it is a scandal that the line between our two main cities is not electrified. Where has the Labour Party been in relation to the need for an improved car park for Croy train station? Although Wendy Alexander, the then transport minister, promised it in 2002, not a single brick has been laid. I am sure that the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change will join me in welcoming the assurances that I have received from Strathclyde Partnership for Transport that that vital project will—at long last—go ahead. Where are the calls from Labour for vital road projects in Lanarkshire? We urgently need the Raith interchange. In Falkirk, people are crying out for improvements at Avon Gorge, which have been called for for many years. Nevertheless, today the Labour Party is insisting on the pursuit of projects that cost millions more than is necessary and are of limited benefit and use to us. That might just come back to haunt it—I hope that it does.

Given that I was born and bred in Glasgow, it may seem odd that I have chosen to make my first speech in the chamber in a debate on rural development. I cannot boast that I come from the same rural background that my friend and colleague Aileen Campbell and many other members come from or that I have had the same idyllic upbringing, but I have been given the honour of representing Central Scotland. Most people think of that region as a fairly urbanised part of the world, but there are many rural communities in it. I will draw on local examples on which the new Government can focus its efforts to assist rural development. First, however, I congratulate Richard Lochhead and Mike Russell on being appointed to their respective Government posts. I also congratulate our new Government on making rural development one of the first issues to be considered and debated in the chamber. There is much to commend in the cabinet secretary's speech and in the policies that the SNP presented at the election. Rural communities are important to Scotland, and they will welcome this debate and the broad plans that the cabinet secretary set out in his speech. In particular, they will welcome the £1.6 billion investment that has been committed to the rural development programme and the commitments to assist the rural economy. Only yesterday we had a debate about making Scotland a wealthier and fairer place. Part of our commitment to doing that must be that our rural communities will be part of the  process. The less favoured area support scheme and rural development contracts will go some way towards achieving that, as will the scheme to assist new entrants into farming. Improving rural transport links is an important part of the process. I am sure that everyone in the chamber shares my eagerness to hear an early announcement on the upgrading of the A9, which is a vital artery for all Scotland. Dualling the A9 will bring tremendous social and economic benefits to the nation; in particular, it will give a great boost to those rural communities along the road's route in mid and Highland Scotland. Although I would welcome improvements to the A9, we must also pay attention to local roads, which are equally important to rural Scotland. I am aware that roads are not the specific responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment—indeed, local roads are not even the responsibility of the Executive; they are the responsibility of our local authorities. However, I wonder what steps the new Government might take to encourage our local authorities to improve our rural roads network. For example, the A803, which stretches from Glasgow through Kilsyth to Falkirk, is a vital artery for many rural communities in Central Scotland. People who live on that route have to contend with a volume of traffic for which the road was not designed. I have heard of many accidents on that road in Queenzieburn, outside Kilsyth, which is a small village of about 300 people. That is one example of a rural road that is not fit for purpose and I look for guidance from ministers on how they envisage making improvements, not just through flagship schemes such as the A9 upgrade, which are all good and welcome, but to the likes of the A803. I have heard many complaints about public transport in rural Central Scotland. One particular bone of contention has been the poor bus services in rural communities. For instance, Kilsyth is badly served by buses to the Monklands hospital. As do all those who campaigned against the closure of the accident and emergency department at that hospital, I look forward to next week's statement by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing. However, the expected and welcome decision to save Monklands A and E will serve only to highlight how vital it will be for the rural communities that are served by the hospital to be adequately linked to it. I seek the minister's guidance on how the new Government intends to encourage improvements to rural Scotland's public transport network. Rural development is a matter of national urgency and I welcome the new SNP Government's commitment to treating it as such.