5. To ask the First Minister what steps, beyond minimum pricing, the Scottish Government will take to tackle alcohol misuse. (S4F-01878)

Will the First Minister support the measures in Dr Richard Simpson’s proposed shifting the culture bill, which includes limiting the amount of caffeine that is allowed in premixed alcohol products? He will be aware of the McKinlay study on young offenders at HMP Polmont, which found that more than 43 per cent of those who could identify it consumed one particular brand of caffeinated alcohol—a brand that makes up less than 1 per cent of alcohol sales. Does the First Minister also agree that bottle tagging would identify the people who are responsible for selling those products to people who are under the legal age for alcohol purchase?

This has been a really constructive debate that many members have added to through their expertise and learning. I hope that the minister has found it helpful, especially as she is looking at solutions to the problem and working with the UK Government on it. It is difficult speak about the debate without mentioning, as many members have, the 47 deaths that have been caused by these new drugs. We extend our sympathies to the families of those who have died and hope that we can do something about the situation before many more die. We also need to pay tribute to the organisations that are doing good work out there. I started taking notes of all the organisations that people mentioned, but it would take up most of my time if I went through them all. Suffice to say that we all appreciate their work, which we hope will inform the debate and how we deal with the situation. Graeme Pearson pointed out what is behind this: profit and greed, with no regard whatever for the impact on the individuals and their families who suffer as a result. There was a lot of discussion about the terminology. Do we use the term “legal highs”, “new drugs” or the unpronounceable “new psychoactive substances”, which does not really roll off the tongue and which I do not see getting an awful lot of traction? Kezia Dugdale suggested—John Finnie emphasised the point—that we use the term “legal highs” because that is what is understood out there. I often wonder whether that term is promoted by those who sell these substances or by the media because it sounds jinglistic. Would the term “new drugs” begin to grow legs and run if we had some help from our friends in the media? Would it become a more descriptive definition? Graeme Dey, I think, referred to a survey carried out in Arbroath, which found that 44 per cent of those questioned thought that these substances were safer because of the word “legal”, which suggested that they had been legalised, when in fact it is just that they have not been illegalised. We need to give that more thought. The stakeholders and the groups working with the people affected are using the term “new drugs”, so perhaps we should consider that. A lot of members talked about the dangers of new drugs. It is clear that nobody knows what the side effects are—not the users and not the agencies that try to support users or deal with the consequences. Therefore, it is very difficult for people to pull together a response. Sometimes, such substances are more dangerous than substances that are illegal. It was interesting to listen to Elaine Murray and Nigel Don discuss chemistry. I have to say that chemistry was not my forte. I do not think that I even got my O grade, far less my higher, in chemistry—it was way over my head. I always thought that a drug was a drug and that people could tell what it was. However, sometimes it is not so clear. If the substance cannot be boiled down—for want of a better phrase—to a chemical compound, it becomes more difficult to assess the side effects. As Alison McInnes said, it is about how the substances interact with other substances—new drugs, alcohol or other drugs. Sandra White said that the new drugs could pose a greater threat to health because they are so accessible. There is so little information about them out there. Claire Baker mentioned the Crew 2000 briefing, which said that people are really unsure about what dosage to take. Some new drugs take time to be effective. Someone might try a little, decide that it is not working and then take a bit more and a bit more over a long period, by which time they have overdosed and the drugs are having pretty fearsome impacts on their health. We need to consider that. Some have said that the drugs are not always dangerous and they do not always have an ill effect. I do not think that we can gauge their long-term effects, such as the impact on mental health, which they interfere with to cause a reaction that is not natural. We do not even know the impact that some legal drugs have on mental health, and exactly the same applies to these new drugs. A lot of people talked about how we can legislate to make these new drugs illegal. It was quite clear that if we do that, we will just be chasing, because the moment we make one compound illegal, it will be tweaked slightly and will come back as something else. That could have a worse effect, because we would not know the impact of the new combination. Willie Coffey said that perhaps we should look at the issue the other way round and should sell only drugs that are named and controlled and which people understand. That might be a way of dealing with all this. A number of speakers, such as Elaine Murray and Dennis Robertson, talked about the decrease in illegal drug taking and the increase in the taking of new drugs, and the question was asked whether the increase in the taking of new drugs was down to people’s fear of getting a criminal record. I think that it was Kezia Dugdale who said that that was not the case, and that the increase might be down to cost. The cost of illegal drugs is much higher. New psychoactive substances are much more accessible—they are available on the internet with buy-one-get-one-free offers or quantity discounts. A lot of tools have been talked about—I notice that I am running out of time to discuss them. Members discussed the use of social media and the internet. Another issue is the use of licensing, although I wonder whether licensing might give the impression that new psychoactive substances are legal. Perhaps we need to enable councils and the like to ban not only certain payday loan establishments but head shops from the high street. Graeme Pearson made what was perhaps one of the more useful suggestions, which was about using HM Revenue and Customs. HMRC normally gets whoever it is looking for, so it might be worth exploring that avenue. We need to consider who uses new psychoactive substances, because it is the same things—poverty, low self-esteem and the like—that cause people to turn to substances that make them feel better.

The minister will be aware of the Scottish Youth Parliament’s care fair share campaign for young carers. Will he make sure that members of the Scottish Youth Parliament are consulted as part of the process and that their views are fed in? The campaign is great for highlighting the needs of young carers with education, help at home, and the like, and it would be helpful if the minister would see fit to include such a useful campaign in the process as much as possible.

I welcome the consultation, but we have been here before during previous CAP reforms and no changes have been made that support crofting and farming in the Highlands and Islands. Every time, the whole reform is skewed wildly out of shape to ensure that to he who hath, it shall be given—and we can be sure that he or she never lived in the Highlands and Islands. We now come to the crunch moment for the new CAP, when the European Commission has made it possible—I should say, made it almost compulsory—to have a fairer division of CAP. We wait to see what the Scottish Government makes of these policies and how they will impact on Scotland. At the moment, it is nothing short of scandalous that, as Elaine Murray pointed out, two thirds of payments go to 20 per cent of farmers, who take in hundreds of thousands of pounds each. Some of them are slipper farmers, and limited companies are among them as well. At the other end of the scale, we see crofters and farmers on the periphery struggling to keep going while they receive a pittance in CAP payments. The current allocation of funding does nothing to encourage farming and crofting in disadvantaged areas, and the consultation does not seem to want to right that wrong at all. The James Hutton Institute did modelling across Scotland, and areas within the Highlands and Islands seemed likely to come out quite well from those dispassionate calculations. The Highlands and Islands agricultural support group, which is made up of all the local authorities from Argyll to Shetland, worked in a spirit of openness and trust with the Scottish Government to test the modelling on which the payments could be based. However, at the last minute, all that seems to have vanished and we are presented with a consultation that is cynically designed to keep the money where it has always been. As usual, nothing changes and the Highlands and Islands look like being left out in the cold. Unless there is a public commitment from the cabinet secretary to the region, over half the land area of Scotland will be disadvantaged again. The consultation proposes a payment of €20 to €25 for the area, but that figure is far too low and is not justified by any of the detailed work that has been done. The figure could damage crofting and farming in the Highland and Islands, and it appears to ignore completely the work of the groups that I mentioned. We even hear rumours that still lower rough grazing region payments are being considered. I hope that the cabinet secretary will deny that when winding up and give a commitment that that will not happen. We saw previously the environmental impact that decoupling payments from production had on sheep farming in the Highlands and Islands. It was close to impossible back then to make a living, with many in the industry working elsewhere to subsidise their farming activities. When production was no longer required, sheep came off the hills in their millions, which led to the devastation of the support industries downstream from the sheep farming, destabilising communities and making it even more difficult for those who remained in the area to make a living. The environmental damage caused by the lack of land management and grazing was on a scale that we had never thought possible. If the cabinet secretary implements a payment of €25 or less, it will be equally catastrophic for our communities and the environment. It will make it very difficult to support those communities that depend on agricultural activity. That is neither greener nor fairer. In addition, the cabinet secretary has deferred any changes to LFASS until 2017, way beyond the referendum. There is no other mechanism available for us to support crofting and farming in my region. The current LFASS payments are applied in exactly the opposite way to how they were intended—the richer someone is, the more they get—and are not used to address disadvantage. The Scottish Government can implement changes to the scheme at any time that it likes—it is the cabinet secretary’s choice. I fear that the consultation is more about trying to win the votes of large farmers for independence than courting those of small crofters and farmers in my area. I say to the cabinet secretary that the large farmers might get the lion’s share of the funding, but they only have one vote each, as do the people whom he disregards in his consultation. I ask that the cabinet secretary speak up for the Highlands and Islands for a change.

I am still looking for them.

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that the rumours that the €25 figure will decrease are wrong, and will he give a commitment to ensure that the figure increases in line with the recommendation in the James Hutton Institute report that I mentioned?

Like many other members, I find it difficult to imagine what drives people to suicide or, indeed, the anguish of family members who are faced with the suicide of a loved one. Therefore, I welcome the debate, because we are taking those issues seriously. I also welcome the impact of the choose life strategy, which was published back in 2002. Although it is disappointing that the targets have not been fully met and, as Willie Coffey told us, our suicide levels are still much higher than other European levels, we must take heart that movement is in the right direction. Therefore, I welcome the new strategy that follows on from choose life and hope that it will have similar impacts on the number of suicides in Scotland. Many members spoke about issues that are pertinent to the debate, but one of the more important ones is the one about which Kevin Stewart talked at length: the stigma that is connected with mental health issues. That stigma still exists, despite numerous campaigns in the area. How can we encourage people who are desperate and need help to seek and receive that help if we do not remove that stigma? It is really important that we do that. Kenny Gibson also mentioned the work of the NUJ in reporting suicide, which is helpful in that regard. Many members spoke about groups that are involved in helping people. I also pay tribute to them: the breathing space service, SAMH, the choose life campaign, Touched by Suicide Scotland and, of course, the Samaritans, which is one of the groups that everyone thinks about when we talk about suicide. They provide a lifeline for those who are suicidal, and they work round the clock to be there to listen to people. Many of those groups also work outside the statutory services, which makes them much more approachable when we consider stigma and the fear that it puts into people about approaching mental health services. Neil Findlay mentioned the Samaritans report “Men and Suicide”. Perhaps we have missed the point that gender stereotypes put men at greater risk of suicide; they put greater pressure on men to cope, to be strong and to provide leadership. As James Dornan said, there is an onus on men to have “achieved”, by a certain time in their lives. They perhaps compare themselves with their peers and find themselves wanting. Men also have difficulty discussing their emotions. Women are much better at discussing emotions and reaching out for help. In men, the gender stereotype says that that is weakness, which builds barriers for people to seeking help from their peers and loved ones. We heard from Neil Findlay and other speakers about the incidence of suicide being much higher in areas of deprivation. That should not be surprising, because living in areas of deprivation where there is no hope of improvement must eventually grind people down to a point at which they see no point in going on. Jim Hume made a really good point when he talked about suicide and “Equally Well”. We need to consider the issue as part of health inequalities. Health inequalities takes in many health issues, and suicide is one of them, which is relevant when we are considering financial pressures and the like. We also need to look at other groups of people. I think that it was Nanette Milne who talked about the predominance of males in agriculture. Farmers and farm workers are a group of people who perhaps do not have a lot of social interaction, because they work in rural areas where they do not meet people. It is important that we reach out to them. Graeme Pearson talked about signposting help for men at male-dominated events, such as sporting events. That is really important, but it is also important that we encourage people to speak about the issues. Another important group is young people. We all know about the issues of transition in mental health services when people move from children’s services to adult services. That is a difficult time and we need to ensure that the services are in place to help them through that. There are added pressures on young people; young people have always been under pressure, but as things move on, especially with regard to social media and the like, the pressures change. Yesterday, YoungMinds published research about the pressures that young people feel they are facing. Half of them said that they felt that they had been bullied, which is a frightening amount. Part of that bullying is, of course, being done through new social media. Christine Grahame talked about the difficulty that that causes and suggested that there is a need for education in that area. I say that we need to take that a step further and hold to account the platforms that publish the material. If we were to do that, there would be a greater chance that those platforms would police their pages to ensure that people do not come under pressure from the bullies. That is something that we might need to look at in the future. Other members talked about substance abuse being a trigger for suicide. That should not surprise us at all. Obviously, those who self-medicate by turning to alcohol and drugs for help are already suffering poor mental health. It therefore follows that they are at risk, so we need to think about ways of helping them through that, and of targeting that group. Graeme Pearson talked about the impact of suicide on families, and the guilt that they feel about whether they could have done something or intervened. Families are hugely important in this issue. Recently, I attended a meeting of the cross-party group on carers, at which families of people with mental health problems talked about how they had been treated by psychiatric services. Patients had been told not to confide in their families and families were not given advice on how to support family members who were coming out of hospital and were suffering mental health issues. They had not been told that people coming out of inpatient services are at a greater risk of suicide, so they were ill prepared to help them. Patient confidentiality must of course be paramount, but it is not helpful if we end up stopping people reaching out to those who are best equipped to help them, and if we are not providing those families with the knowledge and understanding of what they can do to help. In its briefing for today’s debate, SAMH talked about the community support networks that it is putting in place to provide support and information for people who are suicidal. That is a step in the right direction. It also talked about community engagement, and many people have spoken about training for people in work situations in which they might meet people who are thinking about suicide. However, I think that we should look at suicide prevention from a community point of view, so that we can address the training needs throughout our whole society, because we do not know when people might meet someone who is thinking about suicide. On the subject of social media platforms, I read a story about someone who had tried to commit suicide and was trying to find the person who had intervened. That person was not a policeman or a health worker; it was just someone who had been walking past and who had stopped to speak to the person and persuade them not to take their own life, and had then gone on about their business. Obviously, at such a time of great distress, the person did not think of taking the other person’s contact details, but they now want to track that person down to thank them for changing their life by convincing them not to commit suicide. I also welcome the fact that a self-harm strategy will be published. That is important because many of those who commit suicide have also self-harmed. A strategy will help to identify those who might commit suicide. I will touch briefly on the interventions that are available when someone is attempting to commit suicide or is suffering a mental breakdown. The emergency service that tends to respond is the police, which is perhaps not the best service for someone who is in a difficult place. We need to put in place services that reduce the stigma, and which deal with people quickly—it is an area in which there should be no waiting lists—and with compassion. One suicide is one too many. It is hard to imagine the despair that outweighs a person’s natural instinct to prolong their life and leads them to take their life and ignore the impact that it will have on their family and on the person who finds them. Although we wish that suicide was not a problem and that we were not debating it, we must do everything possible to support and reach out to those who are at risk.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

As many speakers have pointed out, the NHS is valued not only by all our constituents but by all the parties in the Parliament. The NHS is a national treasure. It needs to be protected and allowed to grow to meet our communities’ needs in the future. Many speakers—including Michael McMahon, Roderick Campbell and Nanette Milne—mentioned the change in demographics that will mean an ageing population. The NHS will need to work with the complex health conditions of many in the ageing population, not to mention conditions such as dementia, which we have not dealt with in the debate. The NHS needs to develop and change to meet those needs. That is why we brought the debate to the Parliament. We have brought to the chamber the concerns of dedicated NHS staff in the hope that the cabinet secretary would listen to them. Like Hugh Henry, I was disappointed that, instead of giving voice to their constituents’ concerns, many SNP back benchers were apologists for the Government. That was not our wish for the debate; we wished to raise the concerns of people who use and work in our NHS.

It is clear from the debate that the SNP has no vision for the health service, other than crisis management, as was pointed out in some of the comments that we have brought to the chamber. The Auditor General for Scotland put the NHS on financial amber warnings last year and has signalled similar concerns this year about long-term financial planning. That comes not from us but from the Auditor General.

No. Mark McDonald might think that he has all the answers, but it would do him good to listen to the experts, instead of pretending that he knows what to do, ignoring the rest and not allowing them to be part of a review. He thinks that he knows it all. Michael McMahon pointed out that the Scottish Government failed to recognise the impact—

The Scottish Government failed to recognise the impact of slashing local government budgets, which has halted the shift of the balance of care in its tracks. Cuts to community-based services are putting pressure on the NHS because of unscheduled admissions and delayed discharges.

The minister, Michael Matheson, mentioned that those issues are big problems for the NHS in Scotland. After years of rhetoric, health inequalities remain Scotland’s shame. We are presided over by a Government that has slashed anti-poverty funding.

The Government has failed to recognise that poverty is the greatest driver of health inequalities in our nation. It needs to listen to the warnings. Along with the RCN, the BMA and many others, we believe that a comprehensive review of the NHS is needed to identify the pressure points. That would enable us to deliver an NHS that is fit for the 21st century, which is what we wish to do. On that basis, we are delighted to accept the cabinet secretary’s offer of involvement in developing the 2020 vision. We are more than happy to work with the Government, as we were when we offered to work with it on GP contracts. I very much hope that the offer will come to fruition, unlike that on GP contracts. We all acknowledge that staff are our biggest and best resource in the NHS. Dedicated and skilled people are working to keep the NHS going. Some of them are doing that in their own time and unpaid. There are more than 1,000 fewer nurses and midwifery staff than there were four years ago, a drop which puts a strain on our NHS staff. Between 2011 and 2013, the spend on agency nurses and midwives increased by 62 per cent, which shows the desperate need for staff. The RCN tells us that that puts significant pressure on the workers who are there and that 58 per cent of nurses say that they are under too much pressure. Some of the responses to our freedom of information requests have talked about huge numbers of staff being off work as a result of stress, which is because they are working under far too much pressure. They are working unpaid hours beyond their contractual hours to keep the system going. The system is creaking and we need to listen to those people who are working in it. We have also seen cuts in trainee places of 20 per cent. Yes, people have come together and welcomed a 4 per cent increase, but that is against a 20 per cent decrease in the past. We need to do more. We also need to take into account, as Jackson Carlaw said, the demographic profile of the nurses who are working in the NHS, because we will need many more in training in the future to fill the gap. There is also a gap in consultant vacancies. I think that it was Jim Hume who quoted the numbers, but we are also told by the BMA that it is not a short-term problem, as figures show difficulties in filling training posts in some specialties, which is not sustainable. It is the BMA that is saying that it is not sustainable. It also tells us that medical staff are working over and above what is expected of them and that they feel under considerable strain as a result. Again, that is clearly not sustainable. We have seen the situation with junior doctors and we need to tackle it now. We are asking in this debate that the cabinet secretary take seriously our plea to review the situation, to ensure that we can tackle the problems. Sadly, as Margaret McCulloch eloquently said, we have seen in NHS Lanarkshire that it was mortality rates that raised alarm bells for the cabinet secretary to go and examine the situation. The Royal College of Physicians tells us that the findings of the review make depressing but not surprising reading. Clinicians across Scotland recognise the challenges facing colleagues in Lanarkshire. It is not a problem for Lanarkshire alone but for the whole of Scotland, and the cabinet secretary is ignoring it. I appeal to him to consider a review, even based on that information. [Interruption.]

The latest figures show that nine health boards are failing to meet their A and E targets, and the SNP has not met its A and E targets for Scotland as a whole for four years. Even Bob Doris conceded that the weekend service is basically an emergency service, but it is failing. Jayne Baxter pointed out the sad problems in the Victoria hospital, which does not even provide an emergency service at weekends, when patients need to travel to Dundee in the case of an emergency. That is not sustainable—emergency cases need to reach treatment as quickly as possible—and the problems are not unique to that area. The NHS is under financial pressures because of changes to care and the way in which it is delivered. That will create financial pressures, and the Auditor General has pointed that out to us, as some members have said during the debate. I sincerely hope that the cabinet secretary is listening to those concerns. The cabinet secretary talked about C diff and infection control. I have to say that I am concerned about the numbers, because I do not believe that they are realistic, and I ask him to look into whether C diff is being investigated properly. I have reason to suspect that it is not, from a local outbreak that happened in the Highlands, and I am concerned that the same could be happening elsewhere in the country. Health spending is a barometer of the nation’s wellbeing. We cannot leave people in poverty, out of work, in poor housing and dependent on food banks for nutrition and not expect all of that to impact on the NHS. The Government has been so taken up with tearing our country apart that it has stopped doing its job. The money that it spent on a white paper promising childcare in never-never land should actually have been spent on providing it now. It has put Scotland on pause and spent our money on dreams while our services are suffering, and the health of the nation is in jeopardy because of that. In conclusion, I quote Theresa Fyffe from the RCN, who said: “It is not sustainable to manage the health service in this way, as shown all too clearly by missed waiting times targets, growing vacancy rates for nurses and other healthcare staff and an increasing reliance on bank and agency staff as well as private healthcare.” The cabinet secretary needs to listen to those concerns. He cannot continue ignoring staff who are buckling under the strain of his mismanagement. If he does not listen, we will face the consequences. That is why we in the Labour Party are calling today for an honest and comprehensive review of the NHS in Scotland.

I, too, congratulate James Dornan on securing the debate and I join Sandra White in expressing our sympathies to him and his family on their bereavement. I am sure that he is grateful to Sandra White, as we all are, for leading the debate in his absence. It is good that the debate can continue in the circumstances. I, too, pay tribute to the CEDAR network for its work. It works in partnership with children and their mothers and helps mothers to support their children through the issues of domestic abuse, using peer support as well. We do not always understand the damage that domestic abuse can cause not only to the relationships between the abuser and their children but to the relationships among those who are abused, who may try to protect one another, which prevents them from working with one another as they could. The CEDAR network seeks to redress that and empower the people in those families to support one another and work their way through the issues. In the debate, we recognise the often overlooked impact of domestic abuse on children and young people. We very often see that women are abused—in some cases men are abused, but in the majority of cases it is women who are abused—and we understand how that happens, but we seldom see the impact on young people, such as isolation, anger and fear, and the effect on their self-esteem and resilience. Domestic abuse influences their educational opportunities and life chances and impacts on their future relationships. The damage that domestic abuse does to children cannot be overestimated, and the CEDAR network and others recognise that. A violent partner can also threaten children and young people, who can feel that they might face violence too—if they do not face it already. People who are violent to a partner can also be violent to children. That can take place in a bullying relationship: violence can be used against people who are seen to be less able to stand up to it. Glasgow Women’s Aid has been instrumental in setting up the Glasgow branch of the CEDAR network with the advice, support, safety and information services together—ASSIST—project and Children 1st. Scottish Women’s Aid has long recognised the impact of domestic abuse on children and young people. For a long time it has employed children’s workers, who work with young people of all different ages. They use play, social occasions and counselling to help young people, and they provide a service that children can access in their own right. There is no need for parental permission; young people can contact Scottish Women’s Aid and get support and help for themselves. Sometimes their mothers are still in denial about the abuse in the relationship. As we all know, those who suffer domestic abuse can be the main people who cover up that abuse. Often, children see that and have to live with it, so the ability of children and young people to access support in their own right is hugely important. Scottish Women’s Aid offers that service and we need to keep supporting it. We cannot prevent the impact on children and young people of domestic abuse, but we can try to deal with the consequences. We can combat the negative implications for young people by giving them coping techniques, helping them maintain their education by representing them to teachers and the like, and supporting them through their experience. The bottom line is empowerment. If we empower mothers to support their children, and indeed empower children and young people to find a way through the issues themselves, children and young people will have a much better outlook on life. I commend the work of the organisations that assist with that. [Applause.]

I congratulate Fiona McLeod on securing this important debate and I pay tribute to Optometry Scotland and the work that it does to ensure that Scotland provides world-class eye care. It is desperately sad that many people in Scotland still lose their sight through preventable illnesses, so this evening’s debate is welcome in that it highlights people’s need to take their eye health seriously through having regular eye checks and having eye problems treated as a matter of urgency. The fact that there have been improvements in eye healthcare is a testament to the efforts of Optometry Scotland and other organisations, including the Royal National Institute of Blind People, which have rightly promoted the need for good services in our communities. Opticians in the community now interact with specialists in the acute sector. They are able to send test results and pictures electronically to eye specialists, which cuts costs to the health service and reduces unnecessary appointments for patients. Patients can have their tests done locally at their own optician; should the optician be concerned, they can transfer information electronically to a specialist for them to look at. On many occasions, no further treatment will be required, so the patient will not need to attend for more eye tests in the acute sector. The approach also reduces the time that patients spend worrying about the outcome of further tests. It is a win-win for patients and the health service, for which the approach reduces costs. There are times when results flag up issues and patients need further treatment, but the approach saves time, and treatment can commence much more quickly if results are sent electronically. The specialist knows the scale of the problem and what needs to be done before they ever see the patient, so treatment can start immediately. That saving of time could also save someone’s sight. It has been proved that e-health works well in optometry. It saves time and speeds up treatment, it enables better services to be provided to patients and, at the same time, it saves the public purse money. It has huge benefits in my region—the Highlands and Islands—where many people live in remote and rural areas, where it is not easy to access services or to attend multiple appointments that are sometimes huge distances from the patient’s home. As people get older, they often have to depend on public transport, but that is often non-existent in such areas. The advances that have been made have not happened by accident, but are down to the people who work in the sector at every level. However, we need to ensure that the level of service that we are discussing is available to everyone and that everyone takes their eye health seriously and has regular checks. We know that the people who live in our most deprived communities are less likely to look after their eye health. That pattern recurs in all areas of health, and it sometimes feels almost as if we are unable to tackle those inequalities. I ask the Scottish Government to ensure that people in our most-deprived communities have regular eye tests, which means that services must be made available to them locally and accessibly. Regular eye health checks can also flag up health issues that are not necessarily to do with eyes. One problem that most people know often shows up in eye health tests is diabetes. I welcome the debate. Although we have made great strides in eye healthcare since Parliament began, we cannot rest on our laurels. There is much more to be done and I look forward to seeing how that can be brought forward.

I congratulate John Wilson on securing the debate. It is timely for us to be having it in the run-up to Christmas, when people are under huge pressure to buy gifts and expensive food to make Christmas special for their families. The key aim of the debate is to encourage people to use credit unions instead of payday lenders. With wages falling and prices rising, very few people—only the very rich—are better off. The poorest in our society are bearing the brunt of that. We have seen a fourfold increase in the number of food banks, which are struggling to meet the needs of people in our communities. People in areas such as the Highlands and Islands, where employment can be seasonal or temporary, are at high risk of payday loan debt, because banks are reluctant to lend to people who do not have a secure income. Those that will lend charge the worst-off inflated rates of interest. Only last month, it was revealed that the Skye, Lochaber and Badenoch constituency in the Highlands has the second-highest level of individual payday loan debt in Scotland. The average payday loan debt level in Scotland is £1,398.07, whereas in Skye, Lochaber and Badenoch it is £2,418.50, which is more than £1,000 more than the average for the country as a whole. Payday lenders charge astronomical rates of interest, which quickly become unaffordable. That leads to people rolling over their debt. Such lenders also take repayments directly from borrowers’ bank accounts without having any regard to what those people will live on. I recently issued a debtbusters survey to homes in Wick in the Highlands and Islands. The results indicated that around 90 per cent of respondents are supportive of the campaign to increase awareness of the risk of using payday loan companies, of the promotion of credit unions and of increasing awareness of where to get debt advice, but only 9 per cent of respondents told me that they are members of a credit union. Credit unions provide an alternative. All other lenders increase interest rates for the least well-off, whereas credit unions treat all people in the same way. In the Highlands and Islands, we have a credit union that covers the whole area: HI-Scot Credit Union is a community-based financial co-operative that is owned, run and controlled by its members, of which it now has more than 2,000. Interest in the credit union has continued to grow since it was first established around six years ago. It now offers a range of products, from prepayment debit cards that can be used in shops and at cash machines to short and medium-term loans at preferential rates of interest, as well as saving schemes and life insurance. We all have a role to play in promoting credit unions, and I very much hope that the Scottish Government will offer support to those organisations so that they can provide their valuable services to those who desperately need them, especially this Christmas.

We live in a country that recognises prostitution as violence against women, but we continue to prosecute the abused while letting the perpetrator off scot free. Those who profit from that trade peddle the myth that people choose to be prostituted, and the Government continues to turn a blind eye. There are many stories, but I will tell just one. A young woman is struggling financially and a friend suggests that she becomes an escort, getting paid for eating out and attending glamorous events. She decides that it might be worth pursuing and signs up with an escort agency. Nobody told her that she was expected to have sex with clients. She was given details of her first client. She was to meet him in an Edinburgh hotel. She arrived at the hotel only to be told to go up to his room. He expected sex—no glitzy occasion or dinner; just sex. She said no, he became enraged and the escort agency, which she called, told her that she had agreed to that and had to fulfil that part of the contract. She was terrified but complied because she was afraid that she would be seriously hurt if she did not. She immediately told the agency that she no longer wanted to work with it, but its response was that if she did not continue to prostitute herself it would tell her family and friends that she was a prostitute. She was young, naive and trapped. The escort agency pretence was quickly dispensed with and she worked in a sauna for the most part. They drugged her and hardly paid her, and her life was one of basic slavery. She faced violence and was forced to have sex with clients—she was raped. She said: “People are not aware of what happens behind closed doors in the brothel. The minute you walk in you are scarred for life, it’s like being raped 10 times a day and pimps telling you it’s ok. You lose everything: dignity, identity, respect and happiness.” That is what the Scottish Government is allowing to happen in Scotland today, and what makes it so sad is that it is not a one-off—it is commonplace. Most women who are trapped in that trade are those whom the Government has let down already—those who are living in poverty and have nowhere else to turn, and care leavers who have been abandoned by the state with no fall-back.

I am not talking about the content of the meeting that Sandra White and I attended—that was from someone who spoke to me. The Scottish Government had the opportunity to do something about the issue. I lodged a proposal for a member’s bill, but the Government instructed members such as Sandra White not to sign up to it and the proposal fell, so she cannot say that it is not complicit in the trade. This Parliament used to have a proud history of tackling violence against women. I am sorry that that is no longer the case. We are now being left behind as other countries rapidly adopt the Nordic model, the latest being France, which did so in the past couple of weeks. Ireland—both north and south—is looking to follow suit.

Scotland will end up becoming a haven for prostitution, for gangsters and for traffickers who see us as being complicit in the trade. At some point, somebody in that situation is going to ask the Government what it is going to do about their human rights. We need to tackle the issue now and provide a safe space for survivors to be heard, as advocated by the Zero Tolerance Trust and SPACE International. Until we do that—

I would be interested to know what the Scottish Government will do about prostitution rather than hearing the minister’s defence of the Government’s stance.

I congratulate Stewart Stevenson on securing the debate, and pay tribute to the save our libraries Moray campaign group, and welcome members of the group to the gallery. I met the group, and the people are thoughtful and hardworking and are passionate about retaining their library services. They have already saved three of the threatened libraries and continue to look for ways of saving the others. Libraries are an essential service. They are places where people learn and can access information. They are a true equaliser, especially when those who cannot afford computers or internet connections are liable to be left behind. A local library can provide that access. Internet access is also important to businesses and local communities. As Stewart Stevenson said, VAT returns are now dealt with online, and the Scottish Government also asks people to apply to the rural development fund online. In some small communities, a library is the only source of an internet connection, because there is no broadband. By providing services online, Governments and councils can save money, but those who cannot access the internet stand to be left behind. Without libraries, the situation would be much worse. Libraries are also places that give pleasure. There is something indulgent about sitting down and sticking your head in a good book. That is something that we perhaps do not all get a chance to do very often, but libraries ensure that that pleasure is available to all. The equalities impact assessment was clear that the closure of Burghead, Cullen and Dufftown libraries—which have now been saved—would have impacted on equalities in those villages. However, from speaking to people who live in Rothes and use the library there, I know that they strongly believe that the impact assessment for their library was not carried out properly. It was conducted at the wrong time and there was little information about the assessment. There is also a cost attached to the closure of the libraries. The libraries in Rothes and Hopeman have received European Union funding, and some of that will have to be repaid, at a cost of around £41,000. Had they been kept open for two more years, no repayment would have had to be made. Of course, we must also take account of the money that will be wasted, in terms of the match funding and the money that has already been drawn down. Surely that cost offsets much of the saving over the period. A longer period of reflection would allow alternatives to be explored with regard to how we make use of those libraries and make them more cost effective. No one is arguing that the council has to find savings. The unfunded council tax freeze means that councils are facing tough decisions about how they fund vital services. However, I would have hoped that the council would have worked with everyone in the community, especially people such as those in the save our libraries Moray campaign group, who are keen to be proactive and find solutions. I understand that the campaign group is now exploring the possibility of pursuing the community asset transfer route for Hopeman library, to provide a community hub as well as a library and internet access services. I commend it for that. I hope that it will receive support from the council and the Scottish Government to do that, which would allow at least some provision in the village. I very much hope that solutions can be found to the problems.

The minister will be aware that care staff are predominantly female and predominantly low paid. Will the Scottish Government now ensure that they are all paid the living wage so that that does not have a detrimental effect on their health and wellbeing?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to tackle alcohol misuse. (S4T-00540)

Given that alcohol is killing around 20 people a week in Scotland, which is still a higher rate than that in England and Wales, and given that minimum unit pricing is delayed in the courts, will the cabinet secretary come forward with meaningful action to tackle alcohol misuse in Scotland?

As the cabinet secretary is aware, minimum unit pricing alone will not tackle Scotland’s problem with alcohol. He will also be aware that Dr Richard Simpson is leading proposals for an alcohol (public health and criminal justice) (Scotland) bill. Will the cabinet secretary back that bill in principle and introduce Labour’s proposals so that we can take action and tackle this problem now?

I congratulate Linda Fabiani on securing the debate, and I add my congratulations to Michael O’Neil on winning the award that is very much the subject of the debate. It is important that we in Scotland nurture and develop our talent. We often lead the way in the United Kingdom for research, which means that we attract a greater share of research funding than our population would indicate, and that is down to the talents of people such as Michael O’Neil, who go ahead blazing a trail and winning awards. There are many other researchers who do likewise in Scotland, so the debate is about them as well. We often underestimate the importance of facial reconstruction, seeing it as something that is done for aesthetic purposes rather than medical imperatives, but that point of view underestimates the impact that a change to our face can have on us, both mentally and physically. Bob Doris eloquently spoke of his own experience of having an injury that he considered relatively minor and the impact that it had on him. It is hard for us to imagine waking up in the morning and looking in the mirror and the face that looks back at us not being the one that we recognise as our own. That must have a huge impact on people—on their sense of self as well as on their mental health. At the point when facial transplants were being pioneered, there was a lot of news coverage about it, which talked about the amount of counselling that a transplant recipient would require, much more than if they were getting a heart or any other organ. That is because how we look is so much part of us. We do not see a heart or a kidney, but we do see our own face, and that tells us who we are, so we need to appreciate fully the importance of how we look to our sense of self. Neither do we fully appreciate how we use our face to communicate with others, not just by speaking as we are tonight—although speech can be affected by injuries around the mouth, breakages of bones or cancer treatment—but by the non-spoken communication that we use our face for, which can be absolutely lost if we require a lot of surgery. Changes to the structure of our face can also stop us from eating, which impacts on the rest of our body and on our nutritional intake. Although that can be overcome by tube feeding and the like, it does not take into account the pleasure of eating and of taste and how important that is to us. The ability to reconstruct a face damaged by an accident or disease can give somebody back the sense of themselves, as well as their ability to communicate and to enjoy the senses that we all take for granted. That is why I am pleased to support the motion, which brings those issues to the attention of the Parliament and pays tribute to the people who carry out that work. I hope that it will also raise awareness of the profession, so that more people will be willing to get involved and to fill the skills gap that Linda Fabiani was talking about.

The First Minister will be aware of Age Scotland’s concerns that some people are receiving care visits that are as short as seven minutes. Will he ensure that care visits are long enough to provide the care and attention that frail and elderly people require to allow them to live in security and dignity? Will he ensure that care visits are not restricted to 15 minutes or less?

I am pleased to open the debate to mark world prematurity day, which fell on 17 November. I vividly remember visiting my great-nephew just over a year ago in a special care baby unit. He was only a few days old and just out of an incubator. My niece told me that we could see him but we were not allowed to lift or cuddle him. When we were peering into his cot, a nurse told us that we could pick him up and hold him. That was a special moment. Needless to say, he is now doing well and getting up to mischief, and those days seem far away. Other babies are not as lucky. In the United Kingdom, one in 300 babies dies within four weeks of birth. In Scotland, one in seven babies are admitted to neonatal care every year because of early birth, being small or being too sick. Therefore the quality framework for neonatal care is welcome, and I pay tribute to the work of the professionals and parents who have been involved in drawing it up, as well as to Bliss Scotland and Sands—the Stillbirth and Neonatal Death Society. Bliss Scotland drew our attention to the problems that are faced in neonatal care in its “A chance for change Bliss Baby Report and Manifesto: Scotland 2011”. It tells us that there is a significant shortage of nurses for sick babies in at least three level 3 units, and four neonatal units reported having problems with recruiting doctors and consultants. There is a lack of counselling services for parents who need emotional support and a lack of accommodation for them when their babies are in facilities that are away from their homes. The British Association of Perinatal Medicine has outlined staffing guidelines. There should be a nurse ratio of 1:1 for babies who need neonatal intensive care, and the nurse should have a post-registration certificate in neonatal intensive care. The BAPM also recommends a nurse ratio of 1:2 for babies who require high-dependency care and that the nurse should have had training in neonatal care, and that there should be a nurse ratio of 1:4 for babies who require special care. Three out of the eight neonatal units that responded to Bliss Scotland gave information on nursing levels and occupancy rates that did not meet those standards, and units are not meeting the minimum standards for nurse training. The Royal College of Nursing standards say that 70 per cent of nurses who work in neonatal intensive care units should have a qualification in specialised neonatal care, but half of the level 3 units that responded to Bliss Scotland did not meet that standard. They reported that it is difficult to release nurses for training. Neonatal units are also having problems with recruiting consultant-level doctors. One nurse said that posts cannot be filled because of a lack of applicants and funding. Because of that, neonatal units have to close their doors to babies who need that specialist care. In June 2010, fewer than half of the units provided parents with access to counselling. Counselling is crucial because parents who have gone through the trauma of having a child in neonatal care are at higher risk of developing depression or anxiety. We can all imagine the stress that is caused by a seriously ill loved one, but the illness of a tiny baby causes untold stress, so counselling and support are crucial for those parents. Bliss Scotland also found out that there is a need for 38 more overnight rooms to accommodate parents. Babies and families have to travel far from home to access care because there are only 16 neonatal care units in Scotland. That has emotional and financial implications for the families who need to be close to their child. Access to overnight rooms that allow parents to be close to the unit is crucial for them and their baby. We also need to make sure that adequate specialist transport is available. My region covers the majority of Scottish islands, and listening to parents whose child has been airlifted to a neonatal care unit while they have been left behind on an island is heart-rending. It is difficult enough to be separated but somehow having sea between the parents and the baby makes it worse. Fathers also often have to face making an awful decision about where they should be if their baby’s mother is also seriously ill. Those parents need practical and emotional support. It is right that specialist staff who care for babies in transit are given priority on flights and in ambulances, but we need to find ways of allowing parents to travel if they are fit and able to do so. We also need to make sure that there are sufficient allied health professionals to support families and children. Physiotherapy, nutritional support and indeed speech therapy might be needed to help young babies with swallowing, as that is often an issue for babies who need intensive care. We also need palliative care support for parents; that is one of the most difficult areas and it is essential that parents are supported through it. The quality framework deals with many of those important issues, but it requires to be implemented quickly. World prematurity day takes place every November. It allows us to focus on issues, gives us the opportunity to gauge the improvements that have been made during the year, and allows us to renew our efforts to ensure that we offer a world-class service to premature babies and their families.

We welcome the review and its findings, which we hope will give a more consistent and rounded approach that has recovery as the main aim. We, too, want to see a clear commitment from the Scottish Government to improve the routes to recovery from drug addiction. That is why we are asking it to produce a timetable for action. Many members, including Elaine Murray and John Pentland, have stated the obvious: we must have a person-centred approach. People’s recovery is different because the causes and types of addictions are different, so if we do not have person-centred treatment available, the approach will not work. People cannot be put into boxes; they need to be at the centre of and directing the care. Mary Scanlon made the point that, when we are looking to introduce a strategy, we must listen to drug users and recovered addicts because they are the experts. In summing up that concept, Graeme Pearson was right in saying that we need to be ambitious for people, do the best for them and allow them to enjoy their lives and their lives with their families. Those must be the aims of our approach. We must realise that we are dealing with human beings who have issues that we must help them with. Families are also very much part of that—Christian Allard’s speech about the impact of drug addiction on family and friends was not only moving but helpful to the debate. I recently met Scottish Families Affected by Alcohol and Drugs, and it pressed home that point. Sometimes it is the families who know what the causes are and are best placed to help with the recovery. They should be given the tools and the information that they need, made part of the process and allowed to fulfil that role, so that they are much better able to intervene when the time is right and to help people towards recovery, which was a point made by Gil Paterson. A number of members talked about the age profile of people who have been addicted to heroin. It means those people’s families, especially their parents, who are often the people looking after their children, are aging and are perhaps becoming disabled themselves due to old age. There is an issue related to young carers that we must deal with clearly. They have a fear not just about being taken into care but about accessing the available support because they need it for a parent’s addiction. We need to look at a child-centred approach. I remember walking into a chemist one day and seeing a young lad who was probably about 10 years old. As he saw me coming, he had on his face not embarrassment but absolute shame as he stood beside his mother who was being handed her methadone by the pharmacist. He was in dread of me being a part of that. The experience brought home to me the impact of stigma—that young lad was aware of the stigma and what he thought my reaction would be. I felt that, as a society, we were really letting him down. He obviously did not have the support that he needed; he was living with stigma every day. Jim Eadie and many other members talked about stigma. The United Kingdom Drug Policy Commission did a report that discussed the feelings of shame and worthlessness that are engendered through stigmatisation. Those families have an impact on people’s self-worth. We cannot help people through the experience unless we build their self-worth. Families also describe being too afraid to reach out for help because they are too ashamed to speak to anybody about what is happening. If we do not deal with the stigma of drug abuse, we hamper recovery and prevent people from seeking help and, therefore, stop their journeys towards recovery. As our amendment makes clear, we need not only to help people towards recovery but to tackle the causes of addiction. Many people talked about that. Gil Paterson talked about inequality, and he was right to do so, but there are also deeper causes, such as trauma and mental health problems, which Mary Scanlon mentioned. None of those is income related, but they are also causes of addiction, so we need to consider them all in the round and tackle them. We need to tackle those issues for the people who suffer from addiction. As Willie Rennie said, the fear of recovery is great because, once people stop using the drugs that helped them to deal with the problems that caused their addiction, they have to go back and deal with those problems, which were insurmountable before and continue to be so unless they get the help that they need to deal with them. The debate is really about opioid replacements. They have their place, as everyone has agreed. Of course, we need to make sure that the prescription is right. I represent many rural and remote areas where it is not possible for people to attend a pharmacy or access such treatments, and we need to consider different drug treatments. That is especially the case for people who take prescriptions home with them and who share a home with children or to whose home children have access. Methadone causes respiratory depression, and if a child gets a hold of it by accident—that can happen, because children get everywhere—it can have a real impact on them. We need to ensure that not only the people who need the prescriptions but the people who live with them are thought of in prescribing. We need to consider that as a matter of harm reduction to help stabilise people and to put in the necessary help and support. It is a question of dealing with the whole person and the causes of their addiction and considering how we can help them to come to terms with that. Many speakers mentioned the area drug partnerships. As Graeme Pearson said, the Government needs to monitor the improvement in the area drug partnerships, because it is not fair that people do not have a quality of service. People need their issues to be dealt with. There must be national standards and—yes—local strategies, but they should be the same for everybody. People should not be involved in a postcode lottery that means that their addiction is dealt with differently and, indeed, their recovery is less because of where they live. Many speakers mentioned pharmacies. We need to have a joined-up approach among social work, health, pharmacies and everyone else who deals with the issue. To go back to my point about the young lad, there must be dignity in the provision. There was no privacy for him or his mother, and that had an impact on their reaction to stigmatisation. I could talk about many other issues and I could go on for ages, but I will not. We hope to see a timetable for the improvements that are outlined in the review, and I hope that that will give people real hope for their futures.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to provide permanent employment opportunities for people who will be on temporary contracts during the Christmas period. (S4O-02622)

People who are employed on short-term contracts over Christmas tend to be low paid and to have unsociable hours. When the Government gives grant funding to businesses, will it make it a condition of funding that employees and staff who are employed by subcontractors are paid the living wage, are not placed on zero-hours contracts and have reasonable employment conditions?

I congratulate James Dornan on securing the debate on an important issue and I echo his thanks to St Andrew’s First Aid for the work that it does. He has gone into detail about the count me in campaign, which sends out the important message that no one should die because they needed first aid and did not get it. It is important to raise awareness of how first aid can save lives. People can show their support for that by signing the pledge online, reading first aid information, organising a first aid training event in their local area or volunteering with St Andrew’s First Aid in their community. As James Dornan said, volunteers work at loads of different events, from sporting events to music festivals and the like. It is very easy to become a volunteer; being a volunteer means that a person gets the opportunity to learn those vital lifesaving skills. However, if people do not want to be on the front line—perhaps they are afraid that they might panic—they can volunteer to take on other jobs including administration, youth leadership, fund raising and public relations. Those jobs are vital to the voluntary organisation: it is important that its staff are free to train people to be first aiders. Some years ago, I undertook—with some nervousness, because one never knows what situations one might be confronted with—St Andrew’s first aid training. I kept asking the trainer difficult questions on what would happen if such-and-such were to happen. The eventual answer—the trainer spoke with a slight tone of exasperation—was that if someone is dead, a person cannot kill them anymore, so there is nothing that a person can do in a situation in which help is needed apart from do their very best. That put the matter in context for me; everybody needs to take that message on board and learn the skills. The first and foremost skill that everyone should learn is to dial 999, because no matter how honed one’s CPR skills are, a person can continue that only for a short time before assistance is needed. We need to get those very basic messages through to people. Young people who are leaving care are sometimes taught those skills. Although that is important, it is equally important to teach the skills to all our young people, so that they know the basics, know to phone 999 and know to get involved. They should also be braver at picking up some of the information that comes to us through public campaigns. We are all aware of the British Heart Foundation’s “Stayin’ Alive” campaign on hands-on CPR. However, people get confused and wonder what they should be doing during an incident. We therefore should have clear messages that join up all first aid training and public health information, so that people know what to do. Another very useful campaign was the National Advisory Committee on Stroke’s FAST—“Face. Arms. Speech. Time”—campaign about helping people identify strokes. People often see people who are suffering a stroke and think that they are drunk or tired. The FAST campaign showed people how to check for the signs of a stroke and sought to give them the right tools, so that they would feel a bit braver about intervening, and to make them aware of the need to get help, because getting help quickly is vital to everybody in a first aid situation. There are also community resilience campaigns; for example, the Scottish Ambulance Service is installing defibrillators in the community. I am also aware that local general practitioners are helping communities to raise funds and are training people how to use the defibrillators, which can save lives. I welcome the debate for those reasons. I very much hope that St Andrew’s achieves its target of 34,000 signatures. I hope that its campaign will also raise awareness and that more people will be encouraged to take on the skills and save lives as a result.

Instead of promising jam tomorrow, will the minister put on the agenda for the group’s next meeting issues that can be devolved to the islands just now such as transport to and from them, which will make a huge step change, the real integration of public services and indeed the devolution of powers that the Government already holds? Will he put such issues on the agenda and make progress on them, or are the islands, too, on pause?

I think that there is unanimous support in the Parliament for the general principles of the bill. We need an integrated health and social care service that has no barriers and which appears seamless to service users and their carers. However, I am not sure that the bill alone will achieve that—it needs to go further. Moreover, I am not convinced that it is possible to legislate for the type of leadership and cultural change that Duncan McNeil and Malcolm Chisholm talked about, which is crucial to making the step change on how we deliver care. Mary Scanlon talked about Highland, which has adopted the lead agency model. No other area appears to be taking that model forward. It is clear that the model’s success—or partial success, because Highland admits that it is a work in progress, which has a long way to go—and indeed the fact that integration has happened at all, has been the result of strong leadership at NHS and council levels. People have been committed to change, and there has been cultural change in the staffing structure. Most of all, there has been trust. The people involved have said that it will be difficult to replicate the lead agency approach elsewhere unless there is trust. It is not possible to legislate for trust and cultural change. The bill addresses the mechanisms and bureaucracy, but we must be clear that that alone will not work. We will need to consider how we nurture the culture and leadership in organisations.

I hope this is better, Presiding Officer. The bill deals mainly with the bureaucracy, but even that does not seem to be done very well. The legislation will allow a board to be set up with an accountable officer, but staffing and resources appear to remain with the parent bodies. What budget will be required by the new body if it does not have responsibility for paying staff or if capital resources remain in the ownership of the parent authority? How can that new body direct their use? That is not at all clear. The cabinet secretary said in his opening speech that integrated budgets are essential to success, but in committee he said that—as the Government has said in previous budgets—healthcare money would remain ring fenced and protected and that local government money would remain part of the local government settlement. It is therefore difficult to see how the budgets can be integrated if organisations must account separately for the money and show that it is spent in their own organisation and under their existing responsibilities. We must look at how that will work. Malcolm Chisholm mentioned health board budgets. Half of their budgets will go into the new body. That might work in some instances, but what about acute centres of excellence? They may take patients from all over the country, but what part of their budget is ring fenced for that national service and what part will go to local service delivery? Those matters are not at all clear. Neither is it clear what thought has gone into the impact of people working together with different terms and conditions on salaries, pay bands, pensions and policies, including disciplinary and grievance policies. How will those work when people work together? Who would take out a grievance? What policy will they use if they are working with somebody employed by a different agency? That issue needs to be considered, including by the governing bodies and the trade unions. We need to make progress on those issues because, as Ken Macintosh mentioned, if the budgets, the powers and governance are not sorted out, we will end up in lengthy wrangling. I can see that happening if the cabinet secretary does not consider those important issues. Let me be clear that service users and their carers need to be at the centre of the legislation. They are concerned about where they fit in, how they will be involved, whether co-production is at the heart of the bill, whether services are provided for them rather than their being allowed to design their own services, and how they would be represented. The point was made that the voluntary sector interface also represents service providers and that quite often service users feel drowned out by the providers’ voices. We need to make the distinction between service users and providers, and we must ensure that the individual is very much at the centre of what we provide in order to help them to live their lives and to enable them to live how we would wish to live. For example, should an individual wish to move, their care package should be portable and move with them. They should also know what that care package would cost in other areas. That is important and as Ken Macintosh said—Macmillan Cancer Support research made the same point—the service user must be at the centre. Putting the service user at the centre also means that we must look at quality and safety. The RCN, among many other organisations, asked for that issue to be covered in the bill. We need minimum standards of care—people need to access the same level of care, regardless where they live, and they need to know what to expect. It is not possible to have quality without reasonable conditions for staff. Neil Findlay mentioned working conditions. Many people who deliver front-line care do not even get the minimum wage, training or time to do their job. They are frustrated and distressed by the stress that the job causes if they cannot do it properly. We therefore need to ensure that quality is covered in the bill. Furthermore, some of the principles on integration need to be moved up the bill and emphasised, so that everyone is clear about the culture needs to change as well as the different structures that are to be put in place. There are many more issues that we need to consider. For instance, we need joint inspection that is independent, rigorous and available to workers, staff and service users. Whistleblowers also need to be protected in those conditions. I have come to the end of my time, but I very much hope that the Government will listen and will strengthen the bill. It could be a good bill if those concerns are listened to and taken into consideration.

5. To ask the First Minister when the Scottish Government will bring forward plans to extend legislation to make wilful neglect of patients a criminal offence. (S4F-01705)

The First Minister will be aware of Scottish Labour’s proposal to create an integrated health and social care inspectorate that is independent of Government, is accessible to staff and patients to allow them to raise their concerns and has the powers to take tough, decisive action. Will he explain to us why he has failed to consider our proposal so far?

14. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to align education and skills provision in the Highlands and Islands with the needs of local employers. (S4O-02605)

The minister might be aware that Kishorn Port Ltd is progressing its development at Kishorn. There is no local college provision in the area. What steps is the Scottish Government taking to ensure that local young people have the skills that will enable them to take up the jobs that could be created at this exciting development?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with Highland Council about the infrastructure and capital investment required to meet the needs of communities in the Highlands and Islands. (S4O-02568)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that planning consent for Kishorn port development is progressing. Has she had any discussions with Highland Council about the improvements to transport infrastructure that would ensure that we maximise the potential of that strategic development?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to improve access to public transport for people with mobility issues. (S4O-02553)

I have been contacted by a number of constituents regarding the lack of wheelchair-accessible taxis in the Highlands and access to buses. The lack of taxis means that people who use wheelchairs cannot easily socialise together. In addition, buses can take only one wheelchair, but if the space is being used by parents with prams or pushchairs, a wheelchair user cannot get on the bus. The space can be used by only one wheelchair user or parent user at a time.

One of the issues that has been brought to me is the cost of changing to accessible taxis. What incentives can the Scottish Government give to taxi drivers to improve their vehicles to allow them to be accessible for wheelchair users?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that Andrew Walker, who was a lay member of the pharmacy practices committee in the Western Isles, was asked to step down from that role when it became public that he held it and when he committed to listen to the concerns of the community on the application that was in hand. Surely that flies in the face of transparency and of needing to consult and listen to the views of those affected by decisions that are taken on their behalf. Can the cabinet secretary perhaps advise the Western Isles NHS Board how it should proceed and give interim guidelines until he is in a position to come forward with a proper review?

I, too, welcome Richard Simpson back to the chamber. For those of us on his email list he has not really been away—he barely paused in his work. I remember opening an email quite late one night—I think it was sent from intensive care—which began “They have given back my iPhone”. The emails have continued ever since, making points about policy and what we should be doing, which I appreciated. I welcome the opportunity to debate person-centred care. We can all unite around the issue because it is crucial, although many members made the point that we cannot have it in place without resources and time. Malcolm Chisholm amplified our amendment, which commends those delivering health and community care in what are often difficult conditions. If we are to deliver person-centred care, we must have the proper tools, such as beds, blankets and pillows. Neil Findlay mentioned last winter and the striking case of John McGarrity. Around the same time, a senior staff nurse—I am not sure whether they are a woman or a man—said: “It is completely normal, and a common occurrence, to have old and very ill people lined up in corridors on trolleys because there are not enough beds. “In some cases, they are the lucky ones. Others don’t make it out of the waiting room because there are no trolleys or staff to put people on them.” Such situations occurring are a real concern when we have 1,000 fewer beds and 1,200 fewer nurses than we had in place in September 2009. We have listened to the concerns that people have brought to us and their fears that the system will fail again this winter, so the Labour amendment asks the Scottish Government to guarantee that waiting time targets will be met during the winter months. By doing so, the Government would reassure people that it has learned the lessons from what happened last year, assessed the pressure points and taken steps to ensure that the same thing will not happen again. If it is clear from the minister’s closing speech or from how SNP members vote that the Government cannot give that guarantee, that will demonstrate that the concerns that are being expressed to us are real. If that is the case, the Government needs to act now to ensure that we do not end up in the same place as we did last year. Members mentioned the RCN’s briefing, which described the particular pressures of the winter and said: “In addition, staff are overstretched as vacancy rates increase and use of bank staff continues to go up.” I think that Jim Hume quoted the same sentence. As Nanette Milne said, people need to be involved in conversations about their care so that they can be involved in making decisions. However, if we do not have enough staff and rely on a transient workforce of bank nurses, how can we listen to people? Indeed, how can we recruit nurses if we cannot offer the right pay and conditions? It is sad that senior managers in NHS boards are getting a 4 per cent pay increase, while the nurses who deliver the service are getting only 1 per cent.

I am disappointed that the cabinet secretary did not take the opportunity to put on record what the truth is. That is the truth as we understand it. It would be nice if all health service workers were treated the same and if we showed our appreciation of their work by ensuring that their standard of living does not fall. Many members talked about self-directed support as part of a person-centred approach. Siobhan McMahon talked about Pam Duncan. Those of us who have met Pam realise just how tough she is, and if she has experienced difficulty in applying for self-directed support, surely everyone else will be put off by the process. I ask the cabinet secretary to look again at the process, to ensure that people are not being put off. I recently attended a conference of the Scottish Personal Assistant Employers Network. SPAEN helps service users and carers to take control of their budgets, employ carers and take their experience into their own hands. I was impressed by what the organisation is doing; I was also quite shocked by some of the things that I heard during the conference. Tommy Whitelaw gave a presentation. Anyone who meets Tommy or hears him speak cannot help but be moved by his experience. He is doing a number of sessions, entitled Tommy on tour, and I suggest to members that if he comes to their area they should go and listen to him. He talks about looking after his mother, who had dementia, and how difficult that was as she became a non-person to a lot of people who provided services. He became very isolated at a time when he should have been supported. We need to listen to the experience of people who use care services, and we must ensure that they lead change in how we deal with the issues. Bob Doris talked about council cuts. This is a time of concern for people who depend on services. Health service budgets have been ring fenced, but councils have faced cuts in their budgets. There is an unfunded council tax freeze, for which the Scottish Government is responsible. SNP members cannot complain about councils making cuts if their Government is not giving councils the resources that they need if they are to provide services. Councils are at the front line of preventative healthcare, so we must ensure that they have the resources that they need, or more costs will fall on the health service as it picks up the fallout from the cuts.

Duncan McNeil is shouting behind me that all cuts are a political choice. It is a political choice of the Government not to fund the council tax freeze, and that is leading to very difficult decisions being made not only in Glasgow but in councils all over. I listen to councillors who say that this is not what they got into politics for. They deliver very difficult decisions. Duncan McNeil talked about personalised care. That is a step further and we should pursue it. The person is not centred to the care; rather, the care package starts with the person at the core. We also need to look at the financial pressures. We have been told that health budgets are ring fenced, but the Auditor General for Scotland has put health boards on amber warning. I think that that is because of some of the pressures that are coming from other areas, such as local government. People are going into A and E as unplanned admissions, and there is no way of taking them back out of hospital, because the resources are not there in the community. A number of members have spoken about procurement, which is vital, because if we do not get the services in the community right, how can we put people at the centre? How can a 15-minute visit achieve anything at all? I do not know whether anyone watched a programme—I cannot tell members what it was called, but it caught my attention—in which an elderly lady and her husband both got a 15-minute care visit. The carer said that she could not deliver the care that they required and that she sometimes thought that those clients were afraid to ask her to take them to the toilet because time was so short. Those things are the very basics of care. We need to have such support in place, and we cannot do that by paying the minimum wage and having 15-minute care visits and untrained people working in those services. We need to value all those who deliver those services. Things will only get worse, because a demographic time bomb is coming. We need to ensure that there is funding and that it is fair. For instance, is it fair that people who suffer from Alzheimer’s have to pay for their own care, whereas people who have cancer get their care funded? Those are the things in our system that we need to look at. We also need to ensure that people have access to palliative care. We listened to Marie Curie Cancer Care talking about those with cancer having access to palliative care, but people with other conditions not having the same level of access. Those are all things that are coming that we need to talk about. Indeed, Marie Curie Cancer Care brought to our attention a number of issues, including the bereavement survey—it would be helpful to learn from that—and the out-of-hours multipatient service in NHS Dumfries and Galloway. That seems to me to be an excellent initiative to keep people out of hospital and give them the care that they require at home. You would not believe it, Presiding Officer, but there are many other things that I could say, despite using the additional time that you allotted to me. I will finish by saying that person-centred care is really important. I think that we all agree that it is essential and we want it to work for all, not 90 or 96 per cent. We need to value the staff who deliver it and give them the tools to do so. They need time, resources and planning. We need the Scottish Government to ensure that those tools are in place so that it can provide more than warm words.

Will the minister give way?

I am grateful that the minister is keen to learn from experience. Has the Government learned from the experience of last winter, when many people were not able to get access to beds in hospitals? Can he guarantee that that will not happen again this year?

3. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government plans to implement a wage rise for NHS workers in Scotland. (S4F-01622)

The First Minister has sanctioned a pay rise of up to 4 per cent for the top managers in the NHS. Can nurses in the NHS in Scotland expect a pay rise of the same degree?

Like many others who have spoken this afternoon, I welcome the committee’s report and the Government’s response. However, as many have pointed out, the credit for these changes should go to the petitioners who petitioned the Parliament on the subject and the very many people who lobbied their MSPs and had the bravery to fight for others while their own lives were ending. Nanette Milne and David Stewart paid tribute to Mike Gray and Tina McGeever, who started the campaign five years ago—a campaign that has been joined by so many. If, as Duncan McNeil said, three months is a lifetime to many people who are looking for the drugs, that tells us how many lifetimes have passed in the five years since we started discussing the matter and looking for solutions to the problem. Decisions on access to medicines need to have empathy and compassion at their core and must be based firmly on clinical judgment and effectiveness. A system that depends on people’s ability to pay flies in the face of an NHS that is free at the point of use. A system that depends on people being able to make the case for their treatment is equally wrong. Everyone, regardless of their wealth or ability to make their case, must be treated the same. We must have a system that is fair and transparent, which we can all sign up to. Although, like others, I welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement, the devil is in the detail, as members have said, and I look forward to getting more information when it comes to hand. The test, as Malcolm Chisholm said, will be whether there are more yeses. However, they must be based on clinical assessment with the patient at the centre of the decision making. Much of the discussion has surrounded access to cancer treatments, mainly because it is a field in which there are rapid changes in medication. As Malcolm Chisholm said, treatments are becoming more individualised and we can tell which medicines will be of benefit to individuals on the basis of their DNA. That means that the choices that we face may not be so tough, as clinicians can burrow down into whom the treatments will be effective for and whom they will benefit. It is not a case of making very expensive drugs available to everyone on a hit-and-miss basis; we can choose people for whom those drugs will be effective and make them available to them. In order to do that, we must be able to test the effectiveness of the drugs on tumours, and that work is done only when there is a recognised SMC-approved drug treatment regime. If tumours are not tested against all available medicines, clinicians will not have the opportunity to look at alternative drug treatments or apply under the IPTR system. The cabinet secretary said that 40 per cent of applicants are turned down, but we do not know the figure for those who do not apply, perhaps because they do not have the information to enable them to talk about the efficacy of the treatment because it has not been carried out. Also, as others have said, it could be because they know that other applications that have been made have failed. We need to find a fairer process. If we focused only on cancer treatments in the debate, that would do a disservice to many people out there who have life-threatening conditions. Many conditions that were life threatening in the past are now termed treatable chronic diseases because of medical intervention. As Gil Paterson said, we need to ensure that there is not two-tier access to treatments, whereby those with cancer go ahead of those with other conditions. We need a system that works for all treatments and diagnoses. Many members have spoken about the cost of drugs for orphan and ultra-orphan diseases, which can be hugely expensive because there is little use for such medicines due to the rarity of the illnesses on which they impact. We may need a different funding formula that reflects that and ensures that those who suffer from those rare diseases are not discriminated against. Malcolm Chisholm made the point that the fund is difficult to access. I hope that the cabinet secretary will consider improving how people access the fund in the short term. The £20 million per annum is welcome but, as he said, only £6.5 million was drawn down from that this year, which indicates that there may be a gap in how people can access the fund. David Stewart mentioned that the QALY system does not work with rare diseases. Perhaps we need a quick review of the system to see how we can improve it in the short term until we come up with a long-lasting system that addresses all conditions. There are also changes in medicines that are available for chronic diseases. Arthritis, for example, can be totally debilitating and have an enormous effect on a person’s life, wellbeing and independence. In such cases we have to weigh the cost of the treatment against the value to not only the patient but society. I spoke to somebody who is looking for treatment for arthritis, which would have kept her independent and at work and stopped her being a burden to society—as she would have seen it—by needing full-time care and depending on benefits for the rest of her life. That cost did not seem to have been taken into account when the decision was made on whether she could access the treatment. That is really important. Availability of drugs is also an important issue. Recognised drug treatments do not always work for everyone. Lesser-known treatments are out there, but because they are not fully recognised it can be difficult sometimes to persuade clinicians to use them. When clinicians are persuaded, supplies are not readily available. All those issues need to be looked at in the round. A number of people—Malcolm Chisholm and Nanette Milne were among them—mentioned access to drug trials. That should be talked about, because we lag behind in drug treatments and we are not seen as a preferred site for drug trials because we cannot compare new data with the most up-to-date treatment data available. We need to look at that and ensure that it does not become a problem. I see that my time is running out, Presiding Officer. I welcome the debate and I hope that it will lead to a system in which we do not have to pay or lobby to get the treatment that we need. We look forward to seeing the detail of the proposals.

14. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to ensure that all schools have adequate internet connections. (S4O-02455)

The minister will be aware that connectivity in remote and rural areas provides schools with the ability to offer a wider curriculum. As the Scottish Government is delivering interconnect to 32 local authorities, he will be well aware that it proves a challenge to the authorities in the Highlands and Islands to deliver it to schools because they have the biggest geographical spread—more schools and greater distances to travel. What support is the minister giving them to ensure that we have a level playing field and that children in Barra gain from the service as well as children in Baillieston?

I, too, welcome “The keys to life” strategy, which builds on “The same as you?”. There are some comprehensive sections in the strategy, while others possibly need more work to progress. The health section of the strategy highlights the challenges and the health inequalities that are experienced by people with learning difficulties. Some of those are due to health difficulties that form part of an individual’s disability, but others are due to poor communication between those with learning disabilities and health professionals. I am really pleased that NHS Western Isles is leading the way in training staff in better communication with people with learning disabilities and that that good practice is being mainstreamed throughout Scotland. We need to remember, however, that people with learning disabilities are the same as everyone else, in that their wellbeing and fulfilment is key to a healthy life. We must ensure that we understand what causes inequalities so that we can develop services to improve health and prevent illness. Bad health stops people with learning disabilities from enjoying activities such as employment and education that contribute to a fulfilled life, but it is the same the other way round, in that lack of fulfilment can impact on somebody’s health. Therefore, although improving communication between people with learning difficulties and healthcare professionals is important, it cannot end there. The communication channels need to be improved across the various services that each individual interacts with. That will help to identify problems that occur and also help the various agencies and individuals to work together quickly and effectively to resolve problems. I was really heartened to see that some health boards—Inverclyde, for example—were targeting their public health information at people with learning disabilities and helping them to take on that message. However, we need the specialist services as well as communication, because communication can go only so far. The specialist services need to be accessible and properly funded to enable individuals to be supported to improve not just their health but their general wellbeing. This strategy is happening against a backdrop of local authority cuts that are leading to increased care charges. Some people are being charged up to 100 per cent of their care package. We have heard others talk about the human rights of those with learning disabilities. Surely the ability to live your life to the full must be a human right and we must look at those charges to ensure that nobody has a funding issue when it comes to living their life to the full. There is also the backdrop of welfare cuts, which very much impact on those with learning disabilities. That is a work in progress and I hope that the strategy will seek to tackle that. We have had some successes in looking at health issues for those with learning disabilities, with an emphasis on health conditions that are part of a wider condition. For instance, people with Down’s syndrome now have an extended life expectancy that has increased a great deal over the past decade. I welcome the further research into that area because I think that we can do a lot that will improve life expectancy for people with different conditions. That area of the strategy is to be welcomed. I will turn briefly to self-directed support. Although it is welcome, there is a concern that sometimes self-directed support packages are an opportunity to cut support packages. That is a concern for both carers and people with learning disabilities. We must also recognise that people with learning disabilities are vulnerable, so they need safeguards in the system to protect them. Those with learning disabilities often fall prey to unscrupulous people who would abuse their relationship in order, for example, to take their benefits—the person with learning disabilities is then abandoned and left with nothing. Under self-directed care, personal assistants need no qualifications to carry out their roles, so we need to ensure that that role cannot be used by people who would prey on those with learning disabilities as a way of making money out of them. There must also be safeguards in assessing need. I have heard of a case in which a self-assessment was completed for a person with learning disabilities without that person even being present. Had the person with learning disabilities been present on their own, however, they might have downplayed any needs because, as we know, many people with learning disabilities crave independence—they have been wrapped up in cotton wool by friends and families for too long and really want to decide for themselves. With self-directed care, a real challenge that we face is to empower individuals while ensuring that there are protections for them as well. I will also mention supported workplaces, which are integral to this issue. When I spoke to staff at Café Artysans, which is a social enterprise cafe in Inverness that provides training places for people with learning disabilities and other issues that require supported employment, they told me that not as many people can come through that service as they would wish because of a lack of jobs in the community that people can move on to. Most public bodies have policies about employing disabled people, but such posts are rare, so people who are ready to move on from supported employment and who could hold down a job cannot do so. If we are serious about the issue, we need to ring fence more jobs for people with learning disabilities. It is disappointing that the number of people in the ring-fenced jobs that are currently available dropped by 318 between 2011 and 2012. We need more of those places, not fewer. The Scottish Government could perhaps lead the way by ring fencing jobs within its own organisation as well as encouraging agencies—and, indeed, contractors—to do the same. As well as helping people with learning disabilities to reach their full potential, which is crucial to their sense of wellbeing, such a move would play a role in educating the wider population about what people with learning disabilities have to offer. Yes, we need supported workplaces, but we also need mainstream jobs for them to move on to. Coming quickly to the end of my speech—

When I attended a carers forum question and answer session last week, I heard of one person in supported employment for whom the charge for the placement was more than the person earned from taking part. That goes a long way towards demeaning that person’s contribution to society. In looking at the wider health issues, we need to tackle issues of wellbeing and improve health in the long term.

I also congratulate David Stewart on securing the debate. It is extremely important that it has come to Parliament. I also pay tribute to the DGFAG for its tenacity. Its members have been campaigning for many years, and I am glad that they are in Parliament today to flag up their campaign. They have not only been pushing people; they have also been looking for solutions. Tribute needs to be paid to them for that. I was in Dunoon recently and saw the MV Ali Cat coming in. I decided to go down to the pier to watch it berth. That was just out of interest; it was something to do because it was a lovely day for a walk. As I watched it come in, the nub of the problem was brought home to me; even on such a beautiful day, the gangway was moving in a way that we would expect a seesaw to move. It went up and down so much that I do not know how the people getting on and off the ferry were keeping their feet. Mums with buggies were not able to hold on to the gangway because they had to hold on to the children in their buggies. I cannot imagine the bravery of the older people who were trying to get on and off that boat. There were also people with bags of shopping, luggage and the like. It looked horrendous. I am just not clear how any health and safety risk assessment could have allowed that ferry to sail, even in those conditions, as people must be able to get on and off safely. That needs to be looked at as a matter of urgency. Obviously such difficulties in getting on and off a ferry discourage people from using it, which will impact on jobs in the tourism industry. It will discourage people who might have been looking to come to Dunoon to create a business and to commute back and forth. There is also the problem of the Rest and Be Thankful—the other route into Dunoon, which is longer. Last winter the road was closed on numerous occasions because of landslides, which would have cut Dunoon off had it not been for Western Ferries. People who do not have cars are least well served by the service, which is an equality issue. Those who cannot afford cars and so cannot drive to Western Ferries do not have the opportunity to look for jobs on the other side. When I spoke to people in Dunoon I was told that young people who commute town centre to town centre for work have found that their employers have lost patience with them, because they were not turning up to work when they should because the ferry could not sail. Some of the problems that I referred to earlier arise when the ferry is sailing, but there are also difficulties for people who cannot get to work when the ferry does not sail—it is unreliable. I also heard anecdotal accounts of people having to lie on the floor on the ferry and of people being thrown about, which was a terrifying experience. All that adds up to a lack of confidence in the service. Issues need to be addressed very quickly. We have heard warm words from the Government, but what we really need is action. The solution is in the Government’s hands. I hope that when the minister winds up we will hear her view of what that solution could be.

7. To ask the Scottish Government when it will publish its response to the “Review of NHS Pharmaceutical Care of Patients in the Community in Scotland”. (S4O-02388)

The cabinet secretary knows that the review found that opening pharmacies can have a detrimental impact on general practitioner services in remote and rural areas. Will he therefore place a moratorium on granting licences for new pharmacies in such areas until he has had time to consider, respond to and take action on the back of the review?

Our historic environment provides us with the ability to look back and see how past generations dealt with challenges, many of which we too must deal with. Our more recent history is easier to understand, because there is written information, but the further back we go the harder that becomes. We need archaeologists to interpret sites and bring them to life for us and to establish what past generations did. Their work not only tells us about our history but provides valuable insight into how past generations dealt with and adapted to, for example, climate change and changes to the food supply. There are valuable lessons for us in that regard. Archaeological sites are fascinating and can be a draw for tourists, but they are also very much places of learning. Very few archaeologists work in the public sector, and most of them are to be found in local authorities. Scotland’s 26 local authority archaeologists are all trying to identify, protect, interpret and educate, but it is an impossible task for so few a number. Although Historic Scotland appears to list and assess sites, it does not seem to have the resources to excavate them. It is not clear whether the new body will be better placed to carry out some of that work, which means that more of the burden will probably still fall to local government and its diminishing resources. Western Isles Council, for example, employs an archaeologist to oversee its sites, but it is impossible for one person to carry out the job. Although many sites are still to be excavated, a large number of sites are coming under pressure as a result of climate change. Many are situated in saline lagoons or on the machair, landforms that are coming under huge pressure through climate change. Moreover, more than 1,000 sites are under threat from coastal erosion as a result of climate change, and 400 of them need to be excavated. That is simply way beyond one person’s workload and the loss of such sites will impact on our future knowledge of the challenges that we could face. In any other discipline, such a situation would be catastrophic but, because the lack of value we attach to archaeology and learning from the past, we are barely reacting to it. We put much greater emphasis on protecting our natural heritage; for example, we have experts looking at climate change in our natural environment. Of course, that is not wrong, but we need only contrast Scottish Natural Heritage’s 12 employees with the council’s one archaeologist. We need a more joined-up approach to allow organisations such as SNH to work with those who protect and assess our built environment wherever their aims and objectives cross over. In its response to the consultation, Archaeology Scotland stated that it works closely with Scottish Environmental LINK in recognition of the need to closely align natural and cultural heritage. If different non-governmental organisations can do that, surely the Government can do it too. The strategy must recognise and incorporate the work of local authorities and work with them, other Government bodies and the voluntary sector to protect our cultural heritage.

I am grateful for that intervention. Perhaps the cabinet secretary might consider creating a similar position in the rural affairs and environment directorate. Land managers used to be encouraged to build historic environment considerations into their land management strategies and plans, but changes to the Scotland rural development programme mean that that is no longer possible. The previous system was recognised as a good thing beyond our own boundaries; indeed, it was adapted in the English version of the SRDP. However, with the changes that I mentioned, we lost a valuable means of protecting the historic environment and I ask the cabinet secretary to consider that and speak to colleagues in other departments to find out whether such an important measure can be reinstated. We need to learn not only from the past but what we can do in future, which means that we also need to consider the economic advantage of protecting our historic environment. I think that that advantage is recognised, but we probably do not emphasise it enough. With regard to tourism, for example, I visited Skara Brae in Orkney this year. Not only is it absolutely breathtaking and not only does it give a real insight into how people lived many millennia ago, but it is a huge tourist attraction with thousands of visitors every year. At the same time as those people were learning from their visit, they were boosting the local economy and contributing to the cost of preserving that wonderful site. There is a cost to excavating sites and it is understandable that, when money is tight and there are pressures on budgets—especially in local authorities, which also have to deal with education, home care and the like—such work will often go to the bottom of the pile. Indeed, COSLA said as much in its response to the consultation. However, we must consider a more joined-up approach not only to spread those costs but to gain economies of scale and ensure that we protect our natural and historic environments when they face such challenges. We also need to take a longer-term view. If we invest in those sites and they are excavated and protected, they will begin to pay for themselves and will contribute to the local economies. It is important to look at the competition that the new body may push towards smaller, community-based trusts that may take forward some of the initial work. If a large charity is set up through the merger, it will have the ability to apply for resources and grants, and its knowledge will exceed that of small local trusts. We need to consider how we can support local trusts to ensure that their valuable work is not lost. If we take a joined-up approach, we can push this forward; what we need is substance for an action plan and fewer warm words.

The minister will be aware of concerns about the lack of steps to reduce emissions from our housing stock and to tackle fuel poverty, but he has shied away from using building standards to effect a change. The Scottish Government also voted down amendments to the Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill that would have incentivised insulation in fuel-inefficient buildings. What steps will he take to ensure that there is a step change in energy efficiency in our private housing stock?

The Labour Party supports the principles of the land and buildings transaction tax. This has indeed been an interesting debate. The bill is an example of devolution working well and affording the Scottish Government the opportunity to design a tax that suits its needs and redresses some of the flaws of the current UK system. The tax will be responsive to Scottish markets, especially our housing markets, and will free us from the other market distortions that happen when tax is levied more widely. The bill is a good example of decisions being taken as close as possible to those who are affected by them, illustrating one of devolution’s real benefits. I take slight issue with people who have said that we have not had tax-raising powers before. We have. Indeed, the Parliament was set up with tax-raising powers, although we have never used them. It is a point of fact—we did have tax-raising powers. Other members have said that the land and buildings transaction tax is the first tax that we have devised. That is possibly correct, although we did devise the social responsibility levy, and I very much hope that the new tax that we are now providing for will raise more revenue than that other one did—it will probably never raise any revenue again. I turn to energy efficiency, which provides one of the main bones of contention in the debate. No cognisance was taken of Malcolm Chisholm’s stage 2 amendments, nor of Patrick Harvie’s stage 3 amendments to charge differently for energy efficiency. That would have provided the Government with a tool to encourage energy efficiency measures. We know that the climate change targets have been missed, and such measures would have provided another tool in the box to deal with meeting those targets. I feel sure that we will come back to the issue in the future, and the eventual act will perhaps be amended to make that happen. I turn briefly to sub-sale relief and welcome the cabinet secretary’s points on the subject. I very much welcome the setting-up of a working group on the matter and the provisos that the cabinet secretary has put in place to ensure that speculative land purchasers cannot apply for sub-sale relief. I also welcome the fact that there will be clawback if people apply for it, are granted it and then do not fulfil the terms of the agreement. We very much agree that if the balance between relief and avoidance is not met, we will perhaps not pursue the issue further. However, I welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary is examining the matter in greater detail. I re-emphasise the importance of ensuring that tax avoidance is not part of the new tax. Tax avoidance has been a big issue with stamp duty. We welcome the general anti-avoidance rule that will be part of the forthcoming tax management bill, ensuring that people cannot abuse tax arrangements in Scotland. We look forward to working with the Government to ensure that those provisions are as stringent and rigorous as possible. I turn now to a point that has not been raised so far in the debate: that of revenue Scotland and Registers of Scotland working together. I welcome what the cabinet secretary said in his opening speech about good progress being made on that front. I urge the cabinet secretary not to take his eye off the ball with regard to the IT system. We need a good IT system to deliver the tax. It must be fit for purpose, and we know that the Registers of Scotland have had problems with computer systems—its systems have not proved to be very efficient, and we very much hope that the new system that is being devised is fit for purpose and can deliver the system that we require. Malcolm Chisholm spoke about the block grant. That issue has not been discussed very much in the debate, but it is hugely important. We know that we will face a one-off reduction in the block grant, and how that happens will impact on our future revenue. We need a fair settlement. It will be for the Scottish Government to deal in its budget with the peaks and troughs that arise from devising the tax and what it brings in, but we need to be sure that the one-off cut to the block grant is fair and that we do not lose out. Like other members, I welcome the changes in the taxation system, which move us towards a much more progressive system. Many members have spoken today about the distortions that were caused by the old slab system that was part of stamp duty land tax. There were high thresholds, and people tended to keep their prices below the threshold to encourage sales and purchase. The new system will be much fairer and more progressive, and will start from a higher amount to reflect our market conditions. The bill is devolution in practice, and it gives the Scottish Government the levers that it needs to promote economic development as well as revenue-raising powers. It is always a challenge to reach the right balance between two aspects of our economy—raising the revenue that is needed to provide our public services and encouraging economic development—but we very much welcome the bill.

The cabinet secretary talked about delivering high-quality and efficient public services, but he did not mention that he has now spent more than £800 million on putting public servants out of work. Does he consider that to be efficient use of public money, or could it have been better spent building our economy and putting people to work?

The First Minister will be aware that a judicial review has ruled that the Scottish Government should not have stopped the Western Isles schools reorganisation. Will he reimburse the council for its lost savings and legal fees in pursuing the review, so that it can invest the money in the community?

I, too, welcome the bill, but I am concerned about its complexity. It has already been said that specialist crofting lawyers have warned the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee that the bill is unnecessarily complex and could create unintended consequences to add to those introduced by the 2010 act. I heard what the minister said in his opening speech, but I urge him to get round the table with those who expressed those concerns and ensure that the stage 2 amendments deal with them. Perhaps he could include the bill team in those discussions, as well. There is no harm in testing and debating the bill, because it is in all our interests to get it right. Given the short consultation, I do not think that it would be remiss of us to do that. I turn to some of the anomalies in the 2010 act that also need to be sorted out. I understand why those anomalies are not being sorted out in this bill, because it deals with an urgent issue, but they could become just as urgent. It was recently brought to my attention that the bill will make it illegal for anyone other than the registered crofter to work their croft. The Crofters (Scotland) Act 1993 act stated: “The crofter shall, by himself or his family, with or without hired labour, either or both (a) cultivate his croft; (b) put it to some other use, being a purposeful use, so that every part of the croft either is cultivated or is put to such use.” The 2010 act amended that to say: “A crofter must comply with each of the duties set out in subsection (2)”, which says “the crofter (a) must (i) cultivate the croft”. The unintended consequence of that is that the crofter can no longer cultivate the croft with the help of his family or indeed hired labour. That flies in the face of crofting, which is very much a family activity, and it misses the essence of crofting, which is normally carried out collectively in a community. That work has been restricted to just the crofter and not the family, community or indeed hired help, which has created an anomaly. It might not be policed or reported on, but there is an anomaly in the law. Others have mentioned other anomalies—Alex Fergusson might have already spoken about a very similar anomaly to the one that I am going to describe. I give the example of the crofter who has bought a croft, crofts the land, has a home and garden on that land and subsequently decides to sell the house and garden but keep the croft. The home and garden are not decrofted, but change hands. The new owner goes on to try to sell the house, only to discover that although he is the landlord of his home and garden, he is a tenant of the crofter—the original owner of the house. The new owner cannot apply to decroft, because he is the landlord, not the crofter. Such anomalies need to be sorted. It is my view and certainly the view of others that elements of the 2010 act were simply not required. With regard to the use of grazings committees, the body that should organise collective working in a crofting township became the body that polices other crofters. That is a very difficult issue to deal with. We need to look at the 2010 act and start to unpick it.

It all depends on what is required in that report—what its contents will be. Those who live and work in small communities know that stresses and tensions can exist, and the report could be used as a way of giving voice to those stresses and tensions and thereby could ramp things up to the point where the community is no longer cohesive or working together. When we review crofting law, we need to look at the role of smallholders and tenant farmers in the crofting counties. A person’s status in those counties depends on a twist of fate with regard to how their land was categorised when the crofting laws came into force, and many tenant farmers and smallholders in those areas are keen to have the same protections offered by crofting. There is a degree of unity in the Parliament about the need to review and rewrite crofting law. However, that work must be done by those who understand crofting. Too often, those who draft crofting legislation have no understanding of the system and are simply looking in from the outside. Although their genuine aim is to make things better, they manage only to make things worse. We must remember first principles: crofting is an economic driver that was introduced to deal with the excesses of and imbalance in Scottish land ownership that we debated yesterday, and it provides crofters with security of tenure, a home and, indeed, an income. However, recent legislation regulates and polices crofters instead of empowering them, and crofting law should offer protection and empowerment to ensure that we create sustainable economies in our most marginal areas. The 2010 act has also, and for no good reason, imposed costs and put up more barriers and hurdles. I am not saying that this is my party’s position but I certainly feel that the act should be repealed and that we should then look at how we can simplify previous legislation. I stress again that that work must involve those who understand crofting. Of course, that will be no mean feat. Crofting has evolved differently in different areas and means different things to different communities, so it will be almost impossible to define it in legislation. However, any new legislation must enshrine security of tenure, in return for which the crofter must work their croft. Legislation needs to provide not only a high level of protection but the flexibility to allow crofting and crofting communities to work as they have evolved. It is right that the bill has come before Parliament and that it is processed with haste because of the cost to those who suffered from the anomaly that it deals with. However, there are many other issues to be sorted out and I look forward to the minister’s bringing forward an action plan on how he intends to deal with those anomalies.

Nigel Don makes a valid point. Crofting has changed and crofters are using the land to do something because it is basically an economic lever and they need to lever in an income from the croft. One of the problems is that crofting never gets its fair share from agricultural grants, the common agricultural policy and all the systems for helping to pay for agriculture to address its disadvantage. Until we address the economics of crofting, it will never go back to being land based.

What consideration did the cabinet secretary give to the safety of victims and witnesses, who should not have to travel to court with the accused? That was highlighted in particular by Ross-shire Women’s Aid, which is concerned about people who suffer from domestic abuse. What steps will he take to ensure their safety?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what action it plans to take to control the population of greylag geese in the Uists. (S4O-02214)

The minister will be aware that the numbers of geese are extremely large and that if the shooting is to have any impact, it will have to be carried out professionally. Has he given consideration to any other means that might hamper breeding and control numbers?

Four hundred and thirty-two people own half of Scotland. Nowhere else in the European Union or, indeed, the rest of the world is land ownership so skewed to benefit so few. Land ownership is an economic lever that can make a huge difference in the hands of the community. We have seen buyouts that have transformed communities such as those of Gigha, Uist, Harris and many more. They are not without their problems and squabbles, but they promote economic and social development. Distant landowners can be a dead hand over communities. Many tenants and crofters do not know who their landlord is—it is just some faceless company. The Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill provided an opportunity to register beneficial ownership but the Scottish Government squandered it. The UK Parliament’s Scottish Affairs Committee is taking up the challenge with the support of the UK Government, which was given in an answer to Ian Davidson MP recently. The Scottish Affairs Committee also led the charge on the ownership of lands by the Crown Estate—a fact that Rob Gibson did not acknowledge. We must ensure that landlords are accountable and work with communities. Where they do not, the community must be able to buy. Alex Fergusson asked about our motion. The Scottish Government’s rhetoric suggests that it believes in land reform, but its actions say something entirely different. It set up a land reform review group, but I understand that that has now become the community ownership review group. It says that it is no longer looking at the issues of tenant farmers, the Crown Estate, inheritance and a load of other issues that impact on our communities. That appears to be at odds with what the minister said earlier. What is the direction of travel? We have had an interim report that lacks detail and direction. If the Scottish Government is committed to the issue, it must take responsibility. Jim Hunter, who was previously a member of the group, said this week that the cabinet secretary should be leading on that work. I had hoped that the interim report would produce proposals and a clear and radical agenda. Let us take, for example, community buyouts. Everyone knows that legislative changes are needed to make hostile buyouts possible. Pairc estate in Lewis has shown that the legislation does not work. A solution to that could have been in the interim report. That would have been a great start, but nothing was forthcoming. The minister says that the issue will be looked at in phase 2, but surely it should have been in the first report.

I am short of time and I want to make another couple of points. The commitment to extend community right to buy in urban areas should have been in the report, too, because ownership of economic drivers would have a similar impact on those communities as it has had on rural areas. Empowering marginalised communities could lead to their sustainable growth. Extending the right to buy to tenant farmers and giving them the same security of tenure as crofters would also have been a very welcome step. That group in particular is so oppressed that tenant farmers dare not even speak out. Farms that have been in families for more than 100 years are being repossessed and the evictions smack of the Highland clearances, and yet the review group has washed its hands of them. What will the minister do? Following the interim report of the land reform review group, a number of people are asking just how serious the Scottish Government is about land reform and how radical it is prepared to be—hence our motion. Jim Hunter’s stinging rebuke this week shows how much the Government has neglected land reform when it could have been powering ahead on the matter. Is that another example of Scotland on pause and a Government afraid to annoy the vested interests ahead of the referendum? If that is the case, the Government is mistaken; the Scottish people will not stand for that.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

My intervention might help to clarify the report for Mary Scanlon. Some people want to work more hours or to work at the higher skills level that they have been trained to, but the report does not say that people who want to work part time or in less skilled jobs have to do that, too.

The debate has been good; many members have made pertinent points. The committee’s inquiry was certainly an eye-opener for me because I had always thought that any job was better than no job at all. That was before I saw the real impact of underemployment. We heard about the personal and social impacts, which—as Margaret McDougall and Duncan McNeil said—are very similar to the effects of unemployment. Duncan McNeil mentioned in particular the impact of underemployment on health and life expectancy, which is very similar to the impact of unemployment. There is, therefore, no gain in that regard for people who are underemployed. We also heard about the de-skilling of people who are underemployed, and that some of them never reach their full potential—even in adulthood—because they are unable to use their skills and to continue on a career path that would lead them to use that potential. We heard about poverty, and about the people who are trapped in underemployment with very low wages, but who cannot give up their jobs because they cannot get benefits. Alison Johnstone made that point in her speech. It was heartbreaking to hear some of the stories from Citizens Advice Scotland when its representatives appeared at committee. As many members have said, young people and women are disproportionately affected by underemployment. It is true that the definition of underemployment depends on what people want to do. Those who want to work in lesser-skilled jobs or part-time jobs in order to bring up a family, for example, are not considered to be underemployed. The same can be said about unemployment. John Mason made the point that, if someone is unemployed, they are just categorised as unemployed, but that is not necessarily the case. We have a category of people who are economically inactive—although they might dispute that description—and do not choose to be employed, and who are certainly not looking for work. The way in which such things are measured is different, although unemployment is obviously more subjective. There is a huge impact on the economy, because low incomes mean that people have less capacity to spend, and we heard evidence of the negative effect of that on the economy, and of recovery actually being slowed by it. Gavin Brown said that underemployment will improve as the economy improves, but it might be a chicken-and-egg situation, because underemployment could be stalling any improvement in the economy. Marco Biagi pointed out the impact on people who have no skills; the unskilled jobs that used to be available to them are no longer available because graduates are filling those posts. Anne McTaggart made a similar point about jobs that students would usually do while they were going through university now being kept by graduates who cannot find alternative employment, which causes poverty and a knock-on effect in that sector. Solutions are within the Scottish Government’s gift. We need more affordable childcare and increased access to training and education to maintain skills and to reskill those who are underemployed, and we need to explore ways of outlawing zero-hours contracts in the public sector, both for contractors and for grant funding. As Kezia Dugdale pointed out, when we are giving out publicly funded grants we must examine whether the recipient companies pay their taxes and have good employment practices before we give them that money, and we should tighten up the criteria to ensure that public funding is spent properly for the public good.

Many people work in childcare for poverty wages in this country, but it is the most expensive childcare in Europe, so I suggest that we look at what happens in other European countries and ensure that we learn from their good example.

We need to look at every option. Shared childcare is another option that some people use. We must ensure that childcare is not just available from 9 to 5, because some of our lowest-paid workers are employed in supermarkets and the like, where working hours go beyond those times. Sometimes, the price that they are being asked to pay for childcare means that they are better off not working at all, which would stop them being economically active—to use the phrase that was mentioned earlier—although they may not wish to be economically inactive. Many members discussed the distinct gender profile of underemployment. Underemployment is 11.3 per cent for women and 8.7 per cent for men. The prevalence of that gender difference is evident in the fact that a lot of women are in part-time and low-paid work, and that they also take on caring responsibilities for children and for elderly parents. There was also a lot of talk about gender segregation in the employment market; John Mason was right to say that we must broaden the horizons for young women. Gavin Brown made an interesting point about underemployment for part-time workers in the public sector compared with those in the private sector. It is possible that underemployment is lower in the public sector because part-time workers in the public sector probably work at a higher level and may have chosen to job share, and because there are better employment practices in the public sector to allow them to do that. In the private sector many people are in low-paid jobs, which creates an anomaly. As usual, I have loads more to say but cannot say it, as I am running out of time. However, I ask the Scottish Government to have a close look at outlawing of zero-hours contracts. I think that that is something that it can do, and certainly the procurement reform bill can help with that. Can the Government invest in skilling and reskilling where it is required, and perhaps reverse some of the college cuts that have done away with part-time flexible courses, despite their being very much required? We need to think again if we are to tackle the problem of underemployment.

Will the First Minister hold talks with the UK Government, Flybe and easyJet, which now has the flights from Inverness airport? Will he look at having a public service obligation on routes to Gatwick airport? Will he also speak to the airlines about connectivity from the islands through to Gatwick, which used to be booked through one operator and will now require to be booked through two?

15. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to support businesses in the Western Isles. (S4O-02179)

The Scottish Government has now had the impact report on the removal of the road equivalent tariff for commercial vehicles in the Western Isles, Coll and Tiree for some weeks. It shows that the policy has had a devastating effect on the islands’ businesses and economies. What action is the Scottish Government taking to mitigate those catastrophic effects?

Given that the minister commissioned the report, what cognisance of it will he take when he sets out the policy? Will he take the economic development of the islands into account when he does that?

Will the minister give way?

I think that I made the suggestion that the minister has referred to. I said that the boat would pay for itself by working the secondary route between Mallaig and Lochboisdale and that it could be taken off to cover other services in emergencies.

Will the member give way?

I am listening to the nonsense that the member is talking. Does he genuinely expect us to believe that lower fares for all ferry travellers would not be a fair settlement?

Last month, the transport minister, Keith Brown, attempted to sneak out a damaging report that he himself had commissioned, which examined the impact of the removal of RET from commercial vehicles in the Western Isles, Coll and Tiree. The Scottish Government has looked into the effects of its own policy but refuses to admit that it got it wrong. The removal of RET from commercial vehicles flew in the face of advice from local groups, such as the Outer Hebrides commerce group, which, prior to the report’s release, had highlighted the negative impact that the policy would have. The report confirmed that the islands were negatively impacted by the Scottish Government’s policy. Members have talked about the impact on hauliers, who were forced to increase prices to their communities. All that adds costs to households in the islands. The policy is basically the SNP’s island tax.

That would increase costs to some hauliers and some islands. What we want is a price structure that will allow the economy of our islands to grow. That has always been our policy. RET in some routes would increase prices, so we are not looking for that at all. A number of local businesses in the Western Isles, such as Carranoch Shellfish, have directly linked the removal of RET from commercial vehicles to job losses in their area. The Western Isles Council has said that the RET report confirmed that the removal of RET from commercial vehicles had hit the islands’ economy. It also showed that hauliers previously passed on the savings that they made from RET to consumers and that, since the removal of RET, prices have increased. The Scottish Government should look again at the evidence laid before it in the report and act on it. All signs point towards the reinstatement of RET for all vehicles to the islands to protect and grow the island economies. The local businesses know it and the Scottish Government report shows it. When will the minister come clean, say that he got it wrong and reinstate RET in full?

Time is short, so I am not taking any further interventions because there are a couple of issues in our motion that I want to touch on. The Orkney ferry service is highlighted in our motion. It was shown that there has been a lack of contingency planning in place when the engine of the MV Hamnavoe suffered catastrophic failure, halting the service since 25 April. One month later, it has not returned to service. Since the breakdown, no foot passenger service has operated on the route, damaging local businesses and tourism at a time when the economy relies on an influx of tourists and visitor numbers. The Orkney folk festival starts tomorrow. Will the Hamnavoe run tomorrow? If not, what steps are being taken to ensure that foot passengers get there? Orkney relies on the service running; a month without it is entirely unacceptable. It is a lifeline service to Orkney’s busiest ports, and we need contingency services available to avoid that happening again. I have suggested previously that the Scottish Government introduce a standby vessel. The minister has said that the community in Lochboisdale and Mallaig would not want a ferry if it were taken off other routes. What can I say? Any ferry is better than no ferry at all. Instead of the tens of millions of pounds that the minister cited, he should perhaps go back to the community in Uist that is procuring for a fraction of the cost. Unfortunately, the Government removed that money from the table.

I also echo comments members have made about staff salary cuts.

I hope that the Government will urge CalMac to stop that retrograde step.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I explained that point to the minister earlier. He obviously has not understood. Maybe I will explain it later in words of one syllable. However, will he go to the people of South Uist and get their costings for running a ferry service? They would do it an awful lot more efficiently than he would.

Electricity market reform must be set in a framework that allows the energy market to exist for the next 40 years or so. At its heart must be energy security. We in the Labour Party believe that we must have a sustainable energy mix that provides energy security but which also cuts carbon emissions in order to tackle climate change. It is therefore disappointing that there has been so little progress since we previously debated EMR. A number of issues that I raised then are still outstanding. For example, we need to have policies that cut energy consumption in the Energy Bill. We also need targets to cut greenhouse gas emissions. Although we have developed renewable electricity, we have not tackled carbon emissions from heat and transport. We need to tackle emissions from our homes to deal not only with carbon but with fuel poverty. We talked back then about islands transmission charging, but we appear to be no further forward. I join the minister in welcoming the “Scottish Islands Renewable Project: Final Report”, but it tells us only what we already know. We need urgent solutions. Time is running out and we face the real risk of losing the ability to procure an interconnector to the Western Isles. The Orkney islands grid connection is at full capacity and while we boast of the world-leading research and development facilities for wave and tidal energy in Orkney, our grid connection is an embarrassment. The same could be said about Shetland, where we have the potential of the Viking Energy development, which is 50 per cent owned by the Shetland Charitable Trust, which could be put at risk by the lack of grid connections. The looming referendum creates uncertainty for the energy markets, which is increased by the lack of information on contracts for difference and the strike price that developers can expect.

My point is that both those issues create uncertainty and we need to deal with them if we are to reap the benefits that renewable development can provide. It is also uncertain whether the Scottish Government will have the ability to vary CFDs, taking into account Scottish issues. We have seen the Scottish Government hand the powers to set emissions levels from power stations back to the UK Government, while boasting of its grid decarbonisation targets. That is not progress—both Governments are dragging their feet and passing the buck. Once again, the Scottish people are stuck between two Governments with the wrong priorities. We cannot have an Energy Bill that does not look at energy consumption and cutting our energy use. Regardless of the investment in new-generation technologies, energy will always be a scarce resource and we need to use it wisely. We are still dependent on fossil fuels for heat, yet little has been done to develop renewable technologies in this area. We are still waiting for a renewable heat initiative. However, we need to reduce our use of heat. To do that, we need to give priority to insulating our homes and buildings. There is nothing in the Energy Bill to encourage better insulation and reduce energy consumption. The Scottish Government looks to be watering down its proposals to increase energy efficiency in the new building regulations. The insulation industry was reported recently as saying that those proposals and delays will cost jobs and investment. We know that there are always tensions between house builders and energy efficiency standards, but we need to look at how we take that forward. It is a false economy to do otherwise; poorly insulated homes will need to be retrofitted in the future and do nothing whatever to fight fuel poverty. If we are really interested in fighting poverty, we need to ensure that people have warm homes as a basic human right. There needs to be a step change in how we retrofit our existing housing stock and how that is paid for. Those who can afford it are investing already, but those who live in fuel poverty cannot. There are also real concerns about how the green deal will work for people in those circumstances. Fuel poverty is a huge issue in our island communities. I welcome the document “Scottish Islands Renewable Project: Final Report”, which highlights the extent of the problem, but we need to find the solutions now. I understand from SSE that, if we do not resolve the issue of the costs of the connection to the Western Isles in the next few weeks, it may lose its procurement contract for cable. If that happens, it is difficult to see when an interconnector could be built. Prices are already increasing and inflation on cable is huge. More delays mean more costs, which makes the whole thing uneconomic. The islands are one of the areas in which fuel poverty is at its worst, but community land ownership provides the opportunity for communities to generate power, which they can use locally to address fuel poverty. It is possible to deal differently with generation and sale, but we need the connections to allow that to happen. There is nothing in the Energy Bill to encourage community development. If communities have control and influence over their energy generation, they will ensure that local economies benefit. Electricity market reform needs to recognise those benefits. Community benefit clauses are okay at a level, but allowing communities to have ownership is the real prize. There are large developers who, rather than pay community benefit, give shares in the development, working alongside communities. That is a real step forward. However, allowing communities to develop their own renewables must be a priority. We have an opportunity to change the dynamics of how we produce and sell electricity. It is an opportunity to create a real market rather than one that is dominated by the big six, but, again, it appears to be an opportunity lost. I turn again to the referendum. The minister pointed out that the energy market needs certainty. Unfortunately, the referendum creates huge instability. The Scottish Government refuses to answer the simple question how it will fund renewable developments and meet its existing obligations in that regard.

I will continue to make my point, and maybe I will get the answer. We have a third of the UK’s renewables, but only a tenth of the customer base that pays for it. Will the Scottish Government continue to pay for ROCs, contracts for difference and the like in an independent Scotland?

We are seeing delays. Indeed, developers have come to me and highlighted their concerns. The Government has to answer the question. Although ministers argue that there will be a UK energy market, they do not say how subsidies will be paid for. If they do not answer that question, huge uncertainty will be created. At present, the Government can hide behind contracts for difference and the delays that that is causing, but once that is sorted they will have nowhere else to hide. I do not see an instance in which a country will subsidise another country’s renewable developments. That does not happen at present when countries share the grid. Independence is heralded as a nirvana, but it is unlikely that the rest of the UK will subsidise Scotland’s renewables any more than it would subsidise French nuclear power developments.

I need to make progress. I am beginning to run out of time and there are a number of points to make. I turn quickly to the puzzling development whereby a Scottish Government that is always demanding more powers for Scotland is handing powers back to the UK Government. It is empowering the UK Government to set emissions levels for power generators in Scotland. The levels that are set by the UK Government do nothing to encourage the use of CCS—in fact, they do the opposite. Neither has the UK Government set grid decarbonisation targets for 2030. The Scottish Government has done so—the announcement was made with a great deal of hype—but it is handing away the powers to deliver that. In committee, the Scottish Government could not say whether it would repatriate the power if it was required to meet Scottish targets, nor would it say what tools it would use if the UK Government did not set emission levels that would allow the Scottish Government to meet its targets.

That is puzzling, but it is possibly because the Scottish Government has now seen that we are better together. It is sad that there has been little progress since we last debated EMR. We agree that the Scottish and UK Governments need to work together to secure energy supply and cut greenhouse gases, but we are still to be persuaded that the policies on offer will do that. I move amendment S4M-06582.1, to leave out from first “welcomes” to end and insert: “notes the importance of the electricity market reform proposals in maintaining investor confidence in Scotland in both renewable and carbon capture and storage technologies; notes the publication of Ofgem’s Electricity Capacity Assessment 2012, which outlines the significant challenges facing Scotland and the UK regarding spare capacity and security of supply; further notes the publication of Scottish Islands Renewable Project: Final Report, which concludes that “further renewable generation on Scottish Islands will not be developed on any scale in the near future under current policy”; believes that the UK Energy Bill fails to adequately address the recent escalation of energy bills or the ongoing threat of fuel poverty and does not include sufficient measures to reduce electricity demand or facilitate the growth of community ownership of renewables; recognises the key role of the Scottish Government in directly addressing these issues, and welcomes the Labour Party’s more ambitious proposals to reform the energy market, including placing a requirement on energy companies to pool the power that they generate and make it available to any retailer.”

That was not the point that I was making. I was saying that, when countries share a grid, they do not cross-subsidise each other’s renewable development.

I say it again: this is not about having an integrated grid; it is about subsidising another country’s renewable energy investments. Will you or will you not make up for the subsidy that will be lost in a separate Scotland?

1. To ask the Scottish Government whether it considers that North Sea oil and gas production will continue for the rest of the century. (S4T-00352)

Professor Alex Kemp tells us that by 2050 we will be producing less than 9 per cent of current levels. I noticed that the minister downgraded his own assertion when he said “most of this century”. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth privately told Cabinet colleagues that there is considerable uncertainty over the future of North Sea oil. What evidence does the minister have to back his assertion?

Simply saying something does not mean that it is going to happen. The minister is gazing into his crystal ball and citing the only evidence: the Clair Ridge field, which will produce until 2055—some years short of the century of production that he has asserted. Surely ministers owe the Scottish people the same honesty as they give Cabinet colleagues. Surely they need to provide an honest appraisal, to allow the people to make decisions that are based on facts rather than fiction.

I welcome the commitment to get legislation through Parliament before the summer recess. People are waiting to purchase ground on which to build; a constituent of mine is looking at a summer let option, about which I have written to the minister. Is it possible to proceed with such purchases—at least to a point at which missives are settled—before the legislation goes through, so that people can plan and make progress?

This has been a good debate, albeit a short one. We must underpin our energy policy with two principles. One is to have a balanced energy strategy that meets our energy needs and the other must be to cut greenhouse gases. It must be a priority of ours to address climate change. We see poverty and famine in developing countries caused by climate change. We also see the differences to our own climate, with snowstorms in April and floods and storms where we would not have expected them. Our landscape will change beyond all recognition if those changes keep occurring. We need to stop them now. We must reinforce our commitment to renewable energy and ensure that our energy policy leads on cutting carbon emissions and thereby stopping climate change. The Labour amendment focuses on community ownership because we have a real opportunity to build communities by allowing them to own renewable resources rather than just attracting community funding from them. Once communities are in control of renewable energy resources in their areas, they can decide how those are built and use them to build their local economy. One idea is that communities could use them to tackle fuel poverty. If they are generating their own electricity, they can sell it more cheaply to the surrounding community and make the inroads into fuel poverty that we are unable to make at the moment. In a way, I am disappointed that the Government amendment has not renewed a commitment to community ownership. I would very much hope that the Government would re-examine the issue and ensure that it is given priority. Should we miss this opportunity, it will not come again and all our renewable energy will be in the hands of big business. I turn to onshore wind energy generation because I think that it is really what this debate is about. Onshore wind generation is an established technology and the most cost-effective renewables technology that we have. We should remember that wind farms can be taken down as well as built, but climate change cannot be reversed. The Government has published a document protecting our scenic areas. Planning policy may give those scenic areas protection from having wind farms built on them, but they will be changed beyond all recognition by climate change. However, communities have genuine concerns about the siting of wind farms. Elaine Murray talked about having a strategic policy, and that is missing, even though information about protection for some of our wilder areas was published yesterday. We need to address community concerns that are often drowned out by the lobby that just does not want onshore wind farms anywhere at any cost. We must consider ways of doing that. We must also think about how we store the energy that is provided by onshore wind farms—Mark Griffin talked about pump storage in that regard. We need to do a lot more to cut the peaks and troughs of renewable power generation, because we do not have battery technology that is as advanced as we would like it to be. We need a balanced energy mix that focuses on decarbonising our power generation. That means that we need to develop new technologies and move away from traditional generation. We have a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to involve our communities and provide them with economic benefits that will help them well into the future. I ask that the Scottish Government consider that.

I am not sure whether the minister was in post in 2010 when a similar incident happened with MV Clansman but, at that time, I asked that a stand-by vessel be bought to fill in at times such as this when there was catastrophic failure with a vessel. Such a vessel could be used on a secondary route in between times so that a ferry would be available but it would be paying for itself. Will he give that idea serious consideration?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. This has been a more interesting debate than I might have first thought when I saw it in the Business Bulletin, so I almost welcome the nine minutes that I have been given, which is significantly more than I thought I would be filling. We in the Scottish Labour Party welcome the Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill. It is an example of devolution working as it is allowing the Scottish Government to design and levy a tax to suit the needs of Scotland. It must be responsive to needs, but it must also provide us with revenue to build our public services. Malcolm Chisholm spoke very thoughtfully about the block grant. There will have to be a reduction in the block grant because of the devolution of this power, and today the cabinet secretary has confirmed that there will be a one-off reduction. He proposes that it should be based on a five-year average of stamp duty and land tax receipts and that that average should be based on actual receipts rather than the forecast because of those receipts’ volatility. We know that income generated by the tax fluctuates from year to year. For example, in 2007-08 we raised £565 million in Scotland, but in 2011-12 that fell to £275 million. That is a huge fluctuation, so it is really important to know which years will be used for that average. A recovering economy will obviously mean that there will be more revenue, but that would be true for the rest of the UK as well, so we need to devise an amount that is fair and is seen to be fair by ourselves and the rest of the UK. A great deal of thought needs to go into that.

Anything that involves looking into the future makes things very difficult to second-guess, as we have seen with a lot of predictions, including the Government’s own predictions on oil and gas—I think that that was the trap that Marco Biagi tried to set for me. It is very important to look at what we get in reality, and we need to have view to the future because, if the economy falls further, a rate that is set too high will damage us. I am asking for more thought to go into the issue.

Can I make a little progress, please? I have nine minutes, but I see that I am already through three of them and I have not said an awful lot. A number of members spoke about zero-carbon homes relief. I appreciate that the cabinet secretary is looking further at the issue. Less taxation could mean that greater value is placed on energy-efficient homes. That would mean that people would have more money to spend, which could encourage sellers to invest in order to improve the value of their home through such a selling point. Jayne Baxter said that we need to look across the board on carbon reduction and that we need a joined-up policy. We need to examine closely every opportunity to promote energy efficiency. Marco Biagi said that energy efficiency certificates will not be impacted. We need to look at some research on what things people take into account when they look at houses and consider their ability to buy them. We really need to impress on people that energy efficiency is extremely important. We need to look at new ideas that are coming into place. Mike MacKenzie said that energy efficiency incentives could be regressive, but they could be capped.

There is an issue in that those at the bottom of the scale probably will not pay any tax at all, so tax relief will not matter. We need to look at Government intervention for people at the bottom of the scale to allow them to afford energy efficiency measures, but energy efficiency incentives could work to change the mindset at the top of the scale. As I said, they could be capped at a certain level, but they might change people’s minds so that they think that improving the carbon and energy efficiency of their homes is a good thing. If we can get that idea into people’s mindset—which we have failed to do with energy efficiency certificates—it will be a step forward. Although I am not advocating a specific approach, I urge the cabinet secretary to look further at the issue and perhaps introduce new proposals on it at stage 2. Jayne Baxter talked about reliefs for empty homes and compulsory purchase by councils. We need to look at how we can use the tax to make the best use of our resources—our buildings and land. Any move in that direction must be welcomed. There is concern about charity relief and how we determine whether an organisation is a charity so that it can attract such relief. I note that Malcolm Chisholm mentioned that OSCR has concerns about what is proposed. I, too, have concerns about asking OSCR to be the linchpin because it has a quite different job. If we add to its regulatory authority the ability to determine when and when not to levy a tax, that might skew not just its function but the function of any reliefs that are put in place. We need to give the issue some thought. Everyone is keen that charities should receive reliefs, but how we ensure that that happens is important. We must be extremely careful that what is put in place does not impact on charitable funding, because charities are all struggling at the moment. We must ensure that anything that we do in the bill does not impact on their funding and mean that they have less money to spend. Many members have talked about sub-sale relief. I understand the reason for removing it, which is to prevent tax avoidance. That is welcome—indeed, many of the steps in the bill to deal with avoidance are welcome—but I welcome the fact that further discussions are to take place on the issue to ensure that there are no unintended consequences. At a time when our economy is pretty slow, we must ensure that we do not do anything that impacts on our economy’s ability to recover. As members across the chamber have done, I welcome the commitment to progressive scales. Many members have talked about the slab approach to the levying of tax that was adopted under SDLT. I had heard it described in many ways, but “as lumpy as a badly stirred custard” is the description that I will probably remember of a tax that has been seen to do nothing very well. I welcome the fact that people who buy properties of lower value will not have to pay the tax. Mention has been made of the tension between knowing what the taxation rate will be and the ability to evade tax. Michael McMahon, among others, made a plea for early notification, but whether that happens will depend on the bill’s ability to prevent tax avoidance. If the bill is not good at preventing tax avoidance, tax avoidance will eventually take place. We must put in place a solution. If we have a bill that prevents avoidance and minimises the cost of administration, we will have a bill that will deliver more taxation revenue for our services. I notice that I am running out of time, which I should not be. The bill is about devolution and moving decisions closer to the people who are affected by them, and it will allow the Parliament to take local priorities into account. We welcome the bill and its devolving of that power.

2. To ask the Scottish Government how it calculates future oil revenues. (S4O-02016)

Three out of the five Scottish Government scenarios for oil revenues are based on a baseline price of $113 per barrel. Will the minister tell me whether any other professional or independent bodies have given similar projections for the price of oil? Will he explain why the Scottish Government has rejected in its calculations the use of the Office for Budget Responsibility forecast based on futures markets?

I was not asking who has estimated a higher price; I was asking which professional bodies have estimated the price in the same way as the Scottish Government has done.

I, too, welcome the announcement of the task force. The minister may be aware that the trade unions have concerns about the communication coming from both the company and the Government to them. I very much welcome the minister’s announcement of the talks that he will hold with the trade unions tomorrow. They are, after all, the representatives of the workforce and have good communications with the workers affected. What steps will the minister take to keep the unions up to speed and will he include them in the task force that he is setting up?

Will the Government publish its legal advice, so that solicitors can properly advise clients? Will it fund the taking of legal advice? Will it look at paying builders and others in the supply chain who have already undertaken work and incurred costs that can no longer be met by crofters because of the flaw in the legislation?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to directly promote, sustain and develop the unique culture of the Highlands and Islands. (S4O-01965)

The minister will be aware that Moray Council has cut its arts funding by 100 per cent, which will mean the closure of more than seven libraries, the loss of an arts development officer, the withdrawal of funding for museums, and an impact on the viability of 33 local arts groups in Moray. What discussions has the Scottish Government had with Moray Council to mitigate those swingeing cuts? What is the council’s statutory responsibility to the arts?

It is extremely disappointing that this is such a short debate. Last week, we spent days debating issues that are not within this Parliament’s competence, but this week a debate on an issue of global significance that is within the Parliament’s competence is being squeezed into a very short time. The Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 is world leading, with ambitious targets to cut greenhouse gas emissions enshrined in law. Alex Salmond struts the world stage taking plaudits for the legislation, but his Government has missed the first annual target and RPP2 shows no real commitment to getting us back on track. Again, the Scottish Government seems to be making assertions without principles or policies to underpin them. Only if all the policies and proposals in RPP2 are implemented is there any likelihood that we will achieve the legally binding targets. When the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee tried to hold the Government to account over the targets and the content of RPP2, the Government party used its built-in majority on the committee to protect the Government from hard questions. A committee’s constitutional role is to hold the Government to account, but the votes that are listed in annex A to the EET committee report show how some committee members failed in that role. Section 36 of the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 requires Scottish ministers to set out proposals and policies to compensate for any missed targets, but such measures are missing from RPP2. A committee recommendation on the inclusion of such measures was again voted down by Government party back benchers. However, that is a legal requirement, which must be included in the final RPP2 report. The Scottish Government must also show how it will act to meet those missed targets, and that must be addressed urgently. Otherwise, the cumulative emissions from the missed targets will cause further damage. The EET committee had previously asked that the report on policies and proposals be provided ahead of the budget so that the budget could be scrutinised in tandem with the report. Again, Government party committee members blocked the inclusion of such a request in our report. However, unless reports are provided in that way, budget scrutiny of the targets is impossible for committees. As RPP2 is unclear where the costs of policies and proposals lie, any financial scrutiny of the measures is impossible. Stakeholders have found that frustrating, because they cannot calculate where the costs lie and what their financial commitment will be. Our meeting our target is dependent not only on all the policies and proposals in the report being implemented, but on the EU setting a 30 per cent emissions reduction target. If the EU fails to do that, our target will not be met. The report provides no contingency to mitigate the effects of that happening. That must be included in the final report. Energy efficiency is crucial for meeting our targets. We need improved building standards for new builds and the retrofitting of our existing buildings with insulation. However, the RPP2 report depends heavily on new technologies for meeting those targets. That is pie in the sky, because the report provides no real knowledge of what such technologies will be, when they will come into being and whether they will be able to provide the emissions savings that are indicated in the report. Other countries have much better-insulated homes than we have. We need to learn from them and start now to improve the fabric of our new buildings and retrofit our existing stock.

I agree that there is uncertainty about new technologies, but the report must be based on reality in showing how we will get to our legally binding targets, rather than doing things on a wing and a prayer in the hope that something will come out of the woodwork to help us get there. Carbon capture and storage is one of the technologies that the report is so dependent on for meeting the targets. The UK Government has just announced funding for two CCS test sites, but the UK Energy Bill does not include power station emissions targets at a level that would incentivise CCS. The Scottish Government intends to align itself with that by handing back the power to the UK Government to legislate on those emissions for Scotland. Meeting our targets is dependent on CCS, but there is no incentive or, indeed, compunction to use that technology. Again, Government back benchers stopped the committee asking those difficult questions. The RPP2 is a draft document and there is time to improve it. However, I am concerned that the Scottish Government is trying to avoid scrutiny rather than to make an honest attempt to deal with our missed target. The Government is legally obliged to meet the targets and to report on how it will mitigate the missed target. I hope that it will do that when it publishes the final report.

Could the lack of house building be due to the SNP Government’s huge cut in funding for house building?

The cabinet secretary has been talking about how he would build an oil fund in an independent Scotland. Would the money for the fund be over and above normal taxation or would it come from top-slicing the taxation from oil revenues?

Gavin Brown started his winding-up speech by pointing out some of the hot air in the chamber today. I will mention some of the more thoughtful contributions, because on the whole it has been a good debate with thoughtful contributions. One of the speeches that struck me most—although it perhaps stated the very obvious—was Margaret McDougall’s speech. In it, she pointed out that our people are, indeed, our wealth and that we need to invest in them—something that this Government has maybe failed to do, with college cuts and the rest, and on which it should perhaps reflect. Energy also formed a large part of the debate, but members including Margaret McCulloch also pointed out the contribution of other sectors of our economy, such as small and medium-sized enterprises, retail and the like, which we ignore at our peril. Much of the debate concerned the GERS figures. The SNP was not being honest with us, because it presented a distorted version of the latest figures. We receive £1,197 more in expenditure per head than the rest of the UK and, as Malcolm Chisholm pointed out, that is rightly so. We have a demographic issue and a natural geography that mean that service provision is more expensive for us. That additional funding helps to deal with our natural disadvantage. The SNP went on to portray a smaller deficit as being actually a surplus. Many members pointed that out, including Iain Gray. The SNP takes no account, however, of the years when we were worse off. The benefit of being part of a bigger economy is that the peaks and troughs are less pronounced, which provides us with stability for the future. John Swinney said that we had a surplus this year; however, no part of the UK was in surplus this year. He also highlighted how we would spend the surplus, which he credited to oil, but that flies in the face of Professor Stiglitz’s advice, as Margaret McDougall pointed out. Natural resources have to be spent to build future wealth, otherwise things are unsustainable and we squander those resources. John Swinney also did not say that he was planning to borrow to build a stability fund, which is exactly what he would be doing if he were to use the deficit to create it. We are in the very lucky position of having oil and gas wealth, but we must use it to buoy our economy and not be tied to it, as Margaret McCulloch mentioned. Many members talked about the volatility of oil prices, which is a big issue that makes it difficult for us to guess ahead what our oil revenue will be. Let us be very clear that new technology and new exploration are often in the most difficult parts, and are therefore more costly. The cost of that technology and exploration offsets what comes back as revenue, so revenue can decrease even if production increases. We have to be very careful to pin our economy to revenue rather than to production. Mary Scanlon mentioned the problems with field closures. I was one of the people who were lucky enough to visit the Elgin-Franklin field. It was closed, which cut off much of the UK’s gas from the North Sea—something that nobody could have foreseen. We were told last night in the oil and gas cross-party group of other closures that were carried out at very short notice because of safety and maintenance. We need to have a mind to that. While celebrating and, indeed, enjoying our oil wealth, we have to be clear that we cannot pin our economy to it. Many members spoke about renewables, but how would those work in a separate Scotland? Iain Gray pointed out that we have 30 per cent of UK renewables, but they are subsidised by all UK customers. What would happen were that subsidy to fall on a customer base of 10 per cent of that which finances it at the moment? Even nationalists are asking that question. Developers need an answer to it. If the answer is not supplied, we will end up in a place where we cannot harness that wealth, which will not augur well for our future. Many members talked about capital spending. One of the issues that did not get as much of an airing as it should have is the delay in investment through the non-profit distributing model, and the Scottish Government’s failure to bring that forward quickly. That would have made a huge difference to the economy of Scotland and it represents a squandered opportunity and squandered wealth. Further, the nearly £43 million that was cut from our housing budget would have created homes and wealth for the people of Scotland. [Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Education was not tackled sufficiently in this debate, although Margaret McDougall talked about educating our population, which is our greatest wealth. Many other issues should have had more prominence in the debate, including our procurement policies, which could be used to keep the wealth of Government spending in our country. I sometimes feel that I have talked about that endlessly, but it needs to be taken into account. Members talked about the limitations of having a currency union with a country over whose fiscal policy we would have no influence. Most people would regard that as madness, and it would certainly limit our taxation and borrowing powers. The rest of the UK is our major trading partner, which is why our wealth is very much tied to it. The total value of sales from Scotland to the rest of the UK in 2011 was £45.5 billion, which is four times greater than our total trade with the rest of Europe. Even John Swinney’s leaked Cabinet papers acknowledge that an independent Scotland would have a more volatile economy.

Although Mr Swinney says one thing in public and another in private, he shows that we are better together.

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the challenges in providing GP cover in Mallaig, Acharacle and the small isles, and indeed in finding a permanent GP for Applecross. What steps is he taking to ensure that health boards that cover remote and rural communities have the finance and resources to recruit and retain GPs in their areas and can offer the contracts and support needed to make those positions attractive to possible candidates?

I, too, congratulate Jean Urquhart on securing this important debate. Crofting is essential for the Highlands and Islands, not merely because it has a cultural tradition—it has a culture of its own that involves communal working and sharing resources—but because of its foremost role as an economic driver. The motion draws attention to crofting’s contribution to food production and the provision of affordable housing. Crofting’s ability to fulfil those roles depends on the right social and political climate, given the natural disadvantage of the area in which it operates—a natural disadvantage that makes crofting an essential part of the area’s economic mix. I will speak about a couple of issues. Others have spoken about them, but they require emphasis. The first is the fiasco in Raasay, which should never have happened. We were told that the decision was taken without ministerial knowledge, but the Government sets the parameters in which officials operate. The action was along the lines of the worst excesses of absentee landowners, which Raasay had its fill of in the past. People there thought that they were in safe hands with Government ownership. That an official thought that the action would be fine tells us about the lack of appreciation in the Government of crofting and of the wider needs of the Highlands and Islands.

I am very pleased that the Government admitted to the mistake, but I take issue with the suggestion that it has rectified the situation in Raasay. It has given the crofters a year-long reprieve. I hope that when that period ends, the minister will decide that the shooting and fishing rights should remain in local hands.

I appreciate the minister’s intervention and the reassurance that the year is only a period to produce a long-term solution that will put the rights back in community hands, where they should be at all times. The second issue is the ability to decroft land on owner-occupied crofts, which many have raised. One benefit of crofting that we have talked about is the availability of land on which to build affordable housing. However, people cannot secure a mortgage on a house that is built on croft land, so the land must be decrofted. One stated aim of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 was to ensure that crofters had the same benefits, whether they were owner-occupiers or tenants. However, it appears that shoddy drafting has created the opposite effect. As many other speakers have said, Brian Inkster has said that the minister has powers of direction over the Crofting Commission. The minister needs to exercise those powers immediately to deal with the anomaly. Failure to do so will mean that crofters will have to go through the courts to protect their rights, which will be difficult for those who can least afford to do that. The problem is of the Government’s making. If it had not pushed the legislation through so quickly, it would not have made the mistakes. Government back benchers on committees have a role in scrutinising Government legislation and not simply pushing through what the Government tells them to. Committees should lead the charge in ensuring that the Government is held to account and that the legislation that goes through committees is right. That is also applies to the Raasay decision—the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee should look at that and ensure that steps are taken to ensure that such a situation does not happen again and that communities have the right to their own land. The Government must learn from its mistakes, not only for crofting but for the rest of Scotland.

I welcome the debate. We know that Scotland has a declining and ageing population—that is a fact. Although our population is relatively stable, that is not a reason to be complacent. Indeed, when Jack McConnell was First Minister, he saw the declining and ageing population as the single biggest challenge facing the nation at the time.

I want a chance to get going, please. Jack McConnell took action by bringing forward the fresh talent initiative, homecoming and the like. That action helped to increase our population, and we are getting the benefits right now. However, the demographics still show an ageing population. Many members during the debate rightly talked about the contribution that older people make through their knowledge and experience. Someone said that the report referred to the “talents and energies” of older people. Many continue to work when they are healthy. Indeed, on a recent visit I made, the two people running the show—and it was some size of show—were well into their 70s. In fact, one of them was closer to their 80s. Those people were working healthfully and making a huge contribution with an energy that I could only envy. Increased life expectancy is a good thing for all of us, but only when it is healthy. After all, as Anne McTaggart pointed out, the costs are incurred in our unhealthy years. Ken Macintosh and Anne McTaggart also pointed out that wealth is a huge factor in determining whether we will be healthy in our old age. The distribution of wealth is therefore important, because it influences people’s lifestyle and diet, the stress that they have to deal with and their education outcomes. The poorer they are, the shorter their lives and the greater the proportion of their life that will be unhealthy. National indicators are needed to make progress in tackling the huge issue of inequalities, which Government after Government has talked about but which very few have tackled. Health board funding was previously geared to following health inequalities, but the formula has changed, with the result that areas with the greatest inequalities might be getting less of a share of the budget than they previously received. James Kelly highlighted the issue of child poverty. I have to say that I find it quite sad that a person’s place of birth consigns them to an early death. We have to take that difficult issue on board and ensure that children, regardless of where they are born, have the same life chances and the same chance to live a full and healthy life. Many speakers referred to preventative spend and, in that respect, Willie Rennie mentioned new models of service provision. I agree that we all need to think about that issue, but the fact is that we have to take people along with us. People, who are seeing not only health cuts and bed closures but cuts to home and community care, do not take easily to movement and change, which they see as just another way of making cuts. For example, the community transport company in my area used to take people shopping, but it was then told that that part of its service would no longer be funded and, as a result, it had to stop. It was not a transport but a social work issue but the money came from the same organisation. We need a joined-up approach across portfolio areas in local government, health and, indeed, Government itself and to ensure that, as Hanzala Malik made clear, the person becomes the focus. There is no point in telling someone, “We can’t take you shopping because it’s not part of our transport budget” without following that up with help from social work—but that is happening here and now. As an earlier speaker pointed out, we have a funding gap of about £3 billion in health and local government. That is what is needed just to stand still; it does not take any budget cuts into account. As a result, we need to look at how we provide care and how we can best fund it in future. Jean Urquhart highlighted how NHS Highland and Highland Council are coming together to deliver health and social care, with the council taking on responsibility for young people’s health as well as education. We should examine and learn from such examples. Care in the community must also be adequate. Many speakers have referred to the benefits of free personal care but if that is the only support that an individual receives in the community it is simply not adequate to keep them out of care homes or, indeed, out of much more expensive hospital provision. I believe that Jamie Hepburn compared the costs of care homes and home care; those costs are huge and, as Malcolm Chisholm has made clear, the cost of hospital care is even greater. As a result, we must ensure that people receive not just free personal care at home but the care and support that allow them to live happy and fulfilled lives in their own homes. As for housing, many speakers mentioned adaptations, which the Government itself has described as a difficult issue with regard to existing housing stock, tenements, flats and so on. We need to look at how we provide housing for older people. Members talked about affordable lifelong houses, which is fine when we are building new houses, but we need to look at how we plan for that. Sandra White talked about local plans and identifying areas for housing for older people. Stewart Stevenson said that we need to be careful not to put older people into ghettos. We need mixed housing to allow young people to learn from older people, as Jean Urquhart said. Therefore, we need to make sure that we do not form ghettos for older people but instead look at how we plan new housing to fulfil the needs of all our population, including young families and people as they get older. That would mean that people would not have to leave family and friends to move into housing that is more appropriate for them. That degree of planning is required. We need the Government’s strategy on housing for older people to be resourced. We are talking against a backdrop of housing cuts and we need to benchmark what the Government is doing to ensure that we make progress and meet targets on what we provide, and to ensure that housing meets the needs of our older population. A number of members mentioned pensions, and we have a long way to go before we have dealt with that issue. Members should bear in mind that people paid into pensions believing that they would get care and help in their old age. The Finance Committee report adds to the reports of the Christie and Beveridge commissions, and it adds to the Labour Party’s calls for an open debate. I hope that the Scottish Government takes that on board and meets us with targets and progress rather than just warm words.

I, too, congratulate Liam McArthur on securing this important debate. He talked about trying to shift the blame for MS on to the Vikings, but if we look abroad to other countries, it becomes the Scottish disease and not the Viking disease, so it seems that the buck is being passed regardless. MS is a devastating disease, or it can be a devastating disease. Many people who have MS go through life with it as something of an inconvenience rather than as an illness to be dealt with, but for others it can be truly devastating and life threatening. As has been said, MS is in many cases diagnosed when the person is young, which means that many people who are affected have young families who have to deal with the effects. It can have a huge impact on people’s children, who become carers, and people have to live with a disease for which they cannot follow a route. MS takes many different forms and it is difficult to know what to expect. We therefore need specialist services; we need MS nurses and specialist consultants, and MS physiotherapy is really important for mobility and the like. We also need specialist MS social workers, because they can deal with the whole person. They can put people who have MS in touch with the specialist services that they need when they need them, but they can also deal with the wider problems that affect sufferers’ lives and their families. We should not underestimate the importance of that. They also need to be able to point people to advice and assistance when they require it. As we heard, the disease takes many forms, so it is difficult to know what to expect. People do not need all the information initially; they might just need some information as their illness progresses. Indeed, it might not progress. I will take a couple of minutes to talk about volunteers, which Jackie Baillie mentioned. I am aware of many people who have MS who have become advocates for others who have MS and who fight for better services. Christine Stewart in the Western Isles is one such person and she succeeded in getting an MS nurse for the islands, but there are many other people who have MS who use their time to fight for better services and to support others who are newly diagnosed. As part of the debate, we should pay tribute to them and what they do for others. I will leave it at that, Presiding Officer, because many of my points have been covered. However, I think that they were important points to make.

Do retired graduates get access to individual learning accounts?

13. To ask the Scottish Government how it supports students wanting to go into postgraduate education. (S4O-01841)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that only six courses are funded in the University of the Highlands and Islands and that there are no cost-of-living allowances for those who are required to live away from home. That means that students who live in rural areas and who need to live away from home face financial barriers that prevent them from accessing that type of education.

The First Minister will be aware that the Scottish Government has taken away the fishing and shooting rights in Raasay from local crofters and sold them to a shooting company in Ayrshire. The crofters have built the value of those rights over the years and invested the profits in their community, thereby boosting the local economy. Does the First Minister agree that the move flies in the face of the ethos of land reform? Will he take steps to overturn the decision immediately and return the rights to the local community, where they rightly belong?

I echo the thanks that Murdo Fraser expressed to those who took part in the inquiry and who helped to draw up the report. As has been said, the purpose of the committee’s inquiry was to examine whether the Scottish Government’s 2020 targets for renewable energy could be achieved. The renewables industry is new and developing and weekly developments added to the complication of managing the inquiry and meant that many aspects that are pertinent to the industry were hardly touched on. One such example is energy storage. We talked about pumped hydro and batteries, and we have since been learning about hydrogen. I hope that we will examine all those technologies further in the future, as we did not go into them in any depth in our report. One of my main concerns at the outset of the inquiry remains: the ability of communities to develop their own renewables for the benefit of those who live locally. Community benefit clauses appear to be the answer, but the committee heard evidence that communities were much more likely to influence a development and to retain much more of the wealth that was created in their area when they had a real stake in it. The bigger the share that a community had in a development, the greater the amount of wealth that was retained, with outright ownership being very much the best option. However, communities struggled to engage in development because of the costs and the red tape involved. We need different criteria and planning processes so that communities can cut the costs of development, and we need to ensure that adequate funding is available to allow them to develop, as Murdo Fraser said. There was much that the committee agreed on, but an aspect that we could not agree on was how constitutional change would impact on our ability to meet the 2020 targets. There are real concerns that the Scottish Government must address. If it does not, development will stall, which will impact on our ability to meet the targets. The Scottish Government refuses to answer those questions, however, and has used its majority on the committee to remove them from the report.

Companies that work in Scotland such as SSE cannot be seen as political scaremongers and need to be listened to. It is disappointing that the Government used its majority on the committee to close down the questioning on that aspect. However, the questions will not go away. The question that remains unanswered is: what will the Scottish Government do to honour the subsidy agreements that have been entered into under renewable obligation certificates or contracts for difference should Scotland separate from the United Kingdom? To ensure that development is not stalled, the Scottish Government needs to give a commitment on that and tell us how it will pay for the subsidies. Currently, the subsidies are met by UK energy customers. In Scotland, we proudly boast of having a third of the UK’s renewable developments, but we have only 10 per cent of the customer base. If the cost of the subsidy falls on that customer base, that will mean substantial increases in energy bills. The committee heard a number of concerns about renewable heat, some of which appeared to be conflicting. One was that the targets are not ambitious enough, while another was that they are too ambitious and unlikely to be met. Although electricity that is generated by renewables is reasonably easy to distribute, there is no easy way to distribute renewable heat. We heard evidence of district heating systems that work well, but they work only in certain locations and they appear to be economic only when connected with new build, rather than existing properties, because of the cost of retrofit. It was clear that a number of solutions are required, not least demand management through retrofitting insulation and improving building standards for new builds. If we are to meet our carbon emissions targets, we need to focus on renewable heat.

I do not share the member’s confidence that the Scottish Government would be better than the UK Government at doing that. Indeed, we need retrofit for insulation to cut down demand, as well as the renewable heat incentive. However, I agree that we need that incentive with some speed. On the grid, the minister talked about the work of the intergovernmental island charging group. It would be useful to get an update from the minister on the progress that the group is making and the timescale within which it hopes to report. If we cannot find a solution to island charging, an awful lot of the projects that are in line, especially community projects, will stall and will no longer be able to continue or to produce the economic benefit that they could bring to communities. I realise that I am running out of time, Presiding Officer. I wanted to touch on skills shortages and what the Government needs to do to ensure that we reap the full benefit of renewables, but I see that you are indicating that I cannot do so. Therefore, I simply urge the Government to look at what the report says on those issues and act accordingly.

I want to correct Marco Biagi. The paragraph to which I referred is in annex C. The paragraph that the Government party voted down reads: “The Committee believes that there are significant issues regarding the subsidy regime in light of the constitutional debate that require to be addressed and calls on Ministers to continue to update the Committee on these matters.” That was the paragraph that I was concerned about.

15. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to ensure that patients requiring radiotherapy after surgery receive it as soon as possible. (S4O-01783)

As the cabinet secretary will be aware, a report in today’s edition of The Press and Journal says that half of the medical physicist posts in NHS Highland are currently vacant. What steps is he taking to attract, train and retain medical physicists to ensure that treatment can be delivered at the optimum time? What thought has he given to including such treatment in the treatment waiting time guarantee?

What you have not said is that it is Energy Action Scotland and the like that are pointing out that the Government needs to ensure that at least £200 million is spent on fuel poverty to reach its own targets. The Government is not pointing out how it will do that and if the energy companies do not come up with their share, how will that gap be filled?

Will the member give way?

This has been a very disappointing day. We put forward suggestions—[Interruption.]

We put forward suggestions that were modest and deliverable and that could have made a difference, but this Government has proved that it does not listen. So much for governing like a minority. We asked for the FE cuts to be reversed. We welcome the £10 million that has been reinstated, but it is not additional, it is not improved, and it is not extra. It is a cut of £24 million to the FE budget. That is why people including Robin Parker, the NUS Scotland president, are expressing their disappointment and pointing out that it is still a cut, and it is why Malcolm Chisholm talked about how Edinburgh College feels that it is facing a funding crisis. This is not going to go away. Why do we in the Labour Party want more money for colleges? We want it because unemployment is high for 16 to 24-year-olds. Many people in that generation are facing a lifetime on the dole—another lost generation—but the Government is cutting money to colleges to stop that group having a future. Underemployment of graduates is taking the jobs that would be available at entrance level for young people who do not have skills. Those unskilled young people will become that lost generation, so we need to ensure that they are skilled and ready to take jobs at the upturn. We also need to ensure that those who are underemployed—the graduates who are working in filling stations and supermarkets—have their skills updated so that they will be ready to take up other jobs when those jobs eventually come along.

Maybe Margo MacDonald was not in the chamber when we explained how we would find that money. [Interruption.] From the noise that they are making, it seems that none of the SNP back benchers was in the chamber then, either. Perhaps we should look at such things as the Ryder cup, on which the Government spent £470,000, or the Scotland House fiasco, when it spent £400,000 at the Olympic games. [Interruption.]

That is not to mention top salaries and the 16 referendum workstreams on which the Government is wasting our money, instead of spending it on young people who need skills and need to be trained to take the jobs that are available for them—[Interruption.]

Richard Baker talked about the skills shortages in the oil and gas industry. We need funding for colleges, so that people can be trained to fill such skills gaps. It is wrong that people are sitting at home and are not even getting unemployment benefits when they could get jobs if training in colleges was available to them. They are real people—they are not the people who are sitting in this chamber navel gazing. They are people who are thinking about their opportunities, their career chances and their life chances. Rob Gibson said that the Labour Party does not want to do anything for rural areas, but he forgets North Highland College, which is in his constituency. The funding formula already damaged it; how much more damaged will it be by the funding cuts? Colleges operate in both rural and urban areas and they create skills and help people to maximise people’s life chances, which is why we need to fund them properly. The SFHA has stated clearly that social rented housing has been unfairly penalised. I am sure that it welcomes, as everybody else does, the additional money that was announced today, but £10 million for the affordable housing budget is a drop in the ocean and is far too little. Elaine Murray talked about the housing associations that responded to her, which said that building had stalled in their areas. She pointed out the effect of bad housing on people’s life chances.

I will not take an intervention. I need to make progress. The housing association grant has been cut by £30,000 a unit, which means that it is impossible to build units—even more so in rural areas. I remind Rob Gibson that a rural house cannot be built on a £40,000 subsidy. A lot of the housing associations in my area cannot build because of the subsidy level.

The HAG should be at a level that allows people to build housing units. Rural housing associations used to attract more HAG because they could not achieve make economies of scale. We need to set the HAG at a level that makes building sustainable, otherwise no houses will be available. We face a crisis in housing. The bedroom tax will affect 100,000 Scottish households. We need to build smaller homes to help families to avoid that tax, because families—real people—are facing poverty or homelessness, and the Government has done nothing but cut the funding that would build homes in which they could live. Shelter has said that we face a cliff edge in house building and it has backed our policy of investing consequentials in housing. However, the Government has not listened.

A measly £10 million for housing will do nothing for people who are facing homelessness.

We welcome the £10 million for the retrofit programme, but for people who are living in fuel poverty, and if we need to spend £200 million to combat fuel poverty and to meet the Government’s targets, £10 million is but a drop in the ocean. It was sad that the SNP used its majority on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee to stop the committee reiterating its recommendation that the Government invest no less than £100 million in dealing with fuel poverty. Members of that committee are not carrying out their duty to scrutinise the Government; indeed, they are a sop to it and are giving it cover. However, the people of Scotland will not afford them such cover. This is not a budget for growth and it does nothing for jobs. There are cuts to the Edinburgh to Glasgow rail improvement programme and the M8 bundle that Michael McMahon discussed, which are cuts to jobs and our economy. NPD is not working; it has been either mismanaged or misused. The figures show cuts of £333 million this year and £348 million next year but—guess what?—in 2014, £199 million will go into NPD, to coincide with the referendum. I do not think that the Scottish people will be bought in that way. The Government has also failed in procurement. It is creating leakage within capital spending programmes. The budget is a missed opportunity to create jobs and homes, a missed opportunity to cut carbon and poverty and a missed opportunity to save the next generation from the scrap heap. The Scottish people will not be bought by the Government.

I think that we are all feeling the pinch today—pay day is so near and yet so far. If we are feeling it, we can only imagine how people on much smaller incomes are faring. Last week, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee took evidence on underemployment. We were told about a very stark case involving a young couple and their children who came to a citizens advice bureau. When they came to the CAB, the parents had not eaten for a number of days. The husband was working, but he worked for less than 25 hours a week. The family had lost their working families tax credit as a result of changes to the qualifying hours. It transpired that the husband’s wages had been doing little more than covering his travel costs to and from work, and the family had lived off their working families tax credit. Once that went, they had no money. If he had given up his job, they would have been penalised and would not have received any benefits. Whichever way they looked, they could not feed their children. What a position to be in, especially in modern, supposedly civilised, Scotland. The CAB ensured that the family received a food parcel immediately and started working with them. Further changes to benefits will mean that many more people will find themselves in that position. How easy it would have been for that family to take out a payday loan, but that would only have made matters worse. Many people are in that situation. Payday loans are so accessible that they must be a huge temptation. In the briefing that Citizens Advice Scotland has provided for the debate, it cites cases that bring to mind loan sharks much more readily than high street providers. Although financial regulation is a reserved matter, the Scottish Government can act. As Kezia Dugdale suggested, it can provide public information that discourages people from taking out payday loans. Indeed, we should all do that by whatever means we can. The Government should also look at planning legislation to ensure that planning permission is required for any change of use that would result in a high street shop becoming a payday loan outlet. That would allow councils to keep such outlets off the high street. In addition, the Government could work with credit unions to help them to finance emergency loans at affordable interest rates. Historically, credit unions have been driven by the need to help with financial planning, encouraging people to save and only to take out borrowing that is sustainable, but social and economic changes mean that emergency loans are now required more often. We need to look at credit unions’ opening hours. In a time of pay freezes and underemployment, those who would most benefit from credit unions may be in employment, but low-paying employers are probably not the most likely to allow such people time off to access a credit union. We must do more to encourage use of credit unions by the whole of society. That would build them and make them much more sustainable for everybody. How much better it would be if rates and rent relief on empty properties in our high streets was given to credit unions to make them as successful as possible, and certainly as successful as payday loan companies. Banks must develop a social policy. It has always struck me that those who have money can access cheap credit but those who can least afford it have always had to pay more. The interest that is charged by payday loan companies can run into many thousands of per cent. Some members have quoted the amounts involved, which can be breathtaking. However, the interest that is charged by companies that have traditionally lent to the less well-off are also much higher than the interest charged by high street banks and the like. The debate is timely because we are waiting for our first pay after Christmas. We can all do our bit to remove the commercialisation of times such as Christmas, which leads to much greater pressure on the less well-off and can lead to hardship. However, we also need to make it easier for those who are in desperate straits to get the help that they need. The Government can do much more for people in that situation.

Under the legislative consent motion on the Energy Bill, the Scottish Government is ceding emissions performance standards for fossil fuel plants to the UK Government. How will that impact on the Scottish Government’s ability to cut carbon emissions from such generation?

The First Minister will be aware that The Scotsman report did not cover all Ministry of Defence spending in Scotland, including the cost of extensive world-class protection for our oil and gas rigs in the North Sea. Can he tell me how that protection would be provided if Scotland was to leave the UK?

The Standing Council of Scottish Chiefs has said that the Bannockburn re-enactment will not be enough to bring the diaspora back to Scotland. In light of that, what is the minister’s plan C for homecoming 2014?

I agree with much that has been said in the debate. I believe that the UK Government is not managing the economy correctly and that austerity is not working, but neither are the SNP Government’s policies. John Swinney says that this is a budget for employability and recovery, but it encourages neither. The SNP cannot insist that its budget will create jobs and provide economic growth and then blame the UK Government when it fails to do either. We have asked again and again for investment in housing, because it creates homes, jobs and economic growth. That is what the cabinet secretary said this morning. I agree with what he said, and it is worth repeating. In its manifesto, the SNP promised 6,000 socially rented houses per annum. From Mark McDonald’s comments earlier, I gather that that may have been wanting the moon on a stick. The SNP has not provided 6,000 new socially rented houses per annum; indeed, it has cut housing funding by £66 million in the past year. Housing benefit changes at the UK level will mean that we will have a shortage of smaller houses that will be affordable to rent. Neil Findlay pointed out that, with those benefit changes, people face losing their homes, but we are not building homes to take their place. Margaret McDougall mentioned Shelter’s comments. It said: “we are heading for a cliff edge with regard to new completions in the next few years.” It talked about the fall in the number of completions between 2010-11 and 2011-12, which is a huge number if we want to meet the need. Margaret McDougall also spoke about the cuts in the HAG. That means that it will be more expensive—in fact, it will be almost impossible—to develop houses in rural areas. The same is true for houses with disabled access, which are much more expensive to build. Margaret McDougall talked about a drop in the HAG from £70,000 to £40,000. I know from experience in my Highlands and Islands constituency that houses in rural areas—small units without economies of scale—could have previously qualified for up to £120,000 in HAG, which made them affordable to build. That is now missing. Indeed, housing associations in the area cannot even put in a bid to build new houses. We also need to use housing funding for retrofits, not only for our carbon targets, which we have to meet. We need to invest in renewable energy generation and to deal with demand if we are going to meet those targets. We must look at fuel poverty, which we can tackle only by dealing with demand. The Government used its majority in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee to commit no less than £100 million to be spent on fuel poverty. The non-governmental organisations in the area were clear that, at the very least, £200 million needed to be spent, but the Government was not willing to spend even that £100 million within its own budget. Indeed, there has been a cut.

I am sorry, but I did not pick up what the member said. Will he repeat it?

Mr Macintosh was very clear about where the efficiencies would be spent. That would be on education. Housing money would come from the budget consequentials. He was very clear about where the spending was coming from in his opening speech, which I will not go back over. We need housing to create jobs. Construction can lead us out of the recession, but we need to create jobs to do that. We also need to create apprenticeships for young people, and we need to ensure that the procurement of socially rented housing is carried out properly so that we gain the full impact of the jobs. That is why we must invest in housing. We must do so to create jobs and sustainable homes, and deal with fuel poverty. We have talked about investment in education. One in four young people is out of work, but there are 80,000 fewer college places. We need to replace the £34 million in the college budget and we need to create jobs for young people and ensure that they have the skills to fill those jobs. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee asked the cabinet secretary whether his policies were working to deal with youth unemployment and whether the college funding and his funding to support youth employment were creating jobs for young people. His answer was: “It is always difficult to assess the contribution of individual policies to improvements in employment”. The truth is that the cabinet secretary does not know whether his policies will deliver one job, so that was a very worrying statement, especially when he says that this is a budget for employment. Helen Eadie mentioned EU programmes that were not being drawn down, one of which is the youth in action programme. Surely that could be used for youth unemployment, because although €885 million is available to be drawn down, only €2.5 million has been drawn down. We need to address college funding. As Mary Scanlon said, college education addresses inequalities. It also gives young people the skills that they need to find jobs. What was clear from the evidence that the committee received was that young people who were gaining jobs were overqualified for those jobs, while those without skills were destined to a life of unemployment.

That is another thing that NPD should address. On that point, it is interesting that the NPD budget is being cut by £333 million in 2012-13 and by £348 million in 2013-14, but is increasing by £199 million in 2014-15; I dare say that that coincides with another event that year. If that is the case, it is brutal that the Government is playing politics with people’s jobs and capital investment in this country. Reinstating the cuts to the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme would come out of Network Rail’s asset base, not the Scottish Government’s budget, yet the Government refuses to do that, again failing economic growth. As other members said, improvements to connectivity would improve the local economy.

No. I have taken many interventions and I have much to cover. I refer the cabinet secretary to Helen Eadie’s interesting speech. She went through a range of funding packages available through Europe that the Scottish Government could have drawn down. Although that is funding that may need match-funding, it is already being paid out of the Scottish budget. Had the Government matched that funding with European funding, it would have freed up income for use in other projects. We are losing out and I urge the cabinet secretary to take up Helen Eadie’s recommendation that he form a task group to look at that. We looked at local government and business rates. I heard the cabinet secretary say in his opening speech that he would give business rates relief on empty new-build properties. However, he has cut business rates relief on existing empty properties. I am not quite sure how he squares that circle. Maybe he needs to make sense of that policy so that we understand where he is coming from. We want a budget for jobs, growth and fairness but the SNP is only cutting housing and calling for a written constitution in which people have a right to a home. I believe that having a home is a human right and that the Government should put money in the budget to provide for that. Actions speak louder than words.

I, too, congratulate Alex Johnstone on securing the debate. Safer social networking for children is a serious issue. It can be difficult for adults easily to spot abuse and bullying that can have devastating effects on children and young people. As the number of young people going online grows and users get younger, it is essential that social networking sites, parents, guardians and teachers all play their part in ensuring that our young people are safe online. Social networking can be positive, providing users with the ability to stay in touch with friends and family if they live or work in different parts of the country or the world. Young people can feel connected to friends across neighbourhoods, towns, cities and countries. That can be useful to young people when they live in rural areas, like many in the Highlands and Islands do. Many groups and organisations can find it easier to connect with young people in a format that they enjoy and use to contact their friends. Many youth advice groups and charities now use social networking as a means of promoting their work and reaching out to young people who need their help. In the Highlands and Islands, essential charities, such as Ross-Shire Woman's Aid, which provides services to children and young people experiencing domestic abuse, use social networking to share information on how to get help or advice. That highlights the potential for social networking to positively benefit young people. The internet is notoriously hard to police and I join Alex Johnstone and other members in applauding Jamie Tosh for developing Kibooku as a safe online place for young people. Unfortunately, popular sites such as Facebook and Twitter are often not safe places for children, be that due to the risk of predatory behaviour from others or the content of the images and videos that are shared online. Sadly as Children 1st has highlighted in its statistics, around 50 per cent of young people have suffered from cyber-bullying. I agree with Mark McDonald that the other sites really have to up their game. Sites such as Kibooku, which are designed with young people in mind and factor in an element of parental supervision and guidance, mean that young children can be safer online. Figures suggesting that one in five children are the victim of aggressive or unpleasant behaviour online will make sites like Kibooku attractive to parents, and I am also pleased to see that a donation from the user fee for the site is being made to the Cash for Kids charity. I acknowledge that not every parent or young person will make the switch over to child-friendly websites. However, I endorse the recommendations that have been made by Children 1st and agree that it is everybody's responsibility to protect children, and I call on social networks to do more to ensure that young people are safe online. A separate but relevant aspect of keeping our children safe online is keeping them safe from exploitation. The Child Exploitation and Online Protection Centre brings together an extensive range of experts to ensure that young people are kept safe online. It provides online reporting mechanisms alongside education videos and helpful information that is tailored to specific age groups as well as parents and those working alongside children. I encourage the leading social networking sites to have a CEOP link on their websites. That would mean that if a young person felt vulnerable online, they could immediately flag that up and receive advice and information or file a direct report that staff at CEOP could follow up in the interests of keeping young people safe online. I close by praising Scotland’s anti-bullying service respectme, which plays a significant role in supporting young people to stand up to cyber-bullying. We can all play a part in keeping children safe online and ensure that they do not miss out by speaking out and by increasing awareness of cyber-bullying among parents at home, among teachers in the class and, indeed, in any place where young people may be online.

I thank members for supporting my motion. This is an important debate as it comes ahead of the Government’s decisions following the consultation on renewables obligation certificates for biomass plants. Biomass has a role to play in providing us with renewable heat. I have seen really good examples of that in the Highlands and Islands—examples such as Sleat Renewables Ltd, which is a community-owned company that uses land-locked forestry in Skye for local heating. It provides advice to its community on the use of wood for heating, and it supplies Sabhal Mòr Ostaig with woodchips for its heating boiler. Another ideal use where there are sustainable local supplies of biomass is district heating schemes, although there are challenges in using such schemes in rural areas where houses are not close together and shared facilities are not possible. Also, individual biomass boilers are much more expensive than other alternatives. However, local sustainable biomass provides an alternative to expensive electric heating when homes are off the gas grid. It also means that wood is not shipped over long distances, so carbon emissions from transportation are reduced and there is less impact on our often inadequate country roads. However, the motion is about subsidies for larger scale biomass plants and the impact that they can have on both supplies and carbon emissions. The Scottish Government has just finished consulting on its proposals and I hope that it will consider the speeches in this evening’s debate as part of the process. There are a number of concerns about large-scale biomass plants, especially those that are designed to predominantly generate electricity. We need to ask whether that is the most efficient use of biomass. Although the European Union has said that biomass should be considered for industrial use only where there is 70 per cent efficiency, the combined heat and power quality assurance programme categorises plants with as little as 35 per cent efficiency as “good quality”. It is regrettable that, following its very recent consultation, the United Kingdom Government has not significantly improved the definition; however, it is also the definition used by the Scottish Government. If we are to attempt to attain the efficiency outlined in the EU renewable energy directive we cannot use that definition as the basis for allocating subsidies. Concern has also been expressed about the sustainability of supply and the impact on our wood processing industry, which tells us—rightly—that by making products from our wood resources it not only utilises our timber resources sustainably but provides us with a carbon store. It believes that wood should be used for energy only when it has no further use and fears for wood supplies. In the past, Government has said that it will look only at large-scale plants that source fuel from sustainable overseas markets. However, it is unclear to me how we can ensure the sustainability of overseas supplies. The global move to electricity from biomass will increase demand for wood, which, in turn, will lead to higher prices. If we risk reaching a point at which it is no longer economically viable to process wood it might well impact not only on our ability to store carbon in wood products but on our economy, given that wood processing is worth £600 million to the UK economy and employs more than 7,900 people. That is why the industry is alarmed by the move to large-scale biomass electricity plants, even if the vast majority of their fuel is imported. An increase in global prices and scarcity of supply will also impact on small-scale biomass plants because at the moment it is uneconomical to export the wood that they use. However, increasing the value of biomass might make exporting such wood economically viable which would render useless interventions such as the use of district heating systems to combat fuel poverty. Higher prices could also lead to unsustainable felling. When developing nations find such a resource that brings them substantial income, can we govern where felling will take place? Indeed, it might also have a knock-on effect on food security in those communities. Dependence on imports also raises energy security issues. Those are probably subjects for another debate, but I felt it important to highlight them. In any case, we need to make decisions on biomass in the round, noting that it is a limited resource and taking into account our carbon emission targets and the sustainability of our natural resources. All that must then tie in with our economic and social needs. I am grateful to members who signed the motion and are supporting this debate and ask the minister to consider the issues and come forward with a subsidy regime that deals with what are very genuine concerns.

The First Minister will be aware of the 12 per cent drop in tourist numbers this summer, which is very worrying now that we are into the winning years. What steps is he taking to stop this dramatic decline?

I pay tribute to the workers who make the oil and gas industry a success. Many of them work onshore in back-up and planning roles but, given the real personal risk and inconvenience that they undergo, we must especially recognise the contribution of those who work offshore. We are approaching the 25-year anniversary of the Piper Alpha disaster, in which 167 people lost their lives, with many more directly impacted. The lives of those who survived or who lost loved ones were changed immediately. Since then, much has changed. Safety is now given the highest priority—and rightly so—but that does not mean that dangers do not exist. Indeed, recent helicopter incidents have brought home the risks to us. I was lucky enough to visit the Elgin-Franklin platform as a guest of Oil & Gas UK and Total—the details of my visit are in my entry in the register of members’ interests. The platform worked with extremely high pressures and, subsequent to my visit, developed a gas leak. Having visited the platform, I can only imagine the real concern that such an incident caused and the grave risks involved. In preparation for the visit, we had to attend a helicopter safety training course. Although it forms only a small part of the training that personnel usually undertake, I found it a real eye-opener to the risks involved. Being submerged upside-down in a swimming pool and having to find one’s way out of the vehicle were pretty challenging, although the training took place in a very safe environment compared with the North Sea itself. One can hardly imagine the reality of ditching, which is why the recent problems with offshore transportation helicopters are extremely worrying. Constituents have expressed to me concerns about their work. Because of the lack of transportation to rigs, workers have been unable to get to work and are suffering financial hardship. I know that the industry is looking at the problem with helicopters and is exploring alternative forms of transportation, but given the hostile environments in which oil and gas platforms are situated it is difficult to see a safer solution. Nevertheless, the situation emphasises the vulnerability of the workforce to such changes and steps must be taken to ensure that they do not suffer hardship while the safety issues are—rightly—being dealt with. Wider safety in the oil and gas industry is every worker’s business, and the trade unions have pushed safety to the top of the agenda through the utilisation of safety representatives. They have also made sure that safety is a priority for every worker. Research commissioned by OPITO shows that learning enhances employees’ commitment to safety. The trade union movement has also promoted training and the development of skills within the workforce. Unfortunately, despite the issue’s importance, the oil and gas industry still has a way to go, although Nigg might be bucking the trend by taking the issue of in-house training very seriously. During the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s recent inquiry into renewable energy, one of the renewables industry’s common complaints was that although it was investing in skills the oil and gas industry was not and that because of the skills shortage in the engineering field many of its skilled personnel were being poached by the oil and gas industry where higher wages are available. In its briefing for the debate, Aberdeen city and shire economic future highlights Subsea UK’s estimate that the oil and gas sector will require a further 10,000 employees over the next five years, while a PricewaterhouseCoopers report has suggested that Aberdeen might have to find another 120,000 workers by 2022—regardless of what will be a natural decline in the industry because of finite resources. We are facing a skills shortage in engineering, and the industry, as well as the Government, has a role to play in addressing the problem. The industry must look at how it accommodates apprentices offshore and grow its own workforce. The industry has an ageing workforce and needs to act now to ensure that it has adequate skills into the future. It needs to show that it is an ideal career choice for women, too. When I visited the Elgin-Franklin platform, one of the people who showed us around the rig and explained all the processes was a woman. She was proof—if anyone needed it—that that lifestyle suits women. Oil and gas companies in particular need to reach out to women because they can help to fill the skills shortage in the industry. The Government has a role to play in that regard. As we saw in the Scottish Women’s Convention’s report into rural issues, women were concerned that their daughters were being discouraged from taking science, technology, engineering and mathematics subjects at school. In order to break down gender barriers we need to start at school. We also need to ensure that engineering courses are available. Cuts in college funding are not conducive to that, and neither are caps on the number of students entering degree-level engineering studies. Skills must be at the forefront as new oil and gas fields provide even more challenges—the industry is moving into more hostile and deeper waters to access fields that are increasingly difficult to reach. Indeed, as the minister acknowledged in his opening speech, it will take new technologies and skills to bring onshore the reserves that are available. We must have highly trained people to ensure that those technologies are robust, given the disasters that can be wrought by oil spillages. We are all more than aware of the problems caused by the Deepwater Horizon and the impact on many communities. We cannot afford to risk the occurrence of similar incidents, especially in our waters. Skills and a stable workforce are crucial to the industry. The new challenges require fiscal stability. I am glad that the minister acknowledged that, because companies need to plan ahead and develop new fields and technologies—a point that was stressed in Oil & Gas UK’s briefing for the debate. It is therefore important that the Scottish Government is clear about its fiscal regime for oil and gas should Scotland leave the UK. While it pursues its goal of independence, the Government must ensure that, during the campaign and this period of uncertainty, the industry has clarity to enable it to develop. For example, it is unclear whether the Government’s proposed oil fund will be top sliced from existing taxation—indeed, it is unclear whether levels of taxation will remain comparable to those in the rest of the UK—or whether a new tax will be levied on the industry. Decommissioning is another issue. What might be the fiscal regime for decommissioning in an independent Scotland? Would decommissioning relief contracts entered into by the UK Government be honoured in Scotland if it were no longer part of the UK? Those questions need to be answered as quickly as possible so that the industry’s priorities are not skewed. Failure to answer them will cause instability, hinder development and possibly lead to the early decommissioning of fields.

That proves the point about why we need stability and why the industry needs to know what the fiscal regime will be, should Scotland become independent of the UK, and whether contracts that the Government enters into with the UK Government will be honoured. That is an important point because, if we decommission too quickly, we lose out on the benefits of the reserves that are there and we may also lose out on the decommissioning work. I am sure that Tavish Scott will talk about the role that the Shetland Islands will wish to play in decommissioning. The islands are ideally placed for that work—they have a skilled workforce and a history in the oil and gas industry. I will touch briefly on carbon capture and storage, which the minister spoke about. Although we boast some of the most ambitious carbon reduction targets in the world, I do not believe that we can ignore the reserves of oil and gas that we have, so it is extremely important that we have in place CCS technologies that allow us to mitigate the impacts of what is a carbon-intensive industry. It is wrong to say that we are in a position to ignore our oil and gas reserves, because when it comes to fuel for things such as heating and transportation, we do not have the technology to replace that now. We need to move on apace in delivering such technology so that as well as meeting our climate change targets, we can loosen our dependence on carbon-intensive forms of fuel. Oil and gas certainly make a contribution to our economy. We hope that that continues, but we need to have the stability that allows that to happen. I move amendment S4M-05310.2, to insert at end: “; notes the challenges to the industry in managing a finite and unpredictable resource; believes that the industry must play a role in encouraging young people to pursue a career in engineering, working with schools, OPITO and the further and higher education sectors, paying particular attention to the encouragement of young women into the industry; recognises the high costs and technical challenges of extracting remaining oil and gas resources from the UK Continental Shelf and the future costs of decommissioning; recognises that attention to safety must be paramount both at work and travelling to and from oil and gas installations, and believes that workplace safety representatives, trade unions and the Health and Safety Executive have key roles to play in ensuring that safety comes first.”

Will Kevin Stewart give way?

Will the member give way?

The member mentioned my point, so he should give way to me.

Mike MacKenzie totally misrepresents my point, which was that the industry is a hazardous area in which to work because of the geographical challenges of where the oil and gas rigs are. When an accident happens, it has very serious consequences, and travelling to and from work is a dangerous thing. It is to the credit of the industry—and indeed of the workers and the trade unions—that there are fewer accidents and that safety is taken so seriously. That was the point that I was trying to make.

I join other members in wishing everyone in the chamber all the best for 2013. The debate is an important one with which to start the year. I found the committee’s report to be extremely useful. I hope that it will add to our knowledge and understanding of this important topic. The report rightly points out the cost to Government of unemployment through increased benefits payments and loss of tax revenues. It also talks about the cost to the economy of lost productivity. We are also told that unemployment causes permanent scars and impacts on people’s future life chances. For me, the greatest cost is the cost to the individual. The health impact of unemployment is the same as smoking 200 cigarettes a day, and the impacts on mental health and self-esteem are immeasurable. Therefore, we should not demonise those who are unemployed because doing so simply makes matters worse. We need to consider ways of improving employability and finding solutions for them. Indeed, if we tackle the problem, we could probably also make huge inroads into health inequalities in Scotland—a problem that has been stubborn for a number of years. The report rightly considers those who are distant from the labour market. I will touch on looked-after children. Looked-after children need support beyond their teens. Many young people have family support throughout their lives, and we need to replicate that for people for whom the state is the parent. Support needs to be individually targeted. In its written submission, Barnardo’s said that “intervention periods of 13 or 26 weeks often are not long enough” and Scotland’s Colleges talked about needing to work with care leavers for two years. However, support for looked-after children must go on until they are settled into sustainable jobs and are able to continue self-sufficiently. A number of members, including Kezia Dugdale, made the point that Scottish Government support stops at the age of 19. Among young people aged 20 to 24, unemployment is rising, so we need to consider how to support young people beyond the age of 19. We especially need to ensure that those who are looked after receive support. Other members talked about access to childcare, the costs of which are far too high. Those who have families often lean on family support for childcare, but again, people who have been looked-after as children have none of that support and are often driven out of work if they go on to have families. Young people who do not have the support of their own families often start to have families earlier in order to have that family affiliation around them. We need to try to support them through that and to understand why it happens. We also need to provide one-to-one support. It is not about quantity; we need quality individual support to deal with complex problems. Many members mentioned problems such as generational unemployment. If nobody in a young person’s family has worked, how can they possibly aspire to work? Other problems include drug and alcohol abuse or having a criminal record. Elaine Murray also mentioned the stark impact that poor education has on 15-year-olds. What chance do they have if they are already five years behind? Hanzala Malik mentioned the needs of ethnic minorities, which are often ignored. Mark McDonald mentioned homelessness, which is a problem for looked-after children and for anyone who is facing unemployability, as homeless people do not have an address or the secure lifestyle that is needed to get into work. All those things need to be tackled, as do soft skills, such as being able to turn up to work, knowing how to interact with the colleagues with whom a person works and making those relationships work for the person. A lot of people mentioned good examples in their areas; I will mention one in Inverness. Artysans is a social enterprise cafe that takes on people who are hard to place and are distant from the labour market, and prepares them for work. It gives them skills, including many soft skills such as how to turn up for work dressed properly, and to be in a position from which they can begin work. The people from Artysans told me that although they sometimes put in years of work making somebody ready for employment, there is nowhere for those people to move on to and there is real difficulty in creating new places for others coming after them. That is why I truly believe that the public sector has a role to play. At a point when—as has been mentioned in the debate—there are so many people unemployed who have had career paths and who have confidence and qualifications, how can people with special needs possibly compete with them at interview or, indeed, at the job-application stage? We need to consider ring fencing of certain jobs in the public sector, and the Scottish Government could lead the way. Local government, the health service and agencies need to consider ring fencing jobs in order specifically to set them aside for people with special needs, which will give those people the chance to have good and gainful employment. A number of members talked about colleges, which have a role in reaching hard-to-reach people. It is very disappointing that at this point, when we really need that input, budgets are being cut. The impact of that will be that colleges will prioritise that for which they get the better return for their money, which will push the more hard-to-reach people out of the picture. Our having those people compete with people who have more opportunities does not allow us to help them. I am aware that I may be running out of time, but I will touch on online assistance. A lot of people mentioned the my world of work website. People who live in areas of deprivation might also have no access to IT or online support. We need to ensure that areas of deprivation are not replicated by Government policy, through there being too much available online and not enough being accessible to people regardless of where their community is and whether they have access to broadband. We need to take steps to make sure that we do not have a further lost generation. If anything, this debate surely tells us of the impact that the situation has had in the past. We cannot allow it to continue into the future; we need to find solutions now.

1. To ask the Scottish Government when it will announce its plans for the Highlands and Islands superfast broadband pilot. (S4O-01638)

The Highlands and Islands lag far behind the rest of Scotland on broadband provision, with the Western Isles identified as having the worst service in Scotland. I am sure that the Deputy First Minister is aware that there is a great deal of anticipation around the delivery of improvement. Will she say what percentage of coverage the programme expects to achieve in the Western Isles, in particular, and throughout the Highlands and Islands?

This has been an interesting debate but the question remains: is this a budget for jobs and growth? The result of the debate is very clear: we are unable to tell whether that is the case, because the Government has not looked at an analysis that would provide us with that information. Many people talked about how the budget is presented. It seems that, year after year, we talk about the need for level 4 figures and for us to be able to see the budget’s outcomes, not just the inputs. We talk about that, but we are no further forward. We need an analysis that tells us whether the budget is doing what it is supposed to be doing. The only evidence is what we read in the newspapers and see in our communities: poor economic growth and a falling number of jobs. Therefore, we can say only that it does not look like a budget for jobs and growth. Others have talked about how we measure things. Should we be looking at more than GDP to identify growth—should we be looking at the wellbeing index, for example? It is very difficult even to look at the Government’s own measures for this budget’s outcomes. I hope that the Government will take that issue away and reconsider it, so that we can measure things. We in the Labour Party are clear that the priorities need to be expenditure on housing and colleges. Expenditure on housing needs to be a priority because that would not only provide homes and jobs but tackle fuel poverty and our carbon emissions. Expenditure on colleges needs to be a priority because colleges provide education and the skills that we will need to do those very things in housing. Many speakers—Elaine Murray in particular—talked about housing and its preventative spend role. The SFHA has also talked about that—it mentioned fewer people being hospitalised in its submission on the draft budget. We also know that good housing enhances educational outcomes and attainment; indeed, it has an effect on crime and employment. If we are looking at preventative spend, we should acknowledge that housing is one of the main tenets in that regard.

I welcome any house that is completed. The problem is the Government’s policy. Malcolm Chisholm made the point eloquently when he said that the SNP started its term in government with a manifesto promise that it was going to build 6,000 social rented houses per annum. However, those have become “affordable houses”, the definition of which changes daily. Malcolm Chisholm clearly said that despite additional funding being levered in—the £50 million that was announced yesterday—the target has not changed. We are seeing inputs but we are not seeing outcomes. If this Government was really looking at outcomes, surely more funding for affordable housing would mean that the target would grow. However, the target is static—indeed, it has fallen, in real terms, because we will not see the 6,000 social rented houses that were promised in the Government’s manifesto. No matter what the Government puts in, we are not getting anything out, which is hugely disappointing, given housing spend’s role in providing not only good housing but jobs and apprenticeships. Elaine Murray and others touched on the housing association grant, which is an issue of real concern especially—if I can be parochial—in my Highlands and Islands area. HAG falls because people cannot build in rural areas through lack of economies of scale. Elaine Murray mentioned Aberdeenshire housing associations, which are planning only 1.4 per cent of their normal housing build. That will have a devastating impact on those communities and we need to do something now about the situation. Obviously we welcome any efficiencies that can be made but I have to say that if people are looking only at numbers rather than at providing houses where they are needed, performance will be very poor indeed. The housing budget can also be used for retrofitting, which ensures that not only the houses that we build but those that have already been built can be decarbonised. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee has discussed the huge issue of fuel poverty, and I was disappointed that the SNP majority on the committee voted down a recommendation that the Government spend no less than £100 million on the matter. I hope that the Government will consider using some housing funds for retrofitting not only to lift people out of fuel poverty but to do something about our climate change targets, which were mentioned by Rob Gibson and Patrick Harvie, who, in his minute, made a very passionate plea for the RPP to be published. The fact is that all those retrofitting projects would have an impact on climate change targets. I am very aware that my time is running out, but I want to touch on the revenue to capital issue, which certainly came up at the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. Many witnesses questioned whether the move was indeed adding to the number of jobs. The fact is that we have lost 51,700 public sector jobs and 41,300 direct or indirect construction jobs; the revenue that has been moved to capital expenditure is going somewhere other than Scottish construction. There is real concern about leakage and things moving abroad, with all the impact that that has on our communities. I very much hope that the Government will take those points into account and use the powers that it already has to provide economic growth and jobs in Scotland.

I, too, congratulate Rob Gibson on securing the debate. The issue is very worrying not only for the Pentland Firth but for all our islands that have the potential to develop renewables commercially. Historically, grid charging has been set to reflect the price of transmission. The further the transmission, the greater the charge has been. That encouraged traditional methods of generation to be built as close as possible to points of need, and that made sense because power is lost the further it is transmitted. That has meant that most of our larger power stations have been close to population centres, but it has become recognised that that policy disadvantages renewable energy. There is some wind generation close to our cities, but the vast majority of it tends to be in our more remote rural areas, which are exposed to high wind speeds. The same will be the case for wave and tidal energy. The Pentland Firth—our marine energy park—has the potential to generate huge amounts of energy, but transmission charges might hamper development. Project transmit was set up and has sought to deal with the issue of renewables, and it has been widely welcomed as a big step forward for mainland areas, but the charges that are being proposed would disadvantage our island communities. For example, charges on Orkney would be much greater than those in Caithness because a subsea connection will require to be built, and the cost of that cable will become part of the transmission charge. The unintended consequence of that is that Caithness could become overdeveloped when power is taken back to the shore. By contrast, Orkney, which is the home of wave and tidal power, will lose out on many of those developments because it will be much cheaper to transmit power from Caithness than from Orkney. As we harness those sources of power, we cannot choose where the natural resources are. Therefore, we need to ensure that such generation is not disadvantaged by grid access charges. Project transmit dealt with many of the anomalies of the old system. It took into account, for example, the intermittency of wind power, and that change was beneficial for that type of generation. However, it failed to find a solution for our islands. Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles are potentially a rich source of renewable energy, if it is affordable to export that energy from the islands. That failure is equally worrying if we take into account the fact that some of our largest community-owned renewables companies are based on those islands, and the potential of renewable energy to kick-start the economies of some of our more remote and disadvantaged communities. We urgently need a solution also because of the massive inflation in transmission cable prices. The cable costs have doubled in a very short space of time. In the Western Isles, Scottish Hydro Electric Transmission Ltd has had to revise its costs to such an extent that it needs to go back to the developers.

I agree, which is why I was making the point that speed is of the essence. While SHETL goes back to the developers in the Western Isles to re-evaluate the current cost, those costs are rising in the background, which means that when the developers come back to SHETL, having completed the re-evaluation, they may have to go back again. That creates a vicious circle until the point is reached when it is no longer financially viable to run projects. I totally agree that there is a degree of urgency in that regard, and the situation is the same for the northern isles, so we need to speed things up. I know that the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism is involved in discussions with the UK Government, and I believe that there is a will on the part of both Governments to find a solution to the problem. I look forward to receiving an update and perhaps an early resolution to the problem so that we can tap the energy sources that our islands provide.

The Scottish Government is rightly concerned about the mismanagement by Europe of our fishing stock, but it presided over what could have been a catastrophe at home this year, when the west coast prawn fishery faced closure in the summer due to overfishing. The impact that that would have had on the communities on the west coast is immeasurable. Fishermen there are unable to pick and choose where they fish. The onshore fish processors that are dependent on local landings to keep their industry alive would also have been devastated. They provide jobs where there are very few alternative forms of employment. Economic devastation was averted at the last minute, but it should never have come to that. The cabinet secretary will say that he cannot second-guess fish stocks and availability. That is so, but he can act when a problem emerges and the speed of his action has left us with a problem for next month. It is still unclear what fishermen on the west coast will fish next week. That makes it impossible for them to plan crew and staffing levels. It is also impossible for processors that need to meet orders. Should they take them or will there be no fishing for the next few weeks? The cabinet secretary needs to make an announcement about that soon. He needs to allow the fleet and the onshore processors to plan ahead. He needs to take responsibility for the situation and ensure that it never happens again. There is real concern that the same thing could happen all over again when the restrictions are lifted in May. The cabinet secretary needs to ensure that a management structure is in place that protects the fishery and the dependent communities. Otherwise, a similar situation will arise next year. Until management of our fisheries is vested in our local communities, such situations will recur. Only when our fishing fleet is responsible to future generations for the fish that they will inherit will there be a step change in how our seas are managed. Inshore fisheries and static gear boats show a marked difference in attitude that needs to be replicated throughout the industry to ensure that we leave a thriving stock to our children. Steps have been taken, but we need to go further. We need to protect breeding grounds in order to allow fish time to breed. We also need to ensure that they have periods when they are not disturbed so that they can form shoals to allow them to breed. Measures such as the total allowable catch and the days at sea provisions are blunt instruments when it comes to managing the sea. Our attitude should be that we need to farm the sea to ensure that the fish exist for future generations. We are leading the way. We need to go further, but we also need to ensure that the rest of the EU comes with us on that. Many members have mentioned discards; it feels like groundhog day. I do not think that we have had a fisheries debate in which there was not a unanimous outcry that discards are absolutely obscene. The world’s resources are being thrown away. We need to move towards zero discards and certainly not to move backwards. We must ensure that penalties are in place to stop fishermen actively pursuing species that require protection. We also need to ensure that all the fish that are caught are landed and marketed, thereby cutting waste. Throwing dead fish back is wasteful and causes an ecological imbalance that damages our seas more widely. The measures that are put in place need to be balanced against the cost of landing the fish. If the penalties are too great, the fishermen will themselves choose to discard in order to make room for a more lucrative catch. However, if the penalties are not great enough, fishermen will go out and fish for the fish to which the penalties relate, if they are seen as a lucrative catch. I will touch briefly on the mackerel negotiations and join other members in expressing great disappointment that no progress has been made. I hope that progress will be made, but is it not time for the EU to consider sanctions to protect that fishery and to ensure that our fishermen are protected? We had status to show that we were fishing the mackerel sustainably, so it seems wrong that that has been removed not through any action of ours, but through the actions of other states. We need to take steps to ensure that that status is returned. I was a little tickled by Graeme Dey’s comments about how the negotiations would be so much better if Scotland were an independent country. In the light of this week’s interventions by the President of the European Commission, I think that they would be better because we would not be there. It may be better for the cabinet secretary because he would not have a sleepless night but, unfortunately, we would have to abide by the outcome of the talks and would have no seat at the table. I believe that there are problems with the negotiations, which are based on fishing alone. We need to have a link between our fishing industries and the communities in which they are based. We need to reclaim that link in order to ensure that there is an incentive for future generations to manage our fisheries. Until we do that, there will be horse trading year after year.

1. To ask the Scottish Government how many Scottish food and drink products have protected geographical indication status. (S4O-01576)

Indeed, and I am very hopeful that Stornoway black pudding will receive protected status. Given that the award of PGI status would provide a marketing benefit for the producers of Stornoway black pudding and of the other products on the list, what steps is the Scottish Government taking to help them to market their products at home and abroad following that boost?

The minister will be aware that community developments in the Western Isles are being delayed because of slippage on the interconnector to the islands. He will also be aware that those delays add to costs. What is the Scottish Government doing to speed up the delivery of an interconnector?

I congratulate Jamie Hepburn on securing this important debate and I pay tribute to the work of the white ribbon campaign, which is run to show that men will not condone violence against women. Like other members, I believe that we have come a long way in tackling violence against women and we have made much progress. Much of that has been done since the creation of the Parliament with its devolved responsibilities. Many of the responses have been driven by Scottish Women’s Aid and other groups that have secured cross-party support for progress. I welcome the fact that we have come so far, but I must admit that we have far to go. I hope that we can build on that progress by criminalising the purchase of sex. Prostitution leads to vulnerable people—mostly women—being coerced to have sex in return for payment, either in cash or in kind. For the most part, people are coerced by poverty and the need for money—often, they are single parents or have drug and alcohol problems. Others are coerced by abusive partners or pimps, and we see greater numbers of people being trafficked into our society. Young people coming out of care are a prime target for those who would profit from selling other human beings, yet we criminalise the victims while those who feed the industry by their demand get off scot free. Those who purchase sex need to understand the damage that their behaviour causes. They cannot buy consent. The impact of their actions is that many prostitutes suffer post-traumatic stress and mental health problems, not to mention the physical effects, which include assault and rape. That is unacceptable in a modern Scotland and I hope that we can build the same consensus and tackle that aspect of violence against women.

There is concern in townships that, if grazings clerks are seen to police activities, that will break down the working relationships between grazings clerks and other crofters. Will the minister take that seriously and, if need be, change the legislation to remove the onerous task from grazings clerks?

It says in the legislative consent memorandum that, without a legislative consent motion, the UK Government will remove the devolved provisions from the bill. If that happens, will the Scottish Government require to introduce a pensions bill for Scotland, or will it have the scope to retain unchanged the schemes that are in its charge?

When I saw that this debate was coming up, I thought that we might be in for quite a boring afternoon as, while it is on a good cause, there might not be an awful lot to say. I am delighted that I was not right in that regard. Christine Grahame is right to say that a lot of members have used the debate to highlight what is best in their own constituencies, but in doing so they have highlighted what is best in Scotland. That augurs well for us all in a positive debate that is about telling the world what we are good at. The debate has been excellent for highlighting the importance of business tourism to the Scottish economy; I will not rehash the various statistics that we have heard. One thing that business tourism does is to create all-year-round tourism, which has always been an issue. The seasonality of the tourism industry has meant that it has been low-skilled and low-paid, and there has been no career path. Many members have spoken about the career path and the skills that are required. Having a year-round career will help that to happen, which can only benefit us and the wider tourism industry. Many members talked about the level of spend by the tourist visitor, which it is right to highlight. Members such as Mark Griffin mentioned the impact of retail, and highlighted the good retail experience in Glasgow, which has a knock-on benefit for restaurants and hotels. Margaret McCulloch talked about the benefit for our local businesses, even though they may not be directly involved in the conferences, in the form of networking opportunities and the ability to learn from the visitors. Business tourism is an opportunity for us all to showcase Scotland in the hope that people will come back with their families for other trips. Many members talked about the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s report on the winning years and the challenges of getting more people out into our more rural areas. In the report, the committee noted that although urban areas are doing well, rural areas are not doing so well. Some members mentioned the Glasgow Commonwealth games and said that there is a concentration on Glasgow and not areas further out. When the committee took evidence on that subject, it was reassured to hear that the organising committee is looking at ways in which to encourage people to extend their stay and go out to other areas. It is important to put that on the record, and I hope that those efforts will be successful. However, we will need things such as through ticketing, ticketing to the rest of Scotland and better transport and connectivity to make that happen. Colin Beattie’s observations about being a business tourist were eye opening. He talked about the importance of convenient facilities and even things such as tartan gift shops near conference venues. However, we probably need to look at extending business tourism visits rather than just ensuring that visitors go to places close by. Earlier today, we discussed the professional conference management organisations’ roles in that and the need for people to go out and speak to them beforehand so that they know what is on offer in other parts of Scotland and can encourage people to book beyond the event that they are attending. That will enable business tourists to go out into other parts of Scotland. Duncan McNeil made a good bid for Inverclyde in that respect. People who go to Glasgow for business tourism events could be sailing down in Inverclyde soon afterwards if we had the proper transport links. That brings me to transport, which was one of the big issues in the debate. It is clear that we need better transport links. Many members talked about air passenger duty and the double whammy for passengers who use a hub and connecting flights. I am sure that Tavish Scott, who talked about the air discount scheme, would agree with me that people from the islands often face a triple whammy from air passenger duty because, as well as travelling from the island to a centre, they have to catch a connecting flight to the hub, and they then have to pay again, so in all they have to pay the duty three times. We need to consider how we can deal with that problem. I agree with Tavish Scott that we need to reinstate the air discount scheme for businesses. Doing so would make a big difference by creating a level playing field for businesses in our islands, and it would help to grow their economies. Many members talked about rail links between our airports and the cities of Glasgow and Edinburgh and further afield. It is important that the minister takes that back and considers the issue. We need to improve those transport links so that we can get people from the airports to other transport hubs and, indeed, out to the rest of Scotland. I think that it was Roderick Campbell who talked about the logistics of transport and the way in which it pulls people into urban areas rather than pushing them out into our more rural areas. Members talked about the air route development scheme, which was run so well by Glasgow, and said that we could try to replicate it in other places. Perhaps we need to consider direct flights for conferences. When people are setting up conferences in our cities, we perhaps need to provide better transport links and, if we work with our airports, we could do that. At the beginning of the debate, Fergus Ewing said unashamedly that he hoped that the debate would be a chance to highlight the conference bid fund, which is perhaps not well recognised throughout Scotland. It is clear that the fund is not just for the larger urban areas, but I suppose that it is only natural that cities that are involved in business tourism are aware of the fund and are making the most of it. All of us who took the opportunity to talk about the facilities in our areas and their ability to attract business tourism need to take back to those areas information about the bid fund and the opportunity to pull in help for business tourism. Mary Scanlon and Murdo Fraser touched on an area that is close to my heart, namely broadband and mobile connectivity. If we are to attract business tourism, we need proper broadband and mobile facilities. If we do not have that, people will not come because they will not be able to continue with their work. I am aware of the time, but I wanted to touch on a lot of other matters, particularly the issue of cities as highlighted in our amendment. Many Glasgow MSPs took the opportunity to highlight what Glasgow has done and the council’s contribution; other members have mentioned Aberdeen, Perth and Dundee. I will take this opportunity to mention Inverness—after all, Eden Court is a favourite for party conferences—and Oban, both of which are in my region. At the beginning of the debate, Ken Macintosh rightly highlighted the challenges to our economy. However, this particular sector is growing and we need to make the most of it. We are known for heather, bagpipes and the film “Brave”, and I am not sure that that is such a bad thing. We need to build on such stereotypes and make it clear that there is more to Scotland than that and that we are a good destination for all forms of business tourism. As we are all ambassadors, we must all ensure that we sell Scotland for that purpose.

The Scottish Government must recognise that there are increased costs in delivering services in our island communities, and that Orkney loses out, even in comparison to our other island communities. The same is true of health funding. Although a working group was set up some years ago to consider the health funding distribution formula, no discernible difference has occurred with regard to funding for remote and island communities.

Will the member give way?

Does Bob Doris agree that we should not only seek legal advice but make it public and that we should not hide whether such advice has or has not been sought? How much would he spend on hiding something that does not exist?

12. To ask the Scottish Government how it works with further and higher education institutions to develop skills relevant to the renewable energy sector. (S4O-01377)

The minister is aware of the worrying skills shortage—a shortage of trained engineers—that could stall the Government’s progress towards its renewable energy targets. Despite that, the Government has placed a cap on the number of students who can study engineering in Scottish universities. What plans does the Government have to remove that cap, to ensure that we have an adequate supply of suitably qualified engineers?

I, too, congratulate David Stewart on securing the debate. It is hard to believe that it was 10 years ago that Gigha was bought out by the community. I had the privilege of being there alongside the community on that historic day. It was a great celebration, the memory of which will remain with me for the rest of my days. It was a time when the island’s population was falling, there were few jobs, housing was poor and the viability of the community was in the balance. The purchase brought hope to the community. So much has happened in those 10 short years. The population started to increase almost immediately, housing improved, and now the community has its three dancing ladies, which other members have mentioned. The wind turbines generate profit of about £75,000 a year, which provides an income for the community. They attracted 100 per cent support from the community, which shows that such support is possible when a community pulls together. Today’s debate is also timely given that we are so close to the 20th anniversary of the death of John McEwen. As David Stewart said, he was the first person to catalogue land ownership in Scotland. Indeed, his work still drives the debate forward today. We should also pay tribute to the Assynt crofters, who led the way on community buyouts. They also need to be recognised in the debate. Like other members, I am pleased to welcome David Cameron to the Parliament today. He and Community Land Scotland are pushing the agenda forward, which is very much required in the current situation. I welcome the review group that the Scottish Government has set up to look at land reform. However, the Government has already missed opportunities to further land reform through legislation that we have passed. A serious concern is that the time that the review group has been given to report will halt progress on land reform for the foreseeable future, and certainly that there might be no progress in this parliamentary session. I urge the minister to produce an interim report and an interim action plan, so that we can keep the process moving forward throughout the session.

I thank the minister for that intervention, which helps us all and gives us the reassurance that we require. If Gigha and the other communities that have bought out their estates have taught us anything, it is that community ownership leads to growth in communities. Jobs have been created and communities have been revitalised. The most important part of land reform is that it puts the levers of economic generation into our communities’ hands and allows them to take charge of their future and that of generations to come. Many communities want that opportunity, so we must continue to make progress and to look for new ways to empower our communities.

Is it dignified to lie in a hospital bed without a blanket?

The debate is, indeed, welcome, as was the summit to which the motion refers. There has been consensus about the issues regarding women and employment. Indeed, unemployment has been highlighted as one of the biggest issues, and we have heard that women’s unemployment is up by 16 per cent and that the rate for younger women is double that. We have also had a good report from the Wise Group and Save the Children highlighting the connection between women’s employment and child poverty; when more women were in the workplace, child poverty fell, but we are now seeing the reverse of that as more women lose their jobs. We must remember that poverty impacts on a range of things, such as our health, education and, indeed, our future opportunities. Protecting women’s jobs and providing women with accessible and affordable childcare is preventative spend, because it means that we protect our children from damage in their lives ahead. It is not right that Scotland has some of the most expensive childcare in the UK. We need to change that situation and make the childcare affordable, but we also need to make it accessible. I cover a rural area in the Highlands and Islands where it is difficult to get access to childcare without travelling huge numbers of miles. The situation is similar in areas of deprivation; I hear that much less childcare is available there and that, because of the cost, a lot of people who live in deprivation cannot consider childcare. We need to look at how we can get women back into the workforce. Siobhan McMahon talked about local government cuts as one of the major reasons for the fall in the level of women’s employment. We see a further cut of 4.3 per cent coming down the line to local government in the budget. Front-line workers such as care workers and educational assistants, who are predominantly women, bear the brunt of the cuts. However, it not just those women who are affected by the cuts, because other women have to pick up the pieces when services are removed. That makes it more difficult for them to work, because they are predominantly in charge of the caring responsibilities in the home. The knock-on effect is that more female unemployment is created. The cuts are being made by this Government now. By cutting local government funding, the Government is driving children into poverty. Christina McKelvie may think that we in the Labour Party should not question the Government’s spending commitments, but when the Government drives children into poverty, I for one will continue to question those spending commitments. Many members have talked about occupational segregation. We need to start educating very young people or, rather, not educating or forcing them into the stereotypes that we carry with us. Ken Macintosh was rightly concerned about how he and his wife divvied up the chores last night. If they did that night after night, that would create a stereotype for his children to follow. However, he has assured me that he did the dishes and the ironing as well, so his children are probably getting a good role model to follow. That is the last of my sooking up to Ken. We have to be careful about how we pass on our own stereotypes, because we carry stereotypes with us that were formed at an early age.

I was not suggesting that we beat ourselves up; I was suggesting that, if we allow women the same opportunities as men, we will have to change. We need to educate ourselves, our children and our employers to ensure that they recruit women into the right kind of roles. Like recruits like—if I interview people, I am much more likely to appoint somebody with whom I have something in common. Therefore, we need positive discrimination in places such as the boardroom to ensure that women are offered the same opportunities as men. We must offer the right advice and guidance when people choose careers. Several members have talked about the oil and gas industry. We have skill shortages in engineering. It is important that we encourage women into roles in those sectors. This week, I met a woman who had a science degree and who is doing an engineering apprenticeship at Nigg—I was really impressed by what she is trying to do. We need to ensure that we raise expectations about levels of pay, as Jean Urquhart said. Women need to have the same expectations as men on careers and what they can earn from them. As members have said, we are still way behind on equal pay, despite having legislation on the matter. There is a clear link between women’s employment and child poverty and we need to do something about that. We cannot afford the education, health and life opportunity risks. The Government can take action now. I urge the Government to consider providing accessible and affordable childcare and to protect women’s jobs.

16. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to reduce waiting times for people who have been referred for psychological therapies. (S4O-01321)

Will the minister take specific action to target areas in which waiting times for psychological therapies are longer, such as in the Highlands, where an estimated 75,000 people suffer from mental illness? Health boards that cover large geographical areas with a sparse population need more staff time per patient to deliver those therapies. Will the minister take that into account when setting health board budgets?

I, too, welcome the energy skills academy, which I hope will build on the good success rate of North Highland College and Nigg Skills Academy. However, the cabinet secretary will be aware that there is a shortage of graduate engineers. Will he remove the cap on university places for engineers?

I will concentrate my remarks on the Scottish Ambulance Service and start by paying tribute to the excellent staff who operate our ambulances and our control rooms. However, the Scottish Ambulance Service is an emergency service that covers only urban areas. Many areas in the Highlands and Islands receive no emergency service from the Scottish Ambulance Service and it is left to NHS boards to pick up the pieces. I have a couple of examples of that. We had a recent case in Ardnamurchan in which NHS Highland had provided an on-call nurse to tend to emergencies because the nearest Scottish Ambulance Service ambulance was based more than an hour away. When the postholder left, it was NHS Highland that was left to deal with the fallout regarding emergency provision. The best that the Scottish Ambulance Service could suggest was the use of first responders. In other words, it sought to rely on unpaid members of the community to do its job for it. Indeed, it asked volunteer firefighters whether they could take on the job. My second example concerns Glenelg, where the community raised significant concerns when their GP was seconded, because that GP had provided emergency cover. The nearest ambulance station is in Kyle, which is probably about an hour away over difficult roads, on which the conditions are dangerous in winter. Worse still, when there are staff shortages, the station in Kyle is often covered by staff who are based in Broadford in Skye. It is surely wrong that the Scottish Ambulance Service reneges on its responsibility to those communities. In the past, single manning of ambulances was commonplace in the Highlands and Islands. Indeed, I heard tales of situations in which two ambulances and an air ambulance tried to attend to one casualty, because the distances were so large and the ambulances were inadequately staffed. Nicola Sturgeon appeared to address that issue and promised the Parliament that that would happen only in exceptional circumstances. However, staffing shortages mean that single crewing is again becoming commonplace. Alternatively, shifts are covered by people who live some distance apart. We hear stories of delays in responding to 999 calls while the ambulance waits for back-up to arrive from the nearest station. That can take a lot of time and put people’s lives at risk. Such delays in responding to 999 calls are worse in areas in which geography means that response times are already far too long.

I will not take an intervention, because time is very short and I have many points to make. That is not the only issue that puts patients at risk; dropped shifts do that, too. Trade unions tell us that current practice is such that when a day shift is covered by overtime, there is a risk that the on-call shift will not be covered at all. That is because the Scottish Ambulance Service is not willing to pay extra for on-call cover when it has already paid overtime. In other words, it wants people to cover such shifts for free. The trade unions tell us that some staff will make themselves available for free, while others will not. There are also stories of situations that breach employment legislation, in which staff are being asked to work more than seven hours without a meal break and then, instead of being given a meal break, are being told to go and deal with a 999 call. Those staff are being left to take the responsibility for life-and-death decisions. We are moving towards a single service for police and fire services, and we need to ensure that the new services are accountable and do not follow the Scottish Ambulance Service model.

We need to learn that Scotland-wide targets do not work for rural areas, because they hide a lack of service. We also need to build in accountability. We have not had a meeting with the Scottish Ambulance Service since 2008. Prior to that, such meetings were quarterly. The Government needs to take responsibility, as it is only to the Government that the service is responsible.

I thank the minister for prior sight of his statement. I welcome it and much that it contains. I wrote to the minister regarding the renewables obligation and I am glad that he has taken on board what we had to say with regard to hydro and biomass. I hope that he has not closed the door to our third request regarding additional tariffs for the islands. Perhaps there can be on-going discussion on that point. I welcome the announcement about an ROC for innovative offshore wind development. The minister will be aware that any delay in that regard could delay development in this area. Therefore, will he say what form the further consultation that he mentioned will take, when it will begin and when he will be in a position to announce the results of that consultation, so that we can move forward with the developments?

I associate myself with Fergus Ewing’s comments about Charles Hendry. I have certainly heard such comments repeated elsewhere, and have no difficulty in associating myself with them. I welcome this debate on electricity market reform. The driver behind that reform is the aim of providing a secure, affordable and low-carbon electricity supply. EMR has been an on-going process for some time and is crucial to Scotland and our renewable industry. Stakeholders need certainty about the proposals so that they can have confidence in the funding structures and make progress with development plans. We support the motion, but we have lodged an amendment to add emphasis to a couple of issues: grid connection charging for our islands and the impact of the energy market reform on fuel poverty. In Scotland, we have targets to eradicate fuel poverty by 2016. The Scottish Government is under an obligation to meet those targets, but energy market reform also has a part to play. The electricity market is currently dominated by the big six. Market domination is never healthy, and the big six’s hold over the market extends from generation to transmission and sale. That makes it very difficult for new entrants to come into the market. Choice is important to those who suffer fuel poverty, as it means that they can access cheaper electricity. Encouraging new entrants could mean that providers that target fuel poverty, such as social enterprises, enter the market. We need to use the opportunity to encourage community generators and not-for-profit organisations into the market, as the current market works against those who suffer fuel poverty. Companies offer dual-fuel discounts, for example, but they are not open to people who are off the gas grid. Areas that are off the gas grid are often the places where fuel poverty is most prevalent. People who are in fuel poverty cannot access cheaper online tariffs or discounts for paying by direct debit. In its briefing for the debate, WWF Scotland talked about demand reduction, but that is not included in the energy bill. WWF Scotland points out that “A Bill designed to address the electricity market is incomplete if it only focuses on supply and pays no attention to demand.” Demand reduction is crucial to fighting fuel poverty. We know that energy prices will continue to rise so, to tackle fuel poverty, we need to reduce consumption. We must address those issues under energy market reform. The other issue that our amendment raises is grid connection charges. The pricing structure as proposed in project transmit has been largely welcomed, because it is an awful lot fairer to renewable generation and to Scotland. However, huge problems remain with the proposed grid access charges for our islands. I confirm to Murdo Fraser that our amendment does not ask for socialised charges; we ask for fair access for our islands. Our islands could become the renewable generators for the whole country. Wind speeds there are higher, so onshore wind facilities are much more productive. One of the largest wind farm developments is planned in Shetland. That is a joint project between a community trust and SSE. It provides the opportunity to boost the local economy for many years to come, but it will be disadvantaged if grid connection charges are much higher.

That is why we have incorporated the issue into the debate. It would help if the whole Parliament sent a strong message to Ofgem about the charges, so that it looks for a solution to the problem. I do not pretend that finding a solution is easy but, if we send a united message, Ofgem may work together with us to find a solution for us. Other islands that would benefit from a better charging regime are in Orkney, where we have the world-leading wave and tidal energy research and development centre. At that centre, prototype devices generate electricity for the grid now. Orkney sits beside the Pentland Firth, which is Scotland’s first marine energy park. If Orkney is to capitalise on onshore and offshore generation, we need fair grid connection charges. If taking marine energy onshore on the mainland is markedly cheaper, Orkney is likely to lose out, and Caithness could also have a problem, as it could become overpressured by substation development. The Western Isles have the potential to turn around their economy through onshore and offshore renewables. However, if connection charges are too high, they are likely to lose out on that benefit. The area could be the best site for wave and tidal power, so stalling that development could impact on the whole country. As I pointed out, islands stand to generate more. The Westminster Government must address the charges, but perhaps we also need to look at renewables obligation certificate banding, because of the importance of the island generators. I have written to the minister about that and I hope that he will keep that under review. If we do not sort out grid charging for islands, that will delay the upgrade of the grids to the islands. Cable prices are rising quickly, so any delay will mean an even higher cost. That means not only that projects are stalling because they cannot get a grid connection but that further expense will be incurred in the future. There are similar delays elsewhere because of poor infrastructure in our rural areas. We need to increase the pace of grid improvement, to ensure that development is not stalled. Security of supply is a driving force in energy market reform. Much of our generation structure is old, and our transmission systems are creaking. A move to low-carbon generation means that generation occurs where there are low-carbon resources, such as renewables. Previously, the role of the grid was largely to move high capacities within urban areas, but that has changed markedly, because the grid is now required to carry high loads from reasonably remote areas, which previously required little capacity. I have often heard it said that our rural grid system is like a piece of wet string; massive investment is needed to upgrade the grid. That is part of the intention behind electricity market reform. Another main intention is to reduce carbon output in electricity production. Most of our generators are old and need to be replaced. There is no point in replacing like with like, which would not cut our carbon output. We need to use the new contracts for difference to make a step change. I think that everyone welcomes contracts for difference, but the devil is in the detail and we do not have the detail. There are concerns that contracts will be auctioned and that tested forms of low-carbon generation will beat the more expensive forms of renewable energy that are being developed. The plea from the generators is for market stability. The UK Government and the Scottish Government can give clear statements about the support that will be available to renewables in future, so that developers can have confidence about moving forward. It is good that the Scottish Parliament is sending a clear message. There needs to be buy-in from all political parties, so that support continues regardless of changes of Government. I applaud the aims of energy market reform, which are about ensuring that we have secure, low-carbon, affordable electricity. I think that the Parliament can unite behind those aims. I move amendment S4M-04082.1, to insert at end: “, ensure that grid connection charges are fair and equitable, that Scotland’s islands are fully able to contribute to meeting renewable targets and that electricity market reform has regard to the requirement to tackle fuel poverty.”

I welcome the fact that we are debating the economy. I would have welcomed a refreshed strategy if there was something fresh in it and there was a new way of dealing with the economy, but it seems to be the same old policies and statistics, with the Government not taking much notice of the people who we seek to represent and who are feeling the pain. Indeed, the austerity policy of the UK Government is causing a deeper recession, so both Governments need to take action to deal with the problem. Helen Eadie talked about the cost of people being out of work compared with the contribution that they would make to the economy if they were working. Getting people back to work is the only way to get the deficit down. Taxpayers pay into the deficit, so the higher borrowing of the UK Government is a sign of its failed approach. However, the Scottish Government cannot just pass the buck on to the UK Government and say that it is not its fault and that it has nothing to say. We have heard SNP spokespeople say this week that construction has historically led us out of recession—indeed, John Swinney said that if it was not for construction we would no longer be in recession—and yet the Scottish Government has disproportionately cut the housing budget. What is construction if it is not building houses? We have lost 12,000 jobs in the construction sector. The pledge of the SNP “to build over 6,000 new socially-rented houses each year.” has gone as well. We need those jobs; we need the Government to create apprenticeships and wealth in our communities. Jamie Hepburn said that he has never seen so many houses built in his constituency. I say that he is alone in that because in my constituency there are housing associations that cannot afford to build at all. The Government needs to take responsibility for that. We have also talked a lot about procurement and how it can boost our economy. However, it will not do that if we give the work and the wealth that goes with it to other Governments and countries. Although the Forth crossing replacement is being built in Scotland, the products and steel are from other countries. Those contracts should have gone to create jobs in our country. When we look under the new Forth road bridge, we will probably see “Made in China” stamped on it.

I will never apologise for fighting for jobs for people in Scotland—never. This is a huge missed opportunity. Yes, there are people employed in Scotland, but how many more could there have been if we had got our procurement right? The Government is planning to introduce a procurement bill, but it has missed a chance as it has watered it down. That bill should talk about living wages and carbon targets. It is a missed opportunity. I will look forward to seeing the bill if it has those things—indeed, members can be clear that such a bill would have backing among Labour members—but I am afraid that it will end up being more managerial speak by the Government. It talks the talk; it does not walk the walk. It should look at what the likes of people in Wales are doing. Jean Urquhart mentioned confidence among small and medium-sized businesses. If the Government got procurement right, it would create confidence and provide jobs in our communities. Linda Fabiani made a thoughtful speech about the barriers of procurement. I very much hope that the Government listens to what she said, because she highlighted things such as the costs attached to contracting. Other members mentioned procurement as being pivotal to our recovery. Many members spoke about young people and the disproportionate effects that the current crisis is having on them. We need to have them trained and ready for when our economy takes a turn for the better. We have jobs available in areas such as renewables; we need training apprenticeships now. As Kezia Dugdale said, we do not need training apprenticeships for people already in work—that is part of lifelong learning and should be going on day to day. The new apprenticeships should be geared towards unemployed young people, so that we do not go on forming further forgotten generations. It is in the Government’s gift to deal with that issue. I will touch on tourism, which a few members spoke about. Mary Scanlon mentioned it and talked about concerns of the Federation of Small Businesses. Over the summer I have spoken to an awful lot of tourism businesses. They talked about the banks—I know that members have spoken about banks—and bank lending. The businesses I spoke to have confidence in their businesses, but nobody will lend to them and enterprise agencies are not looking to boost spending in that area. There are people who are willing to grow their own businesses and willing to put their own money into them. The Government needs to intervene with the banks and ensure that they lend to tourism industries because that would create jobs and investment in Scotland. Margaret McCulloch mentioned that this debate is timely, as it comes ahead of the budget. Although the Government has talked about what it is doing about the economy, the budget will be the real test of what it is actually doing. We would back a move to capital spending, but in the last budget we saw cuts in housing. We saw the Government talk about capital spending, but that spending was actually a continuation of what had gone before. Capital savings from the Forth crossing were put into other capital projects—rightly so, but that was not new spending. We also saw enterprise agencies being lauded for having increased capital spending when, under questioning, we discovered that that was very much what had gone before. It was not new. I will touch briefly on the national performance framework, which is something that we need to embrace as part of our budgeting and economic programme. John Park mentioned our framework and we have had a briefing from the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations about how we need to encompass wellbeing, social inequalities and environmental impact into it. I ask that that be considered and done. I have often wondered why narrow nationalism would be good for the Scottish economy, but today—[Interruption.]

Today we have had two new explanations of how an independent Scotland would benefit. The first one, which took my breath away, came from Mark McDonald. He disagreed with the fact that climate change knows no national boundaries and said that in an independent Scotland the sun would shine and we would have a microclimate. I wondered whether that was why John Mason thinks that we would have a baby boom in an independent Scotland and that our fertility rates would soar, as well as our economy.

The SNP’s assertions beggar belief. It needs to get back to the real business in hand, which is growing the Scottish economy with the tools that it has at its disposal.

Does Kevin Stewart agree that there are lessons about conducting a referendum to be learned from the experience in Aberdeen so that we can ensure that, rather than pulling together a referendum that is skewed and can be misrepresented, we have one the results of which everybody can abide by?

Was best value considered as part of the letting of the contract? The minister is aware that in the past I have asked that councils be allowed to lease vessels from Caledonian Maritime Assets Limited. If that were the case, keeping all contracts in the public sector would allow more flexible use of vessels to cover maintenance and breakdowns, providing better value for the public purse.

The cabinet secretary has used the budget outturn statement to make announcements on spending £16 million of the fossil fuel levy. How will the remainder of the £103 million fund be spent? When will the cabinet secretary be in a position to bring that detail to the Parliament?

I pay tribute to the tourism leadership group’s work and its report, “Tourism Scotland 2020: The future of our industry, in our hands”. I will talk about a number of aspects of the report, but first I will talk about the Labour amendment. The Government motion rightly points to the report and highlights the opportunities of the winning years, but it is silent on the target to increase tourism by 50 per cent by 2016. We think that it is right to reiterate the target at the outset of the winning years. As we heard, this year is the year of creative Scotland, the London Olympics, the diamond jubilee and the release of “Brave”. I am delighted that the minister is getting an invitation to the première in Inverness and I very much hope that he has embarrassed the organisers into inviting the rest of us—we might have to stand him some popcorn if that happens. There are huge opportunities this year, next year we will have the year of natural Scotland, and 2014 will be the year of homecoming, the Ryder cup and the Commonwealth games. The winning years present a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to build our industry and achieve the 2016 target. The warmth of the welcome that the Olympic torch received as it travelled through Scotland showed that there was the potential to make the most of the London Olympics, but I feel that we have missed that opportunity. The reception was amazing. In areas that I represent, people travelled a huge distance to see the torch. I seemed to be travelling after it for some time. I missed it in Inverness and I missed it in Orkney, but I eventually caught up with it outside the Parliament building. I arrived in Inverness about half an hour after it had left. Thousands of people had converged on the city and people were moving around for hours afterwards, so the torch’s visit provided a much-needed and much-appreciated boost to the businesses around the event. We need to make a success of such opportunities if we are to achieve the 2016 target. The tourism leadership group’s report mentions other opportunities, such as Scotland’s nature, heritage, destination towns and cities, events and festivals and business tourism. Scotland has much of which it can boast, given its scenery and natural and cultural heritage. Those are timeless attractions, on which we can build. We have the ability to grow green and eco-tourism, too. We have not fully capitalised on the opportunities in that regard, but the year of natural Scotland will provide the ideal opportunity to do so. The report also mentions business tourism and the Government motion mentions Glasgow’s success in winning additional conferences. I join the minister in congratulating the team that achieved that success. We need to ensure that business tourists have the opportunity to explore the hinterland and further afield. There is also an opportunity in a growing market to provide conference facilities in our smaller cities and towns, which could help to create year-round tourism in many areas. The report talks about areas in which we could do better. Needless to say, infrastructure is one such area. Internet and mobile phone coverage is identified as an area that requires improvement. I agree. More and more people expect to keep up with work and with family while they are on holiday, using their mobile and internet connections. They are often astonished at the lack of coverage in our more rural areas. The Government has a role to play in that—it needs to ensure that coverage reaches all areas, otherwise we will be at a disadvantage. If people go somewhere and have a bad experience they will not return. The report also identifies the quality of accommodation, eating out and travel as areas that require attention. We cannot drive up quality without training and the ability to attract the brightest and best to our industry. Despite Scotland’s reputation as a tourist attraction, the hospitality industry does not seem to be a particularly good career choice. That has led to poor workforce retention, motivation and skills development. We need to understand that tourism is everybody’s business. We all need tourists. Even if it is just a case of someone being stopped and asked for directions, how they respond to tourists can actually make their holiday experience. Last week I visited First ScotRail’s training academy in Glasgow. I heard about the emphasis that it puts on customer service, which is included in the training at all levels. It understands that the transport industry is part of the tourism industry and it takes that responsibility seriously. I met a class of apprentices in customer services in the Parliament last year. I was lucky enough to meet them again last week in the academy. I was absolutely amazed at how they have grown in confidence and at how they have really taken on board their learning experience. They completed their Duke of Edinburgh awards as part of the course, which really complemented their training. They are a group of young people who have the ability and skills to be ambassadors for our tourism industry. The report also highlights leadership and collaboration, as well as marketing, as key to the step change that is required. In areas where collaboration works well, so does marketing. Take the example of the Cairngorms national park—I have spoken about it in the chamber before. The Cairngorms Business Partnership is a collaboration between the Cairngorms Chamber of Commerce, Cairngorms hostels and a destination management organisation. They work together to provide their own tourism offer. The involvement of the chamber of commerce means that all businesses—not just those that are recognised as tourism businesses—have a role to play. I was really impressed by the way that such a wide range of businesses worked together to manage their market and market their industry. They were aware of their interdependence. The top-of-the-range hotel knew that the bunkhouse also had to provide quality and service so that people using those facilities would return to the area. Their tourism offer also covers a range of activities from high intensity sport to wildlife tourism to leisurely breaks—something for all the family. The Cairngorms Business Partnership also includes retail as part of its organisation. We often forget that retail is hugely important to the visitor offer and that we have a lot to learn. It struck me that retailers probably need to do the same thing as the First ScotRail academy in terms of training to convince their own people that they are part of the tourism experience. As touched upon in the Conservative amendment, the report talks about more direct air routes to and from our growing market. The route development fund would make a big difference—it was certainly successful in the past at attracting new routes to Scotland and to some of our more outlying areas. The report also asks for improved transport infrastructure throughout Scotland—better roads, rail and ferry routes. We need to find ways of encouraging visitors to travel throughout Scotland. Our rural areas are not just for the intrepid traveller—they should be an enjoyable experience for all. Other countries do it so well—the plane meets the bus and everyone can find their way about without hunting for the connecting public transport. We have seen visitor numbers increase because of staycations. That is due to problems with the economy—people are looking for shorter breaks closer to home. We need them to continue to holiday in Scotland, especially when the euro may provide cheap breaks abroad. We need to work on what has happened and build on those trends. The report worryingly says that “if the long-term trend in overnight visitor spend witnessed since 1973 was to continue, we would see ... no real growth in the coming decade”. We need to do more and learn from bodies such as the Scotch Whisky Association that provide a good tourist experience. I welcome the tourism leadership group’s strategy document. It is good that the industry is taking matters into its own hands, as that can only be a benefit. However, we need to ensure that the small businesses that form the backbone of our tourism industry are included in the strategy. We also need the Government to drive forward on the 2016 target. With an industry and Government moving towards growth, there is an unprecedented opportunity provided by the winning years for our tourism industry to grow and make a contribution to our economy. I move amendment S4M-03400.1, to insert at end: “, and urges the Scottish Government to retain the target to grow tourism by 50% by 2016.”

Will the minister give way?

I welcome the debate. Although it may appear that we have had a quick-fire debate and sped through some of the issues, I hope that it will be helpful to the Equal Opportunities Committee when it considers the issue in more depth. Every member who has spoken has mentioned the availability, flexibility and cost of childcare, and it would be wrong to start with any other issue. I am proud that the Labour Party introduced free nursery education for three and four-year-olds, and I welcome the Government commitment to increase that provision to 600 hours and to extend it to looked-after children and two-year-olds. However, I ask the Government to consider the issue further and to reflect on the debate, because one point that has emerged consistently has been the availability of good-quality childcare. Margaret McDougall mentioned the quality of childcare, and—as other members have discussed—flexibility and cost. She said that qualifications should be looked at to ensure that those who provide the childcare are seen as doing an important job as well as enabling others to do their jobs. Sandra White mentioned child poverty. Good-quality childcare has the ability to lift children out of poverty, and it is one of the most important factors in that regard. Claudia Beamish talked about refugees, for whom childcare is one of the main issues. If any issue has emerged that must be considered by the Equal Opportunities Committee and the Government it is childcare and ensuring that there is adequate provision of what is needed. An issue that was discussed last week and which has been mentioned again today is women’s representation on public boards. I urge the minister and the Government to look at that again. It is not a reserved matter; it is an area in which the Scottish Government can take action. Such action would make a huge difference, because people who are in a position to recruit others tend to recruit people who appear to be like them. If boards are dominated by men, they will appoint men to the top jobs. In that way, the problem is repeated for future generations. Until we stop and use some positive discrimination, we will not change things. We had the same arguments in the legal profession in relation to judges and the like. Until we ensure that there are women in positions in which they are recruiting, we will not get women coming through to the top jobs. Another issue that has been touched on is skills. In schools, a process starts whereby gender stereotyping results in guidance teachers and parents pushing girls on to different career paths from those of boys. At the weekend, I heard someone from the Scottish Women’s Convention talk about an inquiry that involved it engaging with rural women and looking at the specific issues that they faced. A big issue that those women flagged up was that their daughters were being forced down a path that was not giving them the skills in maths and sciences that would equip them for a career outside school. We need to ensure that women get into the non-traditional industries if we are to tackle inequality and the pay gap. Another interesting thing that I learned is that in countries such as Russia, most welders are women, because they are recognised for their skills, their concentration and their attention to detail, not their gender. This is a short debate. Suffice it to say that the Labour Party is committed to equal opportunities and to ensuring that the gender pay gap ends and that women have their rightful place in society.

I congratulate John Park on securing this worthwhile debate. I congratulate, too, George Bruce, the other Ardroy ambassadors and the wider community for working so hard, raising funds and reopening the centre, which has benefited many people in the past and will continue to do so in future. I should say to John Park that Ardroy is in my constituency, the Highlands and Islands, which is far larger than Mid Scotland and Fife. However, if he wants a competition on that, maybe this is not the time to mention it. I am really pleased that the centre has reopened, because it provides jobs for the local community. The Highlands and Islands is quite sparsely populated and it is difficult to find employment opportunities. The centre is part of a cluster of outdoor education activity centres in the area. A cluster is good for all its component outdoor activity centres, because they can work together and attract people into an area. It is often said that someone who goes to a place as a child will come back as a young adult, then with their children and then maybe even with their grandchildren. That can only be of benefit to the area. Of course, the centre’s biggest benefit is for the young people who go there and enjoy their time there. I was lucky enough to be brought up in a rural community and I had loads of time outdoors. It is great for young children to get out and about in a safe environment in which they can really let their imaginations go and enjoy themselves without being constantly under surveillance. Such surveillance happens a lot because parents are so afraid of the harm that may come to their children, and I have sympathy for parents in that position. However, outdoor activities help to broaden horizons and build confidence. Children taking part in outdoor activities have to become more self-reliant and therefore they become more self-assured and build the skills that do them well into adulthood. Outdoor activities are good for children’s education—Ardroy is looking at curriculum for excellence—and for health because they allow children to do physical activity rather than being inside, as they often are, playing computer games and the like. Fife Council has supported the centre in the past, has supported the reopening of the centre, and is obviously looking to continue that support, albeit in a different way, probably because of cuts in funding. I know that the group is considering purchasing the centre. It would be good if Fife Council could transfer ownership at a cost that would not be prohibitive to the group so that the centre can be secured into the future. Not only will the centre benefit Fife’s young people, but it has the ability to benefit young people from all other areas. I wish it every success in future.

I congratulate Liz Smith on securing the debate. I am pleased to pay tribute to the work of the many volunteers who make up the mountain rescue service for their hard work and efforts to rescue people on the hills. From speaking to volunteers in the service, I have learned that many of them do it because they work in the hills or because they love leisure pursuits in the hills and want other people to gain similar pleasure from those areas. They volunteer happily to support others, which is to be commended. Members have spoken about equipment that has been provided by the Scottish Government. It is right that the volunteers should be equipped as well as possible. Some volunteers perhaps do not have a great deal of private wealth, so we need to ensure that they are well provided with safety equipment. They also need good communications equipment, because it is difficult to find people who are lost on the hills. Some people do not leave good instructions about where they are going, so if someone falls or another accident happens, it is difficult to pinpoint exactly where they are. We therefore need good communications. I am lucky enough to have been out with an RAF search and rescue team. It was supposedly a training exercise, but we were called out to a real-life rescue. As we got close to the spot where the mountain rescue team said that the people might be found, we all had to take a window and start looking, because it was almost impossible to pinpoint the spot. As a result of everybody in the helicopter looking, we eventually found the people, who were rescued and made a full recovery. Many people come to Scotland to climb our hills and take part in outdoor activities. Fort William is recognised as the outdoor capital of the United Kingdom, and some of the best mountains and climbing are found near there. Many people, such as Liz Smith, are involved in Munro bagging, which brings an awful lot of people to Scotland and makes a huge contribution to our economy. We have moved away from people just coming to stay in a place—they now want to see and do. The mountain rescue teams make that possible and boost our local economies just because they are there, making that activity safer. Members have touched on the insurance issue. From my discussions with rescue teams, I believe that they are not keen on an insurance requirement because they see it as a barrier to people making use of the hills and enjoying leisure pursuits. We all know that a minority of people take risks and go out on the hills ill-prepared and without the correct knowledge. We have to do more to ensure that those people are educated about the dangers of being on the hills. Good public information must be available for tourists and the like who do not go into the hills daily. However, I would not like us to move to a situation in which people need to be insured to use the hills. People who are unprepared would not know that they had to take out insurance, so such a provision would deter only those who are responsible and safe. I pay tribute to the volunteers who provide the mountain rescue service. As well as the service to those who use the hills, they provide a service for the rest of the country. I am grateful for their work and I wish them well in future.

The cabinet secretary has said that he wishes Registers of Scotland to collect the land and buildings transaction tax. He also states that he wants collection to be carried out digitally. Registers of Scotland’s IT system is recognised as not being fit for purpose, so when will the system be replaced and how much will that cost?

The minister will be aware that people who are in fuel poverty are unable to invest in microrenewables, which could provide them with major savings. Will the minister look at ensuring that the fuel poor can access microrenewables and the funding to install them? Can priority be given to people who are off the gas grid? Will he also look at alternatives to deprivation indicators in rural areas? The indicators often work against the fuel poor in mixed-income communities?

In speaking to my amendment, I make it clear that I believe that all land ownership in Scotland should be open and transparent. Knowledge of land ownership and beneficial ownership should be in the public domain. I heard with interest what the Government said about my stage 2 amendments on the issue. The Government did not agree with those amendments because it was concerned about bureaucracy and increased staffing and cost requirements. Rather than amend the bill in the way that I previously proposed, I now seek to amend it in a practical way that I hope would deal with the problems that the lack of transparency causes. Land in Scotland can be owned by offshore companies or trusts. That in itself does not cause a problem, unless such a landowner acts irresponsibly and refuses to enter into discussion with tenants and crofters. I have dealt with cases in which crofters and tenants wished to develop projects that would lead to jobs and an economic boost in their areas, but such projects fell because permission could not be obtained from landowners. My amendment 1 would allow the Government to make regulations that would permit tenants and crofters to discover the true identity of landowners. The amendment is narrowly drawn, as not all landowners would be required to provide the information that is referred to. If a company were publicly floated, it would be impossible to identify every shareholder. However, the names of the organisation’s decision makers would be publicly available and the company would be required to hold an annual general meeting. Those are mechanisms that a tenant could use to make contact. It would be allowable and desirable not to require such companies to give the information mentioned in the amendment. The beneficial owners that I wish to be identified are those who abuse their position and hide behind offshore companies. The amendment is so narrowly drawn that it does not include all offshore companies and the like; it would cover only those in relation to which someone with an interest, such as a tenant, had applied to the keeper for information. Amendment 1 is a simple amendment that would solve the problem, although it is a long way short of the amendment that I would have wished to lodge. I move amendment 1.

I wind up with a degree of concern because my amendment has been misrepresented. The minister said that it would lead to higher costs. It would not, because it is narrowly drawn and it leaves many powers to the minister to use in coming forward with subordinate legislation on the practicalities of how the proposal would work. Unlike the provision in section 111, which the minister says does the same thing, the amendment is not blanket legislation. It would require certain companies to give information at the request of certain interested parties. Those interested parties could be Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs, in the case of tax evasion, or they could be tenants, crofters or neighbours. The provision could be so narrowly drawn that there would be perhaps one or two occurrences of its ever being used. It would not create a new bureaucracy or impose additional costs. Indeed, if HMRC made a request, it might save the public purse a huge amount of money. Another misconception is that there would be a need to list the names and addresses of all shareholders. That would not be the case. When such information was publicly known and available, that type of company could be excluded. The amendment would not lead to huge bureaucracy and it would not be expensive. Rob Gibson said that amendment 1 was more about heart than head. As I said, if this was about heart I would be taking forward a totally different amendment. This is about head—it is about having a practical solution to a difficult problem that occurs every day. We need to ensure that loopholes are closed and that is what amendment 1 does. The amendment does not create a bureaucracy, unlike the provision in section 111. The minister argues that that provision does the same thing as amendment 1—I argue that it does not. The amendment says that ministers “must make regulations”; section 111 allows ministers to make regulations at their own behest if they so wish. Section 111 also ensures that every property will be subject to those regulations and that anyone can request the information. The amendment narrows that down to cover only certain types of property ownership and certain types of interested people. I press amendment 1.

I, too, want to put on record my thanks to the committee clerks, our adviser Professor Kenneth Reid, SPICe, all the other officials who gave us advice and all those who responded to the consultation. Unlike John Park and Stuart McMillan, I found the bill quite dry and complex. Perhaps they need to get out more if they found it exciting. Nonetheless, it is a good bill as far as it goes. It will streamline our processes and allow for mistakes to be corrected. Mike MacKenzie’s amendment will allow the Lands Tribunal for Scotland to adjudicate where there are concerns about mistakes that may have been made. Therefore, although it lacks policy, it will put in place some very good administrative practice. There are issues missing from the bill that could have been addressed. One of those is the issue of prescriptive claims, when unscrupulous people acquire land—ransom strips—and hold back development. The aim of having a prescriptive claim in legislation is to do the opposite of that, but we need to look at the process again to ensure that it meets the public interest. The bill is a missed opportunity to rectify that problem. Patrick Harvie was right when he said that many aspects of the bill do not address the public interest. Another issue that is missing from the bill is beneficial ownership. I tried to do something about that earlier with my amendment, which would have allowed those who had real concerns about the ownership of land that they were interested in to have that beneficial ownership registered. That would have created transparency when there were problems. I am disappointed that the amendment was not supported. Organisations such as HMRC, as well as tenants, crofters and neighbours of unscrupulous landowners have been let down because that amendment was not agreed to. Mike MacKenzie levelled the charge of idealism at me. If I were being idealistic, I would have moved a totally different amendment that would have made the whole process much more transparent and accessible. I did not—I moved an amendment that was a practical solution to a difficult problem. As Patrick Harvie said, the bill would benefit from a good dose of idealism—we have missed that opportunity. The other issue that has not really been touched on is the need for the register to be open and available to members of the public. People need to be able to access the register without any great cost. Information about who owns land in Scotland needs to be open and transparent. I hope that the minister will keep an eye on that issue to ensure that that is the case in the future. Many of the contributors talked about completion of the register, as is right and proper, because that is one of the main aims of the bill. The statement was made that keeper-induced registration will not be compulsory. That raises concerns. How will we get a transfer to the new register if much of the land in Scotland remains unregistered? A lot of the land may pass into new ownership, but because that land ownership is in a trust, it is the ownership of the trust that changes, not the ownership of the land itself. There may be an inducement in the bill—if not in the bill itself, certainly in the policy behind the bill—to encourage large landowners to register their land, especially if the land title is complex, because the minister suggested to the committee that there may be a change to how fees for land registration are charged. It may become much more expensive to register complex land titles in the future. Owners of large and complex estates might do well to consider that and get in early with their registration. Mike MacKenzie talked about quality being sacrificed for speed—he is right. There were complaints about inaccuracies in the register and concerns about errors that were made by the keeper. The bill allows for those errors to be rectified, but we need to be careful. Land registration is extremely important. If it goes wrong it leads to disputes that can be expensive and difficult to put right. I hope therefore that accuracy will be given a high priority. Section 108 was mentioned by Murdo Fraser, John Wilson, John Park and Annabel Goldie. There is a real concern that in trying to ensure that the transfer of land and land purchase is not open to fraud, solicitors may end up being prosecuted for fraud when they acted in good faith on the information that they had. We need to look at the guidance that goes with that part of the bill, because even an investigation can cause huge problems. A solicitor acts on the basis of their good character and people trust them because of that good character. If there is any question about their reputation it could damage their business, so I urge the minister to look at that guidance closely and to make sure that that damage cannot happen. As I said earlier, I am pleased that the Lands Tribunal is being used to settle disputes. Mike MacKenzie pushed that in the committee and lodged amendments on the issue, and I congratulate him on getting his proposal accepted. Accessing the Lands Tribunal does not mean that people do not need lawyers, but it should mean that the process will be much simpler. I thought that I would struggle to fill the seven minutes that you generously gave me, Presiding Officer, but I see that I am getting close to the end of that time. This is a good and useful bill, but it is a missed opportunity to make good progress on the land reform agenda that the Government says that it supports.

I am sure that the member is aware that not only public funding, but private funding is required, and that if the Greek economy goes down, less finance will be available throughout Europe, which could have an impact on our economy and our ability to invest in renewables.

Most people glaze over when we speak about currency and national debt. However, the banking crisis has shown how they can impact on everyone. It appears to me that the bail-out package for Greece forgot that income must be created to pay off the debts. Austerity only makes short-term savings; it does not create any wealth. Forcing people out of work creates costs and cuts income to the public purse. Therefore the policies that are being pursued by the UK and the European Governments will not work—they have no hope of working—unless growth is encouraged. As people lose their jobs they become a cost, rather than a contributor, to the public purse, which creates more debt and leads to further cuts. In nations such as Greece, that situation has become a vortex that drags everyone and the country down.

It is a well-known fact that although Thatcher tried to make cuts, she was not very good at making them, and that the cost of borrowing increased before she left office. We will not use her fiscal policies as an example of how to run a country. We need to create growth; indeed, we need our Government to do the same. The only way to make our economy grow is to create jobs and cut unemployment. Mary Scanlon referred to a policy to cut red tape that is emerging from the Westminster Government. It proposes to create growth by cutting employment rights. What part of making jobs less secure is going to persuade people to spend? If people are in secure jobs, they are more likely to move house, to buy a car, and to go out for a meal, but if people believe that their jobs are insecure, they will not. Some private businesses appear to be backing that policy, but they will damage their business because they need people to buy their products, otherwise their business will be unaffected. Although people still use public services when their jobs are insecure, they do not use products that are provided by private industry. Therefore that policy is not only ineffective, but will further damage our economy.

I hear what Mary Scanlon says, but there are strong signals coming out of Westminster that it is looking to cut job security, and I do not see how that can promote growth. We need to create secure jobs to get people contributing and paying back the debt that we are in. As I watch the Greek crisis unravel, I cannot help but feel sorry for Greek people, who joined the euro in order to have economic stability. However, now they appear to be worse off. If Greece leaves the euro, its debt will double overnight because the currency will have devalued, and it will have little hope of recovering. The EU has a responsibility to develop a workable solution for the Greek people, which will promote growth and employment and allow the country to remain in the euro. If Greece leaves the euro, that will have a knock-on effect on the other countries that will become exposed due to banks losing money that is owed by Greece. The banks will turn to the rest of Europe to recoup the losses by increasing costs to borrowers. Interest rates will go up, which means less money to spend on goods and services, and it means fewer jobs. We are interdependent with other European countries. They buy most of our produce, so an economically struggling Europe means that our producers lose out. Our farmers have their biggest markets in Europe. We export shellfish to Spain, and companies are already finding the markets difficult to sell to. It means that there is less money for us to invest in, for example, renewables, as we heard in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee this morning. Although we are looking for double investment in that sector, we will be lucky to maintain what we already have. A euro that is weaker against the pound makes our goods more expensive. It also has a knock-on effect on our tourism industry, as was mentioned earlier. It makes holidays in Europe more affordable for us, which looks attractive at a time when money is tight, but the downside is that it has the opposite effect on tourists who would otherwise come to the UK, and there being fewer European tourists damages our industry. Last year, the staycation was the saviour of our hospitality industry. Although the length of stay was shorter and the spend lower, the numbers involved meant that the tourism industry bucked the trend and had a pretty good year. However, if people who take staycations are attracted to Europe because of low costs, there will be an overall loss to our tourism economy. Jobs in the tourism industry are the backbone of many rural communities, and they are often the jobs that pay students through their education. Working in a restaurant or bar is a good summer job, and students also do the occasional nights during term. No one is immune. The student who is studying for a degree, the shellfish fisherman and the bed and breakfast owner are all affected. We need to find a solution to the crisis. We need the Government to use the levers that are under its control to protect us from the worst excesses of the problem, and the best way of doing that is to build our economy, get people back to work and invest in training and skills for new industries. There is potential in the energy industry, but we need stability to achieve it, and not the instability of separation. We need colleges to train our young people and give them skills, not college cuts. We need to build good-quality houses and to insulate our existing housing stock, and not cut the housing budget. Those are things that our Government can do right now.

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what consultations Scottish Water must hold with communities prior to making changes to their water supply. (S4O-01005)

The cabinet secretary might be aware of the change in water supply at Aviemore in Badenoch and Strathspey. Constituents are concerned about the safety of the water supply because of the taste and quality of the water. What consultation took place prior to the changes in the water supply and what action is being taken to remedy the situation?

I am concerned about what Alasdair Allan is saying about the Government not prejudicing the consultation. If I understood Dave Thompson correctly, the Government has already given him reassurances about things that were in the draft ferries plan and told him that things will change. Why is the member not able to get the same reassurances for the people of Uist?

I am pleased that the issue is being debated today, and I welcome to the public gallery the representatives from the long-running missing link ferry campaign. It makes economic sense to have a ferry from Lochboisdale to Mallaig, if one compares a three and a half hour crossing—both the time spent at sea and the cost—with a six and a half hour crossing. A ferry is especially needed now, following the withdrawal of the RET from commercial vehicles. That policy will have a detrimental effect on all the islands, but especially on those that have the longest ferry crossings. The Government appears to have no concept of the disadvantages that can be caused by geography. I stress that we are seeking not a rerouting of any ferry that currently serves Barra or the rest of the Uists, but a new route that runs from Lochboisdale to Mallaig. That would allow the Barra to Oban service to concentrate on that route and provide a better timetable, which would have an immediate positive economic impact on Barra and the other islands. I recently spoke to a hotelier who told me that the ferries to the islands are full, but the hotels are only half full. We need more routes for economic development of the whole area. The Scottish Government appeared to support the instigation of such a service a few years ago and earmarked £1 million for it. Unfortunately, however, that money was not forthcoming because the Government could not find a ferry. By the time the community—being as resourceful as ever—found one, the money was gone. My colleagues and I have campaigned alongside the community for the route for many years, and we have 1,200 supporters signed up to our campaign. Stòras Uibhist, which is the community land owner, petitioned the Parliament with 1,500 supporters, but to no avail. It is interesting that the minister says that he is listening to the people, because nearly 3,000 people have put their names to those campaigns and he appears not to be listening to what they are asking for. It is, given that level of support, hugely disappointing that the draft ferries plan has not identified any public support for the route. The Government did not ask the community what its preferred option is.

People were not, as part of the survey, asked whether they wanted a Lochboisdale to Mallaig ferry service. If they had been asked that, they would overwhelmingly have said that they supported such a service. That is what was missing. The minister’s civil servants wrote to my colleague David Stewart and said that it would have been a leading question, so it did not appear in the ferries review questionnaire. Although I was previously aware of the level of support for the link, I recently attended—along with Alasdair Allan—a packed public meeting at which there was unanimous support. There was also real anger, because people felt that they had been let down by the Government and by their representatives, and especially by their local Scottish National Party councillor, Donald Manford. Stewart Stevenson expressed his surprise that Donald Manford was so against the development of the route when he met representatives of Stòras Uibhist—

Mr Manford urged Stewart Stevenson not to allow the ferry route to go ahead before he had spoken to him. Local representatives need to stand up for their communities, so that behaviour is unacceptable. I am pleased to support the Labour motion. I very much hope that the Government will listen to the many people who wish for the route to be reinstated.

The minister will be aware that large renewables development companies spread risk by investigating several sites for development, knowing that their achieving a small number of consents will pay for their wider outlay. A community does not have that option, so its one project holds all the risk and all the cost. On that basis, will communities have access to the renewable energy investment fund and if so, and if their project is not consented, will they have to repay any loans?

I associate myself with the thanks that Murdo Fraser and the minister offered to those who provided evidence to and assisted the committee. The bill is largely technical, so that assistance was very much required and appreciated. Much of the bill has been well received and is widely recognised as being required to improve the land registration process. The bill is largely technical, but it raises some policy issues, and it is disappointing that those issues have not been properly thought through. There was an opportunity to continue the land reform process that the Labour Party started. In coalition with the Liberal Democrats we made a lot of progress, but there is much left to do. In opposition, the Scottish National Party signed up to many such reforms, so it is disappointing that it has not taken up the baton and continued to push forward. One omission from the bill is on the need to register the beneficial owner of property or land. Much of the land reform legislation was based on the need to know who owns estates in Scotland. If land was owned by a company that was registered in Liechtenstein and those who lived and worked on that land could not speak to the owner, they would be unable to develop economically.

No. If Mr MacKenzie listens to the points that I will make, he might understand where I am coming from. The land reform legislation was based on the need to know who owns land. The right to buy was introduced to allow communities to take economic drivers into their own hands. If a community cannot speak to a landowner, it can at least take back the drivers for itself. However, not every community is able or wishes to do that, so it is important to know who owns the land on which people live and work. Registration of the beneficial owner would cut the opportunity for people to use land ownership to cover illegal or fraudulent dealings, such as money laundering and tax evasion. Andy Wightman suggested that, in order to own land in Scotland, a company should need to be registered in the European Union and therefore subject to EU legislation. Large global organisations normally register a local subsidiary when starting a business, so that would be no barrier to them. However, the committee heard that the owner of an EU-registered company could easily be a company that was registered somewhere else in the world. The proposed approach would give a signal, but it would not in itself close the loophole. On the other side of the argument, beneficial ownership needs to be registered in a way that does not unreasonably delay registration or, indeed, restrict registration and ownership to those who are in Scotland. The minister had and still has the opportunity to examine that further before stage 2, so I urge him to consider how we can register beneficial ownership to make land ownership in Scotland much more transparent, so that people who live and work on the land know who owns it. Probably one of the most contentious areas of the bill is the amendment of legislation on prescriptive claims. Currently, when land has no clear owner and has been abandoned, it can be prescriptively acquired—basically, people can take ownership and register the land to themselves after a period. A process for bringing apparently unowned land back into economic use without the owner’s permission is required. If that cannot be done, development will stall. However, the system that is currently in place allows unscrupulous people to land grab. If such people see that land is unused, they can go through the process to acquire it for themselves and sell it on when they have a clear title. The bill will tighten the process and make it longer—the land will need to have been registered for 10 years before ownership is conferred—which is an improvement. As the minister said, the bill provides that such land must have been vacant for seven years prior to registration. I welcome his intention to amend that provision, because clarifying the position for that length of time is seen as being extremely difficult. We need a mechanism to deal with land that has no owner, but the current system is open to abuse. We need to go back to first principles to develop a way forward. The current system is used when there are mistakes in the register; when, for example, a strip of land has not been registered properly and when land is ownerless. We should have different systems to deal with those issues. When there are mistakes, the keeper has the power to amend the land register and to rectify them, but we also need a dispute resolution system. If the owner of land cannot be traced, however, we need another process that will allow the land to be brought back into use but will also ensure that it cannot be abused. That process must also ensure that the land is put to the best use for the public interest. The process must have checks and balances, and every effort must be made to trace the true owners and to ensure that, if an owner does come forward, their property will be reinstated to them or that they will, at least, be compensated. We also need to consider mechanisms to register common land. No organisation has a duty to do so, which leaves such land open to prescriptive acquisition. The committee has suggested that public bodies, such as local authorities, should have a duty to register common land to protect those areas for their communities. There are several types of common land, such as commonties, land that is bequeathed to the community, and land that has been purchased by the community. I am sure that there are many other variations on that theme. Land being purchased by the community is a relatively new concept and I am sure that most such land will already be properly registered. Commonties are an ancient form of community land ownership and there are very few left because of acquisition of land, so we need to move to protect those that are left. Land that has been bequeathed in the past is also difficult to identify, but it needs to be registered for protection, so the Government needs to give that issue more consideration before stage 2. In order to identify the owners of land, the register needs to be accessible to the general public. We need the register to be available electronically and for that access to be affordable for the general public so that people can scrutinise the register to ensure that they know who owns their land. The bill is required and it has been widely welcomed, but the Government is missing an opportunity to do something radical that would make a difference to land ownership in Scotland. It is not too late and I hope that the Government will take up the challenge before stage 2.

I share the minister’s delight at the announcement that the green investment bank will be headquartered in Edinburgh. It shows that the cross-party campaign in this Parliament was heard loud and clear in the UK Parliament. I put on record my thanks to the UK Parliament for recognising Edinburgh’s potential as a site for the bank. I hope that the development will bring investment and jobs to Edinburgh and to the rest of Scotland. The debate is timely, because the winning years strategy will provide a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to build Scottish tourism. We need to make a success of such opportunities so that they act as a springboard for the industry in the future. The report on tourism published by the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee informs the debate. Scotland has much of which to boast: scenery, natural and cultural heritage and—I believe—one of the warmest welcomes that one can get anywhere in the world. Scotland’s unique natural heritage led us to lodge our amendment. I believe that we have the ability to grow green and eco-tourism, on which we have not yet fully capitalised. The year of natural Scotland provides an ideal opportunity to do so. The minister has identified business tourism as a growth area, and I welcome the funding that he announced today. That funding, together with the green investment bank, will help to grow business tourism in Scotland. Despite Scotland’s reputation as a tourist attraction, people do not see going into the hospitality industry as a particularly good career move. That has led to poor workforce retention, poor motivation and poor skills development. Much of the problem is caused by the seasonality of the industry. Despite improvements, we still have a long way to go to create a year-round industry. We need permanent jobs that allow people to build a career, keeping skills and knowledge within the industry. The industry has a low-pay culture, and although the minimum wage has helped, it is not an attractive career choice to aspire only to the minimum wage. The committee heard worrying evidence that staff who worked more than 48 hours a week sometimes opted out of the minimum wage. The minimum wage is not optional: it is a legal requirement. We must strengthen protection for the staff in that situation. The old saying “Pay peanuts, get monkeys” comes to mind. Until the hospitality industry gets its act together, we will not increase standards. The committee also heard concerns about skills development in the industry.

I take Murdo Fraser’s point that people need to pay more, but they must pay for the service that they receive. The hospitality industry has come a long way in recent years in driving down costs and making hotels less labour intensive so that people who work in them get higher levels of pay. However, huge numbers of people are working long hours for very small amounts of money. If we really are going to make hospitality a career, we must pay properly and focus on career development as one of our priorities. Skills development goes hand in hand with career development. The system works best when the industry works in collaboration with further education to offer classroom training and job training that complement each other. That best practice needs to be turned into high-quality apprenticeships for the industry, perhaps through traditional job pairings with one employer or with a group of small or more specialised businesses. I was surprised to hear last night that there is a shortage of skilled chefs in the industry. We must address that to move the industry forward. VisitScotland is the lead marketing authority for tourism, and its campaigns are shown to be highly effective. However, many other area organisations are equally effective. Last summer, I had the pleasure of spending a day with the Cairngorms Business Partnership, which is made up of the Cairngorms Chamber of Commerce, Cairngorms hotels and a destination management organisation. The Cairngorms Business Partnership works under the banner of the Cairngorms national park but has freedom to develop its own offer. What really impressed me is the wide range of businesses that work together to manage and market their industry. They were highly aware of their interdependence. For instance, the top-range hotel understood that the bunkhouse also needed to provide excellent quality of service. It recognised that, if a child had a good experience, they would come back to the campsite as a young adult, to the bunkhouse with their family and to the budget hotel with their teenage children. Indeed, when they had money and freedom and were on their own, they could then come back to the top-range hotel. Those businesses know that they are interdependent, so they work closely together. Their tourism offer covers a range of activities from high-intensity sport, through wildlife tourism to leisurely breaks—indeed, something for all the family. Some of the operators to whom I spoke were a wee bit concerned that VisitScotland tended to market the Cairngorms as an outdoor, high-activity sporting centre when they felt that they had much more to offer. VisitScotland must try to work more closely with the businesses that it serves so that it can market them as they see fit and in a way that brings back the same return that VisitScotland’s marketing promotions obviously bring back. The Cairngorms Business Partnership also includes the retail sector. We often forget about retail being part of the visitor offer but, to be frank, it is crucial to tourism. Another challenge that we face is moving visitors from London, Edinburgh and other big centres to more rural areas. Our ability to do that will determine the success of the winning years strategy. Although our cities have done well in recent years, that has hidden a fall in tourism in our more remote, rural areas. Tourism is often the economic backbone of many of those rural communities, so we must try to redress the balance. I am keen to hear what the minister plans to do to encourage visitors to see more of Scotland.

Yes, I agree with that. The point that I am trying to make is that our cities, such as London and Edinburgh, do well, as do some of the small towns, which have a great deal to offer. Our remote and rural areas also have something to offer, so we need to consider the balance. Our amendment points to green and eco-tourism and the potential to use that sector to increase visitor numbers in our more remote areas and, indeed, areas outwith our large cities. However, many tourism businesses outside our cities cite infrastructure as a barrier to increasing visitor numbers. Connectivity is a huge issue. The lack of flights to more far-flung areas and the associated high costs are barriers to moving tourists out of our cities. Slow trains and poor roads also play their part. We need to find ways of encouraging visitors out of the cities. Our rural areas are not only for the more intrepid travellers; they should be an enjoyable experience for all. Other countries do it well—the plane meets the train meets the bus—but we need to go hunting around to find connecting public transport in Scotland. Edinburgh is our capital city and probably has the best connections to public transport. From the airport, we have a regular bus service to the railway station—although it should go to the bus station. Indeed, there should be better connectivity to the rest of Scotland. We need to achieve that to increase numbers of tourists from outwith Scotland. I have an awful lot more to say, but I am running out of time. I welcome the debate. As we embark on the winning years, it is time to plan to optimise their impact. We will support the Government in its preparations, but it must put Scotland before party interests if it is to market Scotland and reap the legacy of forthcoming events. I move amendment S4M-02245.1, to insert at end: “and further commends tourist industry partners for working together to develop green and eco-tourism.”

The minister asks about the representations that Labour made, but the Government was absolutely silent on the issue during the budget process. Indeed, the budget makes no mention of withdrawing RET from commercial vehicles.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

I rise to support the Labour Party’s motion on the removal of RET for commercial vehicles. The policy would be ludicrous during a time of economic stability, but to increase fares by up to 134 per cent at a time of economic downturn is rank stupidity. The SNP Government has a duty to protect and provide for the people whom it serves, but it is not doing that. Because of the public outcry, it has sought to introduce transitional arrangements that will see no fare rise beyond 50 per cent this year, but a 50 per cent rise this year is indefensible. The Government hopes to divide and rule. It has extended RET to small commercial vehicles of up to 6m, which it should have done years ago. It was cheaper to take a camper van over to the islands than a small commercial vehicle of the same size. The Government has also continued RET for passengers and tourism traffic, again trying to introduce some division. The Government has sought to accuse hauliers of not passing RET savings on to islanders, again seeking to cause division. I do not want to waste a lot of time on that, but it shows that the SNP Government is trying to drive wedges and create divisions between communities in an attempt to divert attention from its policies. The claim is refuted by all; every haulier to whom I have spoken is more than willing to open their books to the Government so that it can examine them and see that the claim is untrue. If hauliers in the islands were profiteering, they would not be going out of business. Divide and rule—that is the SNP Government’s hope. What it fails to understand, but what every islander understands, is that the cost will be borne by all the islanders. Nothing can go on or off the islands without the islanders bearing the cost. The policy means that prices will go up in shops, hotels and restaurants. The costs will be borne by the health service and local government as well as by ordinary families. Divide and rule has not worked, so the SNP Government is trying something else, and it is its usual stance—blaming someone else. We heard Alasdair Allan, in his intervention, trying to make out that hauliers and indeed the Labour Party are looking for lower fares in order to offset fuel prices that are increased elsewhere. We are not asking for lower fares. Nobody is asking for that. We are asking only for RET to continue until the impact can be fully assessed. That claim is something else that the SNP has put into the debate in order to blame someone else and create a diversion from its policies. The SNP says that the Labour Party never supported RET, but it was in our manifesto to roll out RET to the Argyll islands. That was Labour Party policy, and it was fully costed at that point. The SNP, in a fit of terror, decided to copy us, but it did not cost the policy, so it is stealing from Peter to pay Paul, robbing the Western Isles in order to pay for the roll-out of RET to the Argyll islands. However, those islands are waiting, and some of them will wait for close to five years to get the benefit of RET. I turn briefly to the Liberal amendment.

The Liberal amendment points out that RET on some of the northern isles routes would lead to fare increases. That is hidden gently within the ferries review, under which RET to the northern isles would be phased in. No islander will pay lower prices; in fact, they will face higher prices. The SNP is breaking another promise as it seeks to rob the most vulnerable in our society.

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Presiding Officer, is it not normal courtesy, when a member has referred to another member by name, for them to take an intervention from that member?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

The debate has been interesting, but I fear that much of the discussion had already been rehearsed in the Parliament during the budget debates. I see little change in direction. What the SNP Government is doing is not working. Although I share its criticism of the UK Government’s approach, its own approach appears even more woeful. It is cutting capital spending faster than the rest of the UK and it uses smoke and mirrors to pretend that it is transferring revenue spending into capital spending. In his opening speech, the cabinet secretary painted quite a positive picture, despite the fact that a third of all jobs lost in the UK were in Scotland. The UK Government has the wrong approach, but so does the Scottish Government. In his closing speech, Gavin Brown talked about how the unemployment figures in Wales appear to be improving. The National Assembly for Wales has fewer powers than this Parliament but appears to be using them more effectively. Young people are the hardest hit by unemployment. Neil Findlay said that 30 per cent of young people in his constituency are unemployed—an horrific figure. When the Government cuts funding to colleges, that impacts on young people’s ability to gain skills. We need to act now to ensure that young people are equipped for an upturn in the economy. If they have no skills and no experience, they will become increasingly unattractive in the job market and in future will find themselves excluded from it. A cut in funding for colleges of 20 per cent over the spending review period plays into the hands of what is already becoming a national crisis. We need to use procurement to get young people back into work. Margaret McCulloch emphasised the need to upskill young people during this period. We can talk about the figures, but unemployment takes a huge emotional toll on everyone, especially young people. Some time ago, the quote was that being unemployed had the same impact on a person’s health as smoking 400 cigarettes a day. We cannot underestimate the personal impact that unemployment has on those whom it affects. John Park talked about training and development for those who are in work, and ensuring that employers make certain that those people receive recognised qualifications. That is especially important in modern apprenticeships. If employers are getting help with that, they need to make sure that nationally recognised qualifications are being delivered, to ensure that people are being skilled in ways that prepare them for the future. Women are second in line to young people when it comes to those who are affected by unemployment. That is because front-line services are being hit and women tend to deliver those services. In many areas of local government, free personal care is the only care available to elderly people. Although the Government talks about preventative spend, its policies are doing away with any prevention. Unemployment also has an impact on child poverty, not just because many unemployed women are in single-parent households but because women tend to be the breadwinners now. A high proportion of women out of work will not help the Government to meet its child poverty targets. Malcolm Chisholm said that he was a housing bore, and so am I. Housing is one of the most important issues in the debate. In its manifesto, the SNP promised 6,000 social rented houses a year. What a difference those houses would make if they were delivered. They would make a difference to housing standards, they would help in the fight against fuel poverty and they would create jobs. Last year, 30,000 jobs were lost in construction alone. The Government seems to fail to acknowledge the impact that those jobs could make to our economy, including through the provision of apprenticeships for young people. Housing money could be used to retrofit older houses, as part of the fight against fuel poverty. Such things not only deal with social ills but provide jobs in our economy. A 30 per cent cut in the housing budget is incomprehensible in the present conditions. Margaret McCulloch talked about the introduction of the procurement bill, and I very much agree with what she said. She also talked about small and medium-sized enterprises being able to take part in procurement. To allow them to take part, we need to look at not only the tender size but the simplicity of the process. The procurement bill is long awaited and could make a huge impact on some of the Government’s targets, for example by ensuring that those who receive funding from the public sector help to meet our carbon reduction targets. A bill could also help us to meet social and financial sustainability targets. Enshrining policies such as those on the living wage and the employment of disabled people in a procurement bill would ensure that the best value is obtained for not only the procuring organisation but the public purse. We could consider employment practice, which John Park talked about, and apprenticeships in a procurement bill, which could also deal with inward investment. Public money goes towards contracts and is used to encourage businesses to set up here, so we should ask those businesses to sign up to a procurement bill that sets a basic minimum standard for how people are to be employed. Malcolm Chisholm talked about contracts going abroad. All those issues could be dealt with through a procurement bill, so it is high time that we had one. We need to concentrate on the most vulnerable in our society and ensure that our young people get that valuable first job that provides the experience that they need and leads them to their career. We need to ensure that women are working so that we do not have an increase in child poverty. A failure to deal with the economy is a failure to deal with the people whom we serve. I call on the Government to scrap plan MacB and to use the powers that it has to make a real difference to the people of Scotland.

At stage 1 we said that the budget was beyond redemption, and the cabinet secretary has proved that today. Despite the consequentials, cuts have not been reinstated in crucial areas such as housing, front-line services and education for young people. I welcome the additional funds for housing, but it is clear that the funding is still 30 per cent down on last year. The promise of 6,000 social rented houses per year remains broken.

I cannot rewrite the budget in eight minutes, given the state that it is in. However, I can give the member one example of an area from which we could take money. We could take money from the referendum campaign that the Government will run, which is not highlighted in the budget. The money would be better spent on housing. We could invest it in our people—[Interruption.]

SNP members might not like what I am saying, but if they were willing to invest in housing they would make a huge difference to the people whom we are here to serve. Such investment would create jobs in the construction industry, kick-starting our economy. Apprenticeships would be created for young people, about whom the SNP appears not to care much. Investment in housing would provide an economic boost, help to cut carbon emissions and fulfil the basic human right of everyone to live in a warm, dry home. It would be preventative spend, saving money in health and education. A 30 per cent cut will not achieve that. I ask the Government to support investment in housing. Members talked about retrofitting and fuel poverty, the budget for which was cut last year and will not reach previous spending levels during the spending review period. We have been told that a minimum of £100 million is required from the Government if we are to meet the 2016 fuel poverty targets; £65 million is not enough. John Mason welcomed the decrease in the amount of cuts. In the stage 1 debate I did not hear him or indeed any SNP back bencher ask for a single penny more, but they have lined up today to welcome every penny that has been deducted from the cuts. I welcome the additional money for further education and for grants to enable students to stay in further education, but there is still a cut, as members pointed out. The budget is still down £30 million, at a time when record numbers of young people are unemployed.

We have a lost generation—and I am not sure whether Mark McDonald has anything to say for that lost generation.

I suggest that the member listen a little more closely, because I started by saying that I welcomed the additional funding. The cut is now only £30 million, which is less than it was before—but it is still a cut at a time when we need places in further education for young people. We need to train them and to give them skills now, in order to prepare them for an economic upturn if it comes. If we do not do that, we stand to add another lost generation to the generation that was lost—as Hugh Henry pointed out—in the 1980s. As we all know, the country is still paying for what happened to that generation, and the cost to this generation will be much higher than the £30 million that we are cutting from funding for college places now.

I apologise to no one for building schools and hospitals; I only wish that this Government would build them too. This Government complains about cuts that it has received from Westminster, and I join it in that. The cuts are too fast and too severe, and they will damage our economy. However, with the same voice, the Government doubles the cut and passes it on to local government. It is local government that provides the services to our communities. It provides care in the community—Jackie Baillie talked about preventative spending and about providing care. Others such as Jean Urquhart have talked about free personal care being provided by this Government. The only problem is that that is the only kind of care now available to older people in our communities. They do not get care at home any more. If they can wash themselves and dress themselves, they are on their own. That is not preventative spending. Those people end up in hospital, costing the taxpayer more. The Government cuts from local government, cuts from the front line, and cuts from classrooms—it cuts classroom assistants and teachers, which creates problems further on. The Government cuts from local government with a road maintenance backlog of £2.5 billion. It passes on double the cut with no understanding of the situation in which people find themselves, and no pity. I welcome again—members will note that I said “welcome again”—the additional funding for broadband. The cabinet secretary talked about £40 million—[Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The cabinet secretary talked about £40 million from local government for broadband. I would like him to clarify whether that is the same £40 million that was announced last week in the digital action plan. I am pleased that the Government is putting more money into an essential service, and I would be keen to learn how it plans to lever in additional funding. The Government is more than aware that the figure quoted for the roll-out of superfast broadband to the Highlands and Islands alone is around £300 million. We have a long way to go if we want to bring rural services up to the levels enjoyed in our cities. I accept that funding should not be provided entirely by the Government, but it needs to use its investment to lever in other funding—especially from providers that will use the infrastructure to make money in the future. Other members have spoken about transport, and it was rightly said that the air discount scheme is a tax on business. When in difficult times, we must not tax business further. However, we must also ensure that we do not place a tax on communities—I am thinking of the road equivalent tariff for hauliers in the Western Isles. This budget is the budget of a Government that is asking for more powers. At the same time, it is proving to this Parliament that it cannot use the powers to govern that it already has. The budget is a wasted opportunity—and while we face the financial cost of that, the people whom we serve are facing the human cost.

The cabinet secretary got that majority on the back of a promise to build 6,000 social rented houses a year for the Scottish people. That promise was immediately broken.

I congratulate Jamie McGrigor on securing the debate and I welcome the representatives from the community of Barra who are in the public gallery. As Jamie McGrigor said, the issue has been long running and has created a great deal of disquiet in the community. It is clear that SNH made up its mind about the Barra designation from the outset, but it failed to make the case to the community or scientifically. Throughout the process, it has moved the goalposts and cited different reasons for designation when it has failed to make the case. SNH has said that the designation will not impact on the fishing industry, but it has also said that designation could limit static-gear fishing effort and will require some types of fishing activity to be prohibited in more sensitive parts of the site. To be frank, SNH has lost touch with the community and has lost its trust. SNH has not acted openly. It has given the constituency MSP and MP information but has failed to brief regional members. That gives the impression that it might have something to hide, which is not helpful in the debate. SNH has failed to make the case to the local council, which objected to the designation on scientific and socioeconomic grounds. The scientific grounds for the designation are the protection of common seals, sandbanks that are slightly covered by seawater all the time and reefs. Back at the beginning of the process, the common seal was the primary reason for the designation, but the seals have left, which is possibly because of the building of the Eriskay causeway—and SNH hid even that until it was pulled out by a freedom of information request. Back in 2000, the sandbanks were not considered sufficiently important to justify designation but, when seal numbers plummeted, they became crucial to the designation. To designate on that basis, other sites must be examined, after which the best is designated. No comparisons with other sites have been made, so the proposed designation is at odds with the European legislation. The reefs in the proposed area are not unique. Many similar types of reefs have been designated, so further designation is not required. The science does not hold up. The council objected to the designation on socioeconomic grounds, because the islanders in Barra alone stand to lose earnings of about £800,000 per annum, and an additional 27 jobs are at risk in Uist. The figures all depend on the fishing industry and take no account of the potential for wave and tidal renewables, once those technologies are developed. It is recognised globally that the west coast of the Western Isles will be one of the main sites for wave and tidal power once we have the technology to harness that power. It is widely understood that the Western Isles has a challenged economy. It has been a priority area for Highlands and Islands Enterprise for many years, and the jobs that I mentioned are crucial to the survival of the islands. The people who live there know that—that is why they would never do anything that would damage their fishing industry. For generations, they have looked after their natural heritage, and SNH is arrogantly overlooking that knowledge. Designation has to be an open process that must start with engaging the communities who have looked after that natural heritage over the years. They must have ownership of the process. It is very clear that that has not happened with the Barra designation. It is also clear that SNH has not been open and honest with the community. For that reason, as much as any other that I have talked about tonight, the process must stop now. The minister must ensure that there is a full investigation into what has gone wrong and that no other community is treated in the same way. In many such places, the most endangered species are the people who live there. They are forced to guard their natural heritage. I hope that the minister will give the community some comfort tonight.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth last met the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and what issues were discussed. (S4O-00646)

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the concerns of Western Isles Council and communities throughout the isles about the impact of the removal of the road equivalent tariff from hauliers who travel to and from the islands, and the impact that it will have on local and household budgets? Given the impact on the whole economy of the islands, will he intervene, with the Minister for Housing and Transport, and ensure that the council leader, Angus Campbell, is admitted to the meeting with hauliers next week?

I welcome the action plan’s acknowledgement of the scale of the challenge ahead. As things stand with the current infrastructure, only 50 per cent of Scotland will get next-generation broadband. We are in real danger of being left behind; indeed, at this rate, rural India will have next-generation broadband before rural Scotland. Not only have the people in that area recognised the need for connection, they are rolling it out. My worry is that this is not an action plan but a route map towards one. It outlines four distinct programmes, the first of which is to achieve a step change by 2015; the second, to achieve world-class broadband by 2020; the third, to demonstrate and deliver innovative local solutions; and the fourth, to increase take-up rates. The Scottish Government’s previous goals were to make next-generation broadband available to all by 2020 and to make significant progress by 2015, and I am a little concerned that both are being watered down. Given that achieving a step change and world-class broadband are part of the same trajectory, why are there different pathways? Programme 1 will be put out to tender in September while an action plan for programme 2—to achieve world-class broadband—will not be launched until December. To do this properly, we must ensure that what we do now contributes to the final goal. For too long now, we have had a piecemeal approach. We also need to remember that, as we progress with next-generation broadband, many of the communities in the Highlands and Islands, particularly in the Western Isles, have no broadband provision at all and we need to focus on those communities, which have already fallen behind because of market failure. If we are to roll out next-generation broadband, the infrastructure must be in place. We need fibre to connect communities. The Scottish Government knows where the fibre is and who owns it; indeed, the public sector itself has already invested in fibre—for example, in the pathfinder north network and JANET and on electricity transmission lines—and there has been investment by, among many others, Network Rail and Scottish Water. I ask the Scottish Government to publish Scotland’s fibre map showing the current location of all fibre because that alone will show the gaps that are preventing the whole of Scotland from getting next-generation broadband. Given that Ofcom has opened up BT’s ducts and poles for use, is it not time that the same principle applied to fibre? Indeed, I really hope that that is what the cabinet secretary means by the reference in the plan to “open access”. Legislation might be needed, but I truly believe that, with all-party support, that can be done quickly. As taxpayers have funded much of this fibre infrastructure in the past, they must benefit from it going forward. With pathfinder north, for example, local government has been able to procure fast connections between its offices and schools and other buildings. People have argued against using that fibre because, under the original procurement process, its use was not extended to communities and businesses. In most cases, however, the pathfinder infrastructure is owned not by the state, which simply rents part of it, but by other businesses, so there is nothing to prevent communities and businesses from contracting with the owners of the fibre to use the spare capacity in the cables. The action plan mentions the seed funding of £5 million, which is welcome. However, we need the fibre infrastructure to allow communities to go the last mile. If the backhaul is not in place, no community solution will work. Where communities do not have the ability to go it alone, the Government needs to consider enabling a community internet service provider to take things forward and build community resilience to make that affordable. What keeps costs down in the Tegola project is that members of the community carry out repairs and replace parts as required. If a large ISP were to do that work, it would cost thousands of pounds per repair and the running costs would be unattainable. I welcome the fact that the report promises to deliver an open-access infrastructure. Under such an approach, all public procurement of fibre must be tendered properly to allow public agencies to be part of the solution. However, we also need to future-proof our planning system. Retrospective laying of fibre is expensive. Fibre, or at the very least the ducts, should be incorporated into all new road and building developments. It is almost cost free to put ducts in when roads are resurfaced or housing developments are built, and once they are there, it is relatively cheap to put fibre down. Geography and landscape mean that there is no one-size-fits-all solution to the problem. I have seen at first hand the problems with trying to achieve good broadband connections in the Highlands and Islands. I welcome the fact that commercial mobile services are improving—for example, 3G and 4G services—but the areas that do not get broadband are the very areas that are unlikely to get a mobile signal, so all technologies need to be used: fibre, wireless, satellite and the white space that is freed up by the shift from analogue to digital television. We need a mix of providers. BT is the largest supplier and is the only one left in the Highlands and Islands pilot. We need to involve the other players such as Cable & Wireless, which owns much of the pathfinder infrastructure, and National Grid and Scottish Hydro Electric Transmission Ltd, which also own fibre transmission lines. Large internet service providers will roll out next-generation broadband where the market is sufficiently large to pay for it. It is vital that Government money does not skew that process but is used where the market fails, which is in rural areas. Solutions needs to be future-proofed. It is hard to find a solution for rural areas that can be updated at a later date. The long-awaited action plan is not an action plan but a statement of what requires to be done. The Government admits that the technology is moving apace, and it also needs to move apace to ensure that Scotland does not fall behind.

The Government knows where the existing fibre is in Scotland. The cabinet secretary talks about HIE going ahead with its contract now. Will he make available to HIE information on where the fibre is so that HIE can build that into its contract and maybe save us some money?

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what the increase in number of children entering Gaelic-medium education has been since the Gaelic action plan was published. (S4O-00615)

The minister will be aware that the supply of Gaelic-medium teachers is crucial to the roll-out of Gaelic-medium education. The distance-learning options that the University of Aberdeen, the University of Strathclyde and the University of the Highlands and Islands run allow suitably qualified people to gain a Gaelic-medium teaching qualification with the minimum disruption to their family lives, thereby increasing the supply of teachers. Will the minister give an assurance that those training options will continue?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

We in the Labour Party will be voting against the Budget Bill, because we believe that it is so far off the mark that it is beyond repair. Even at this stage, we urge the Scottish Government to look again at its priorities. We firmly believe that the budget should be for jobs and the economy, and that the SNP Government has failed to produce such a budget. Instead, it has slashed funding to housing, further education and councils—directly hitting the economy, jobs and crucial front-line services. It is inexplicable that the budget for housing is halved. We need good-quality housing. Elaine Murray eloquently presented the effect of poor housing on people’s health and education—the human cost of poor housing. If preventative spend were an objective of the Government, housing would surely be foremost. Where is the Government’s manifesto commitment to 6,000 social rented houses a year? It has gone. As others have said, output in the construction sector has fallen by 1.2 per cent in the past quarter. That has affected our economy and jobs, and no apprenticeships are coming out of the housing sector. Investment in housing would not only help the people in need of good-quality housing; it would provide jobs and a much-needed boost to our economy. The fuel poverty budget is part of the housing budget and was slashed last year, yet the Government has the cheek to boast of an increase this year, coming from an all-time low—it will not reach its previous levels in this session of Parliament. If this is the progressive policy that the First Minister boasts about, we are all in deep trouble. Others have mentioned retrofits, and Patrick Harvie spent some time—

Yes.

It is interesting that Kevin Stewart talks about the deficit that was left by the Labour Government bailing out the banks. This week, his leadership has said that it would be unable to bail out the banks in an independent Scotland. We would not have a problem with a deficit; we would not have a bank. The member should think again about that one. I want to make an extremely important point about retrofits. Retrofits not only tackle fuel poverty, which is hugely important; they tackle carbon emissions and create jobs. If we are going to have “happy healthy bairns”—to quote Clare Adamson—retrofits are needed to ensure that people live in good-quality houses. Many members have talked about young people, and unemployment among young people is one of the most important issues that we face. It is soaring, and we have the prospect of a lost generation, as Hugh Henry pointed out. Young people need the colleges and it is therefore unacceptable that the Scottish Government has chosen to slash college budgets by more than 20 per cent. If young people cannot get jobs in the economy, they need to obtain skills so that they are ready to work when the economy improves.

I welcome that intervention, but can Clare Adamson guarantee that every college can form such partnerships and that every college can give a guarantee on student numbers? I do not believe that every college can. We need to ensure that the apprenticeships and training that colleges offer are meaningful and are not just exercises in manipulating numbers to take people off unemployment registers for short periods of time. People are bringing evidence to me about that. We need investment in housing, for example, to create meaningful apprenticeships and take young people off the dole.

I have taken several interventions, and I want to make progress. As other members have mentioned, the local government cuts are attacking front-line services. The Government promised to fund the council tax freeze, but it has failed to do that, and the people who deliver our front-line services are experiencing the brunt of the cuts. I am talking about people such as classroom assistants, home carers and people who provide services to our vulnerable people. It is about preventative spend again. If we do not spend on the most vulnerable people in our society, overall spending will rise, as the cost of picking things up later will be much more. We need to consider the people who are affected by the job cuts in front-line services, a disproportionate number of whom are women. Women are put on zero-hours contracts so that the job cuts are ignored or hidden. If we are really going to invest in preventative spend, we must ensure that that spend is on the front line. I want to touch on comments that other members have made. Liam McArthur talked about the air discount scheme and its removal from business travel to and from the islands. That is a tax on business; it is an anti-growth tax. That removal has been followed by the removal of the road equivalent tariff from hauliers in the Western Isles this week. Making the Western Isles hauliers pay for the roll-out of RET to the Argyll islands is robbing Peter to pay Paul. It is a house tax on people on those islands, with increases of more than 100 per cent on the cost of taking a lorry there. The Government has looked to cut the freight facilities grant, which is another preventative spending initiative. There are cost savings on road maintenance through that grant, which has been cut, as Malcolm Chisholm and others have mentioned. There are also cuts to active and sustainable transport. Preventative spend options have had their budgets slashed. I turn to the myth that the Government wishes to put forward about revenue-to-capital spend. It tells us that it will change £750 million from revenue to capital over the spending review period. As Gavin Brown pointed out, some £250 million of that is capital spend savings from the Forth crossing. One could ask, as the Forth crossing has not been built, how can there be savings? The Government also has £256 million revenue-to-capital spend on enterprise agencies. The enterprise agencies tell us that that happens year on year, so it is not a change in spending. It is ironic that the SNP Government has chosen today to launch its consultation on the separation referendum—a day when it refuses to use the powers that it has to improve the lives of the people of Scotland. It simply does not add up. Could it be that the Government is not using its power in order to create the impression that it needs separation to make a difference? If that is the case, it is unforgivable.

Does George Adam agree that having “Alex Salmond for First Minister” on the ballot paper was designed to cause the electorate confusion?

Is it not the case that the Government has made an art of cutting budgets and then restoring them in part and saying that it has increased budgets? Has that not happened with the housing budget and again with the local government budget?

10. To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken in 2012 to promote the cultural legacy of rural Scotland. (S4O-00588)

Recent tourism figures have shown that our cities are doing much better than our rural areas, and that larger hotels are doing better than guesthouses and bed and breakfasts. How will the cabinet secretary ensure that tourists are encouraged to visit remote and rural areas so that they can experience the unique culture and heritage of those areas?

I have raised with the cabinet secretary on numerous occasions the lack of service provided by the Ambulance Service in rural areas. Indeed, it is often the case that the ambulance is over an hour away from the community that it seeks to serve. The cabinet secretary advised in her statement that there will be an increased number of community paramedics for rural areas. Can she give details of the status of those paramedics? Will they be full-time employees with access to emergency vehicles? Can she also tell us what rural areas will benefit from those new posts?

I, too, welcome publication of the infrastructure investment plan. We need a plan for long-term capital spending. However, as many other members have said, I am disappointed that the plan appears to be just a wish list or never-never land, as Margaret McDougall said. Half the projects have no funding mechanism. The costs are sketchy and vary between hundreds of millions of pounds for individual projects, and it is difficult to see how they can be budgeted for. Where funding mechanisms are in place, there is very little detail about how they will work. We do not have borrowing powers at the moment. The non-profit-distribution model—or for-profit-but-capped-profit-distribution model, which, as Murdo Fraser said, might be more accurate—was proposed for the Borders rail link. It was unsuccessful, so it is untested and we do not know how it will work. Can we be sure that the projects that have been earmarked for such funding and the projects that have not been earmarked for anything and so might come under that model will be delivered? We also have tax increment financing, which has been piloted. However, my understanding is that we would need legislation to roll that out, so which projects are earmarked for that funding? What will happen to them if the legislation is not rolled out and the pilot throws up problems?

Indeed; that is my point. To roll out TIF further than the pilot projects, we need legislation. When is that legislation coming forward and which projects will be affected by it? We need some clarity on that. EU funding was mentioned. It is unclear what EU funding we will get post-2014. Jean Urquhart mentioned the impact that objective 1 funding had on the Highlands and Islands. I agree with what she said. I was puzzled that Mike MacKenzie implied that EU funding had nothing to do with the Government. Will the cabinet secretary give credit to someone other than the Scottish Government if we secure some for EU funding in the future?

That is wholly untrue. We lost objective 1 status because of enlargement of the EU. The Labour Government successfully secured transitional funding, from which we are still benefiting. Let us hope that we are so lucky in the future. Malcolm Chisholm mentioned the 5 per cent rule. We need some clarity on that, including how it affects all the funding mechanisms and how it will affect investment. We wonder whether the infrastructure plan will be delivered. Alex Neil said in his opening speech that all the projects in the current infrastructure plan will be delivered but a number of projects that were included in the 2008 infrastructure plan have since been dropped. For example, as Margaret McDougall mentioned, GARL is not happening, and nor are the trams to Leith. Today’s plan includes a number of repeats and delays. The 2008 plan said that the Aberdeen western peripheral route would be completed by 2013 but there is now no completion date. Is that another delay? A great many delayed projects, such as the A9 and the Southern general hospital, are repeated in the plan and rolled out as something new. The plan talks about broadband, which, as Aileen McLeod said, is extremely important, especially to rural areas. However, I do not have Aileen McLeod’s confidence that next-generation broadband will be delivered to everybody by 2020. Other members, including Mark Griffin, asked about the speeds of next-generation broadband. We need some clarity. My understanding is that next-generation broadband provides high speeds. If that is going to be rolled out everywhere, it should be available to people who do not currently have broadband as well as to those who enjoy reasonable speeds. To do that, we must map the fibre that is available throughout Scotland and we must do it now. I am aware of fibre being provided by state funding in pathfinder projects, and that fibre will be installed on the Beauly to Denny line. We need to have a public map of where the fibre is to ensure that we utilise what is available and do not build fibre on top of fibre, wasting public money. We should make the best use of public money to roll out next-generation broadband to other areas. That is hugely important. Many members talked about the important issue of housing. Neil Findlay was right to say that it was the biggest budget loser. The promise of 6,000 social rented houses a year has been scrapped and we will get affordable housing instead. It is debatable whether mid-market rent qualifies as affordable housing—to my mind, it does not. Malcolm Chisholm talked about retrofits. Retrofits are extremely important not only because they create jobs and cut down our emissions, but because they tackle fuel poverty. Retrofitting could lift huge numbers of people out of fuel poverty and make a real difference. We need to think about rural housing and how that is funded. Housing funding is now competitive, and rural housing associations cannot compete with their urban neighbours. That means that some of them will not build any houses next year. We need to ensure that that does not happen, because we need new houses in rural areas as well as in urban areas. Many members have mentioned transport. As I said, the A9 is in the plan, albeit that it is a retread, but roads such as the A737, which Margaret McDougall mentioned, the A83 and the A95 are not even on the wish list. Will they be improved in any way between now and 2030? Mike MacKenzie mentioned the A82 and the work at Pulpit Rock, which the plan says will be done post-2017, if funding is available. That is written in the document, and I would like the cabinet secretary to confirm that when he winds up, because I was certain that that funding had already been allocated.

I will conclude. A number of issues have been missing from the debate. For example, there has been no mention of what is to happen with the consequentials from the autumn statement. If the letter about revenue to capital transfer was, indeed, sent to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee prior to the debate, why was it not made public and placed at the back of the chamber so that we could talk about it in the debate? The SNP Government has no shame about dropping plans. It dropped GARL and it dropped trams to Leith. We are not sure whether it will maintain the infrastructure investment plan. We hope that it will, and we hope that it will fair better this time.

I welcome this debate, albeit that it is a little dry. Discussion of the subject is timely and extremely important. Our economy is struggling and we need to ensure that regulation is in keeping with building the Scottish economy and ensuring that that growth is shared. Growth must benefit the wider community, and good regulation can achieve that. Regulation is necessary in many areas. However, we increasingly get complaints about red tape when regulation appears to have become overly bureaucratic and is not in keeping with the Government’s policy aims and objectives. Although a sustainable procurement bill would create greater transparency in regulation, we need constantly to review existing regulation. When new regulations are drafted, there must be a review of the existing regulations to ensure that the result is as simple and transparent as possible. I welcome the annual report of the regulatory review group. It mentions the group’s work on the regulation of carbon capture and storage, which is welcome. However, I urge it to examine other areas in which we need simplification or, at the very least, a one-stop shop approach to regulation. We are all keen to develop wave and tidal energy, but the field is strewn with different regulators that have different remits. We have the planning system, Marine Scotland and the Crown Estate to mention but a few, and there are statutory consultees such as SEPA and SNH. The list goes on. They all have important roles to play, but the area can be daunting for developers. Regulation is required, but we need to make the process as accessible and cost effective as possible. The same is true in relation to onshore renewables. Developers tell me that Scotland is one of the most risky areas in which to develop, because of the regulatory framework. As a counterbalance, we have the renewables resource. However, if expert developers are struggling, what hope do small community groups have of working their way through the regulatory framework? The Parliament is united in the view that communities should benefit from the development of renewables, so it is important that we make that possible and remove the barriers. One of the biggest concerns that I hear from communities and constituents is about their interaction with the planning process. I note what the minister said in his opening remarks about trying to simplify the process, but the measures do not seem to have made it more accessible. It is a legal process that is made up of national planning policy guidelines, local plans and the like, but decisions are made by politicians either at local government or Scottish Government level, which leads constituents to believe that there is political input to the decisions. There is not; their elected representatives are unable to make meaningful representations on their behalf. What they need is expert planning advice on how to pick apart an application, against the national planning policy guidelines. That would help communities; they do not have the resources to do that, and so become extremely frustrated. Our planning must be fair and above question, but that does not mean that it should not be accessible to all. The amendment in my name states that we in the Labour Party are calling on the Government to introduce a sustainable procurement bill. It could be argued that that would involve further regulation, but it would be good regulation. It would encourage economic growth by protecting jobs and retaining in our communities the economic benefit that they bring. Such a bill would set the scene for minimum standards and best practice in procurement. Too often, we see contracts going to companies that are not local and which bring in their own workforces under conditions that we would not find acceptable here.

I think that Mark McDonald misunderstands where I am coming from. I am not suggesting that such companies should not be able to bid, as they can under European law. I am saying that a sustainable procurement bill would set the standards under which they could bid. I think that our colleagues in Wales have done that. The non-local companies get the contracts but do not have the standards or local procurement values that we expect. The situation will get worse as the global crisis deepens and companies from further and further afield compete for work. A sustainable procurement bill would ensure that there was a level playing field and that companies that exercise good practice are not disadvantaged. Procurement should be carried out on a scale that allows small and medium-sized enterprises to bid when that is possible. They are more likely to bid in their areas and to employ local people. Companies should demonstrate commitment to apprenticeships, to training, to paying a living wage and to access to employee stakeholder pensions. There has been much debate in recent days about public sector pensions, which commentators often compare with private sector pensions. The truth is that private sector pensions have fallen back—companies no longer offer pension provision. However, we should not become involved in a race to the bottom because of the economic climate. Pensions lift retired people out of poverty. If people do not make provision for their retirement, taxpayers will have to support them. Our demographic profile will place a greater burden on future generations, so we must ensure that workers are encouraged and enabled to make pension provision. Otherwise, we will create a generation of older people who face poverty at the most vulnerable stage of their lives. A sustainable procurement bill could also promote environmental sustainability by ensuring that contractors do their bit to meet our environmental goals. It is pointless to set goals if public money is spent on undermining the policy. Currently, contracts do not take account of a supplier’s or contractor’s distance from the organisation with which it is contracting. In catering contracts, reducing food miles should be a crucial part of the contracting process. Large suppliers have been given contracts on the basis that the local supply chain is too small or in places too fragile.

I agree that that is worth exploring, but a lot of small companies do not have the resources to join consortia. I have spoken to large companies that have spent many thousands of pounds on bid preparation. To ask smaller companies to do the same would be unviable, because they do not have the financial back-up for that. A crucial point is that contracts with catering suppliers take no account of the environmental impact of transporting food and other goods over long distances. Local contractors can often supply the same goods at a much lower price. If that consideration were built into tenders, the successful contractor would be bound to buy locally, even if a contract were too large for a local company, which would ensure that the economic benefit remained in the area. Procurement processes could be used to increase the number of disabled people in our workforce. A minimum percentage that depended on the size of the business would provide people with much-needed employment. I have in a social enterprise in my constituency met people who work with disabled people. The time that is necessary to get individuals job-ready varies depending on the support that they require. However, when they are job-ready, very few jobs are available. Sadly, that is the case even in the public sector. The situation condemns those people to poverty and exclusion when they have a lot to offer. A sustainable procurement bill would ensure that contractors ring fence jobs for disabled people. Someone with learning difficulties will always have difficulty in competing in an interview process, even when they are perfectly able to carry out the job to a high standard. Ring-fenced jobs would allow such people the opportunity to work. We must look at best value for the whole public purse and not just for the organisation that carries out the procurement. We need to get out of the silo mentality and to consider knock-on costs to other agencies. A sustainable procurement bill would have an impact on all the issues that I have mentioned, which are crucial to our economic recovery. The Conservatives’ amendment talks about business and regulatory impact assessments. The review group has stated that they are the most important tool for ensuring that measures are properly assessed and that their impact is measured before their introduction. It goes on to state: “We therefore need to ensure that they are being completed thoroughly for all appropriate legislation and regulation.” I agree with the Conservatives that BRIAs should be carried out for the proposed retail levy and for the reform of empty property rates relief. We live in difficult times, and it is important that new legislation does not create unintended consequences. Impact assessments are therefore even more important now. I welcome the regulatory review group’s annual report; it makes an important contribution to our governance. I also urge the Government to introduce a sustainable procurement bill to improve regulation and to maximise environmental, economic and social benefit. I move amendment S4M-01526.2, to insert at end: “, supports regulation that encourages equal opportunities, and calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward its proposed sustainable procurement bill.”

I wrote to the minister on this subject some time ago and suggested that it might be helpful if councils that run their own ferry services were able to lease ferries from the Scottish Government’s ferry-owning company, which would allow them to spread the cost of developing new ferries and not to take the whole burden of replacing a ferry route. Has he given that any consideration and will he look at it again?

I am pleased to introduce this members’ business debate and I thank the members who signed my motion. I was privileged to sponsor a reception in the Parliament this week for the Multiple Sclerosis Society, which MSPs supported well. Many who attended the reception told me that they appreciated that support. Approximately 10,500 people in Scotland live with MS—that is one of the highest rates in the world. In parts of the world where rates of Scottish immigration have been high, MS is often called the Scottish disease. MS takes many forms. Many sufferers can go through life with little effect on their lives, whereas the disease can be devastating and life threatening for others. It is progressive, and a diagnosis seldom tells a patient what they can expect. The disease is often remitting and relapsing, so its effect is difficult for people to gauge. Because of those factors, it is important that people receive on-going support and information. People with MS often face a postcode lottery in accessing healthcare. In 2009, the Government published the clinical standards for neurological health services, which sought to address the situation. They go some way towards providing guidance for NHS boards, but services are still patchy. The MS Society therefore finds itself campaigning for better services. I campaigned alongside the society in the Western Isles recently. Despite having a high incidence of MS, the islands had no specialist nurse. That meant that patients had to travel to the mainland for specialist services. I was first told about that problem by Christine Stewart. The success of the campaign to get an MS nurse for the Western Isles is due largely to her and her fellow campaigners’ tenacity. The clinical standards for neurological health services set out the standards of care that health boards must meet when treating people with MS. They include access to a multidisciplinary team that specialises in MS—as a minimum, that must consist of a specialist consultant and an MS nurse; access to neurological physiotherapy and rehabilitation, occupational and speech therapy, dietetics, and pharmacy and mental health services; access to an MS education programme; and access to a review by a specialist team every 12 months. People with MS must also be able to self-refer to specialist services. Progress has been made, but many health boards are still to implement all the standards. Their importance cannot be overestimated. If patients receive the support and information that they need, that helps to improve their outcomes, keeps them independent and helps them to continue to work. That will not prevent relapses, but people will recover more quickly with specialist support.

I agree with David Stewart about that centre, which I visited some years ago. I was impressed by the range of services that was available—the centre had a hyperbaric chamber, aromatherapy and a physiotherapist, when physiotherapy was not widely available to people with MS. Evidence suggests that physiotherapy helps people with MS to retain muscle tone and mobility and helps to strengthen bones and to prevent conditions such as osteoporosis. Self-management can help people with MS to develop the skills that they need to manage their MS symptoms. Specialist psychological support, such as cognitive behavioural therapy, can help with depression or behavioural symptoms that are directly or indirectly caused by MS. MS nurses provide a range of services that would otherwise often be dealt with by a consultant neurologist, a general practitioner or someone in an accident and emergency department in a hospital. Those resources are already stretched and are considerably more expensive than an MS nurse. Access to an MS nurse also means that patients have a point of contact and are more likely to seek and obtain support quickly. Early intervention improves recovery time, and relieves pressure on other services that might not be the best equipped to help. Since 2010, Health Improvement Scotland has led the implementation of the programme to assist health boards in meeting the required standards, but we must continue to monitor service provision and improvement, especially at a time when budgets are tight and posts might not be filled as quickly as they otherwise would have been. I have been concentrating on health services, but many other services impact on people with MS, not least social care and housing. People with MS frequently express concern about the lack of integration between health and social care services. MS can be a fluctuating and unpredictable condition. People with MS might require support only sporadically but perhaps quite suddenly, and they must be able to access equipment or make interim arrangements easily, so that their needs are met without undue delay. It is vital for people with MS that health and social care professionals have an understanding of the condition and share their knowledge. In 2008, Dundee City Council appointed an MS specialist social worker, and a recent evaluation of that post has produced very positive feedback. People with MS felt reassured that their social worker understood their condition and the fact that their care needs could change rapidly. Healthcare professionals also experienced benefits as a result of the post, because the social worker acted as a single point of contact, which led to much quicker and easier referrals to and from health services. Housing services must also be able to deliver adaptations quickly to help people with MS to remain independent. Finally, I pay tribute to the MS Society, whose work on campaigning for better services has resulted in increased funding and service improvements throughout Scotland. It works with the Government, the health boards and other authorities to improve services for MS patients. Those improvements have led to better outcomes for those people, and those changes improve people’s life chances and make a real difference to their wellbeing. It is therefore important that local authorities also develop partnerships with the MS Society. It is able to provide social care staff with tailored training and education, which would provide the authorities with an insight into services that would make a significant difference to people’s lives.

I thank the minister for an advance copy of his statement. I welcome the statement, but I am disappointed by the time that it has taken to reach the decision. In his statement, the minister confirmed that consent for the Beauly to Denny line was granted in January 2010. It is now close to two years later and this decision has made no material difference. Why the delay? Many communities and campaigners will be angry that they were given false hope at that time and that they have used their energy and resources to try to change the decision to no avail. From the statement, it is difficult to see what they could have said or done to change the outcome. What was the cost of the delay and who bears that cost? Has the delay impacted on the Scottish Government’s target of 100 per cent of electricity being generated from renewable resources by 2020?

The debate has been interesting. We believe that the UK Government’s economic strategy has failed. When the current UK Government came to power, Labour was taking the country out of recession, the economy was growing and unemployment was falling. The UK Government squandered that position by cutting too hard and too fast, creating a challenge for the Scottish Government. However, we in the Labour Party do not believe that the Scottish Government is using its powers adequately to make a difference in Scotland, which continues to lag behind the UK. The Scottish Government should do a number of things. For example, the budget for affordable housing has been cut by 50 per cent, yet the SNP manifesto promised that 6,000 social rented houses would be built every year. The SNP Government has already reneged on that promise. Paul Wheelhouse talked about investing when construction costs are low, yet the housing budget has been cut—what an opportunity to grow our housing stock when costs are low. We have called for retrofitting of energy efficiency measures. There is a 100 per cent target for electricity generation from renewables, but we must also implement energy efficiency measures to cut fuel poverty and meet our carbon emissions targets. The knock-on benefit of retrofitting would be more jobs for the Scottish economy—many would be local jobs that would help our communities. That is another opportunity that this Government has missed when it should be making the most of it. Many members have talked about families losing out as a result of the autumn statement. Malcolm Chisholm, John Pentland and others talked about the terrifying cost to the UK economy of child poverty. We must put an end to child poverty, but in Scotland cuts were made to the fuel poverty budget last year. That budget will not catch up with spending in the previous year, which will lead to further poverty for families. I was glad that Anne McTaggart got to speak, because she pointed out that the cuts in child tax credit in the UK have a bigger impact on women. In Scotland, the public sector cuts are having an impact on women, with fewer classroom assistants and home carers. The Scottish Government talks about there being no compulsory redundancies, but that does not mean that there are no cuts in hours. Women in part-time, low-paid jobs are bearing the brunt of those cuts, which is reflecting back on families. The answer from Governments both here and in the UK on targets for child poverty and fuel poverty is to change the way in which those are calculated. That is a new and innovative way to meet a target. We hope that people step back from that approach. We need real targets that we can trace and which get rid of the effect of poverty in our communities. None of us should be complacent about that. The Scottish Government talks about transferring resource to capital funding. We would agree with that, but the Scottish Government’s approach is more spin than fact. The capital savings arising from the new Forth crossing have been treated as a transfer from resource expenditure to capital, but the new Forth crossing is a capital project. The Scottish Government also tells us about transfers from revenue to capital in the Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise budgets. When those organisations gave evidence to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, they told us that they do that year on year—that the approach is nothing new, that it is not new capital and that the position is much the same as it was. Can we therefore have some new capital coming forward? The Scottish Government published an infrastructure plan—a wish list—that focused on powers that it has not got rather than those that it has. In that infrastructure plan, there was no mention of the consequentials from the autumn statement. We would very much welcome seeing the detail. We would also welcome the Government’s response to the £50 million that has been put on the table for the Caledonian sleeper. Will that funding be matched? Will the proposed investment happen? Delayed projects are reannounced in the infrastructure plan. The A9 upgrade has been announced on several occasions, but it is dependent on policies that have not been put in place. The previous SNP Government announced that the whole of the A9 would be dualled, but we are now told that that applies only as far as Inverness. What about the A9 between Inverness and Thurso? Will that be dualled, or is that another broken promise?

If I had had a pound for every time the SNP spent the Edinburgh trams money I could have dualled the A9 all the way to Thurso, and taken much pleasure in doing so. I welcome the SNP’s extension of the road equivalent tariff to the Argyll islands, which the Labour Party was keen to do. However, what the SNP gives with one hand it removes with the other. It is removing RET from freight, which will stifle jobs growth on the islands and mean that companies on the islands face higher costs. The response to the plea from the northern isles for RET to be extended to them was fare rises. There is no fairness in what is happening.

I agree, but that was the case with the Oban to Barra route. The SNP Government insists on calling the measure on that route RET; it is not RET but a discount. What the northern isles are getting instead of RET is a fare increase, not a discount. If they were getting a discount I would be happy to call it RET or indeed anything else, but that is not the case. I was interested in what Kezia Dugdale said about the living wage, which I very much support. We need a procurement bill that enshrines the living wage in public sector contracts and ensures that people are paid a fair wage for the job. John Mason asked Kezia Dugdale whether a minimum wage is better than the living wage. SNP members could not get out of their beds to vote for the minimum wage and they are asleep on the job in implementing the living wage, so we will take no lessons from them. The Labour Party has come forward with positive proposals for growth. It is important to the country that we grow employment. I make a plea to the Scottish Government, on a matter on which we might be able to unite. The UK Government said in the autumn statement that 10 cities will receive funding for superfast broadband. The cabinet secretary will be aware that the market will provide superfast broadband in cities. We need the money in rural areas, to give them a competitive advantage. I make a plea to the Government to consider moving the money from cities to rural areas. The debate has been interesting, and we agree with the Scottish Government that the UK Government has got it wrong. However, it is not enough for the Scottish Government to pass the buck; it has the powers to make a difference in Scotland. This is not a time for posturing; it is a time for the Government to use the powers that it has.

Is it not the case that unemployment among women is growing, second only to unemployment among young people? If the cabinet secretary is taking measures to fight that, they are obviously failing.

The First Minister will be aware of the £100 million allocation that has been made for superfast broadband in our cities, while many people in our rural areas have no broadband at all. Will he make representations for a change of focus for that funding towards rural areas, particularly the Highlands and Islands, to ensure that that project benefits people in our most rural communities?

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the £100 million that was allocated to broadband in the autumn statement. Does he believe that the broadband funding, which is geared towards cities and urban areas, will attract additional European funding, or would it be better targeted towards rural areas, which are less likely to be covered by the market?

Does the minister agree that the problem would be somewhat alleviated by having well-trained guards with the experience and knowledge of dealing with rowdy behaviour in charge of trains?

I, too, congratulate Neil Findlay on bringing the debate to the chamber; it has on the whole been a very good debate. Members have disagreed on some points, but I think that everyone in the chamber agrees on the need for community involvement. I will start by touching on community ownership. In my area of the Highlands and Islands where community land buy-outs have taken place, community ownership is possible and many communities are considering it. However, it is not easy. The costs involved in looking towards developing wind power—even before one gets to the planning process—are heavy, and there is a need for expertise. That makes it very difficult for communities to take that risk on their own without any indication of whether their plan will be successful. Communities that do not own their land do not have access to funds, and therefore do not have access to expertise. Small developments in my region, and throughout the rest of Scotland where the communities are involved, are not able to access the grid. If a grid upgrade is required, those communities are expected to pay for it as it is not on a commercial basis, which makes it impossible. I suggest that we need a community renewables unit: a body of expertise that can advise communities and fund the development costs for them. That will allow communities to reap the benefits and perhaps return some of those funds to the public purse so that they can help other communities that want to do the same. There has been talk of community benefit—some members are concerned about that and view it as a bribe. I do not take that view, but I believe that the Government needs to step in to ensure that all communities receive a benefit. That is perhaps something for which we could legislate. Developers clearly access public funds and in return for that they must provide a public good. We need only look at areas such as Shetland, which during the oil boom years cleverly sought to harness some of the benefits for its communities. It will continue to reap the benefit for years into the future, enabling Shetland to build services within its communities. We must be very careful that communities do not lose out in renewable energy generation. The motion refers to community concerns about the process and people’s involvement in it. That is also the case when communities are the developers. We need a strategic plan for where renewables are to be placed, where they will work and where they can access planning permission. That needs to be available at the outset, but it cannot be put together unless communities are involved early in the process. I urge the Government to look at how that can be done, involving communities at the very beginning, looking at the areas where energy can be generated and then putting in place a strategic plan that will benefit both developers and communities. It is clear that we need renewables. Fossil fuels are finite and their cost will continue to increase. We also have carbon emission targets to meet and we need to fight climate change. Wave energy and tidal energy need desperately to be developed and we need to continue to invest in that development, keeping the expertise in Scotland. We must also look at our energy consumption. Renewables are a precious resource and they need to be developed in conjunction with the communities that we seek to serve.

I welcome the debate. Although there has not been a huge amount of consensus, it is important that the Parliament sends a strong message that no savings should be made at the cost of lives. Duncan McNeil talked about the campaign for the Clyde coastguard and how it had brought to the fore the level of service that we expect and, indeed, perhaps do not often recognise, from the coastguard service. Like others, I pay tribute to the service that we receive and to the men and women who deliver it quietly day in, day out. I want to be clear that although Labour rightly brought forward a review, the current proposals have come from the Tory and Lib Dem Government. I welcome some of the proposals. Indeed, I welcome the changes in the terms and conditions of coastguard officers. Those are well overdue. I also recognise that the proposals have changed since they were initially published on 16 December 2010. I welcome the retention of the Stornoway and Shetland coastguard stations. The councils and the local people ran a strong campaign in those places. Local people took to the streets to fight for their local services. I pay tribute to their efforts, which reversed the decisions, and welcome the change that took place. Many members talked about the tugs—the emergency towing vessels—that are available in the North Sea and the Minch. I welcome the extension of the contract to December, but we need to have more detail about what will replace it. Richard Lochhead previously asked the Westminster Government to allow time for a solution to be put in place. That time has been given, and I would be interested to hear what talks he has had with the UK Government on what can be put in place to guard our seas. Jamie Hepburn talked about the Scottish Wildlife Trust submission to the Parliament, which mentions the cost of the Exxon Valdez clean-up operation, which was more than $2 billion. Lewis Macdonald mentioned the clean-up operation for the Braer disaster, which was £100 million. The saving from the proposal to cut the tugs is £34 million over four and a half years. I recognise that the contract may not be ideal, but why get rid of the tugs altogether? We need them, but perhaps we also need a better contract. If we were to unite around that, it would also send a strong message to our colleagues at Westminster. We also need clarity on the changes in Aberdeen. On that point, I am not so happy about the changes from the earlier proposals, which favoured two marine operations centres: one in Aberdeen that would serve the oil and gas industries—and, indeed, the offshore renewables industries as those develop—and another one in Portsmouth or Southampton. The UK Government has decided against that and is going for one centre at Fareham with a back-up in Dover. However, we really need a marine operations centre in Scotland and Aberdeen is ideally placed for that because of the expertise that it holds on the oil and gas industry. If the plan for the centre there goes through, it will be the only one with expertise on oil and gas, because we will lose Liverpool and Yarmouth, which also have knowledge in that crucial area. It is important that a marine operations centre have that specialised expertise, and I ask for the proposals to be reconsidered. Many speakers talked about the Clyde coastguard area. I share those concerns. I am an MSP for the Highlands and Islands region. The busy passenger ferry services that run from Argyll use the Clyde coastguard service, so the closure of the Clyde station would be a retrograde step. Colleagues such as Neil Bibby pointed out that it is the third-busiest station in the UK, so we can only assume that the reason for closing it is the costs that are associated with relocation.

I fear that the minister misquotes Neil Bibby, who was clear that any devolution had to be in the Scottish interest. He also pointed out that a service that covers the whole UK—the sea does not stop at the border—had to be run at the UK level. I do not agree with the Scottish National Party Government’s call to devolve the functions. Like Neil Bibby, I say that we need the UK Government to provide an adequate and workable service rather than a devolved one. How can the SNP call for a centre in Aberdeen that would cover the whole of the UK while asking for the service to be devolved? That does not add up. What we need are proposals from the UK Government that work for not only Scotland, but the whole of the UK. I am as worried about Scottish boats getting into trouble in English seas as I am about English boats getting into trouble in Scottish seas. Any initiative has to be UK-led.

I have taken a number of interventions and am now running out of time, so I will press on. I simply do not agree that the service should be devolved. Many members have referred to the lives that could be lost with the closure of the Forth coastguard service. The Forth replacement crossing was mentioned in that regard but, as Claire Baker pointed out, we also need to take into account the effect of offshore renewables, the development of what we hope will be a busy ferry port that will bring more work into the Forth and the tankers at Grangemouth. Losing that service could have very bad consequences for the whole area, and we need to look carefully at the issue. Indeed, an impact assessment must be carried out on all centres, not just Scottish ones, before they are closed; after all, as we have heard, Liverpool MRCC covers the Dumfries and Galloway area. Given that the Clyde and Forth centres are due to be closed in March 2013, there is very little time to carry out such work and I urge the Scottish Government to prevail on Westminster colleagues to make this an urgent priority. We need a marine operations centre in Aberdeen to cover oil and gas—and if there is to be only one such centre in the UK, the Parliament should fight for it to be in Aberdeen. The AAIB’s recommendation on helicopter safety must be implemented as soon as possible and we need to find out what is going to happen to ETVs. We cannot do without them and getting rid of them is simply a false economy. My colleague Lewis Macdonald talked about the firefighting at sea capability of certain fire and rescue services in Scotland. Given the plans to introduce a Scottish fire service, I ask the Government to confirm whether that capability will be retained. With the use of marine, wind, wave and tidal energy hugely increasing marine activity, we need more, not less, protection at sea. Lives depend on an early response to major incidents and, given that people are unlikely to survive for any period of time in our really cold waters, delay can spell disaster. We must always review, update and change; indeed, no one is arguing that service delivery cannot be improved. However, the proposals will make no such improvement and, unfortunately, might well cost lives.

The minister is aware that the most recent crofting acts put burdens on grazings clerks to report on the crofting activities of other tenants. Will he review that in light of the disharmony that it causes in crofting communities?

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what consultations national health service boards should carry out before implementing changes to services. (S4O-00404)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that response. Obviously, she is aware of the situation in Ardnamurchan, but there is a similar situation in Glenelg in my region, where staffing changes have led to lesser services being proposed by NHS boards. The communities in those areas are very unsatisfied and very worried, despite having been consulted. The cabinet secretary has written to those communities and said that service changes should not lead to lesser services. When will she intervene to ensure that health boards provide the same level of service, if not improved services, under those service changes? Given that there are no emergency services as such in those areas, will the cabinet secretary also intervene with the Scottish Ambulance Service to ensure that adequate service provision is in place?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

The First Minister will be aware of the sudden departure of Philip Preston from his post as managing director of CalMac Ferries Ltd. Staff have been informed that he is leaving as part of a company refocus. What is the nature of that refocus? Will the First Minister confirm that CalMac will remain as an entity and that his Government will continue to tender all the routes together? Will he guarantee that the refocus will not have a negative impact on service users, and that any changes will be subject to full consultation?

I very much welcome the debate. We have spoken in Parliament many times about shifting the balance of care. Re-enablement and rehabilitation are crucial to that, through enabling people to get their lives back after they have been unwell. We also need to ensure that we include self-management, independence at home and people’s social wellbeing. We have an ageing population and we need to ensure that health and social care providers work together to deliver joined-up services that fit the person’s needs. From my experience of trying to organise care for family members, when I not only had to go between the health service and council social care services but had to speak to different services within those organisations, I know that it becomes very clear that there is no joined-up care. As an MSP, I am used to working with those organisations when I represent constituents, and I have found the process to be hugely difficult, so elderly people who do not have families must find having to deal with those services and trying to get care packages in place nigh on impossible. We must do something about that if we are to consider the whole person.

Co-location is a benefit, but we also need better communication. We need to ensure that service providers speak to each other, so that when they have identified a need it does not remain with that provider but is passed through the system. Services should be geared to the person, not to the tickbox and to whoever is delivering the service. We also have challenges with service delivery in rural areas. We need generalists and every service has grappled with how to provide services when the population is not large enough to have specialists in place. To train generalists and put them in place is challenging because they are not recognised professionally and they are certainly not recognised financially, because payment tends to attach to the level of qualification and the specialism. We need people who can treat the whole person and we need to recognise their skills. We must also recognise that there is an added cost in delivering services in rural areas. I have been banging on for a number of years about the need for a health funding formula that acknowledges that added cost; we need to do something about it. It has been too long and there have been too many reviews. Something now needs to happen to ensure that funding is in place and that it is fairly distributed. We must also involve communities in the services that they receive. My postbag is full at the moment as communities are complaining about how they are receiving services and about how changes to services are being managed. Communities in Ardnamurchan are considering their emergency out-of-hours services, as are communities in Glenelg and Arnisdale, and although that might not directly impact on today’s debate, people living in those communities who want to be independent and to be reabled and rehabilitated might not have the confidence to move home if they feel that services are not there to back them up. One service that could really impact on rural areas includes telehealth, telemedicine and telecare. We can use it to monitor conditions and information can be sent to the patient and the practitioners so that health conditions are recognised and deterioration is dealt with quickly. It can also be used to get information to patients about their conditions through CDs and DVDs so that when they need the information, it is available. We could also consider videoconferencing. I have seen physiotherapy classes being delivered by videoconference, which is hugely enabling to people with long-term conditions who might not wish to travel. That has a real benefit for rural areas, but to deliver it properly we need connectivity. Broadband is not an infrastructure problem; it is a health and local government problem. We need good broadband to deliver that care to the people who require it because such care not only improves services but alleviates the cost of delivering them. At a time of very tight budgets, there are huge savings to be reaped across all our public services, health and local government by investing in that type of infrastructure. The Government must look at the Audit Scotland report on how we deliver telecare and telehealth and then set a strategy and targets, which must join up with its targets on the roll-out of broadband to rural areas. I will touch briefly on prevention, which several members have discussed already. Access to services such as physiotherapy could offer huge cost savings to the health service. For instance, if patients with issues were triaged by a physiotherapist, they would probably never have to see a consultant, which is a costly service, but they would be seen quickly before any complications occurred and they would be back to being independent and working without having had to wait. The Presiding Officer is looking at me, so I must wind up. There are many other issues that I could speak about, but it is important that we deliver patient-centred services to ensure that people are independent and have good quality of life.

The Parliament welcomed the steps taken by the Government to ensure that kinship carers receive the same benefits as foster carers, but that has not been implemented throughout Scotland. What steps will the minister take to ensure that there is not a postcode lottery in support, including financial support, for kinship carers?

I welcome the debate, which has been a good one, for the most part. I start by paying tribute to the British Red Cross, which hounded all candidates in the run-up to the election about its ready for winter campaign and had continued making representations to the Government, with some effect. It has also continued with its public campaigning, which is welcome. We should pay tribute to it for its efforts. I welcome the plans that the Government has set out. Now is a good time to prepare for the winter and we welcome the steps that are being taken. However, the buck stops with the Minister for Housing and Transport and it is his job to ensure that everything is in place for the winter. If it is not, we, unlike Jackson Carlaw, will hold him to account. Stewart Stevenson resigned because he was not up to his game. I hope that Keith Brown will be. Perhaps Jackson Carlaw will not be quite so amused about job hunting in the next few weeks, once the leadership campaign is over and done with, but I hope that he will not be licking his wounds too much. Many members spoke about roads and rightly said that we cannot predict the weather, but we can prepare for it, and that preparation needs to be joined-up. The gridlock on the M8 last winter, which Anne McTaggart mentioned, was unacceptable. It was also unacceptable that there was no way out of Inverness by road, rail or air for many days last winter. We welcome the purchase of gritters, but where will they be sited? Will it be possible to move them to where they are most needed? Like many others, I travel on the A9 week in, week out. The gritters will be much needed there, but when severe weather hits roads such as the M8, they will also be needed there. Can they be moved around to where they are most needed? Margaret McCulloch mentioned the issue as well, but in the context of trunk road agencies and councils. We now have two different contracts, and winter weather is one of the big issues that arose when the trunk road contracts came away from councils. We need to find ways of making the two contracts work together, with sharing of resources and expertise. We need better information and updates. As someone who travels on the A9 a lot, I know that there are few good, robust updates. I tend to depend on the live cameras that are sited on the road, because they give me the best impression of the road before I travel. Dennis Robertson talked about how information is relayed to people and about connectivity, which is a big bugbear of mine. I will not discuss that now, but he is right. Another issue is that there is little information on rural roads. We see trunk road information on websites and there are places to look for it, but there is little information on rural side roads. Information must also be meaningful. Many members talked about self-help. It is important that people clear their pavements. Perhaps the Government needs to legislate to ensure that people do not face litigation for their best efforts to help others out. We do not want a society that depends on litigation, in which people are afraid to act. It is also right that people should clear side roads and lanes. However, I query what Gil Paterson said about ploughing. We have to be really careful about that. My father drives a snowplough so I know what is involved. I know the risks that he faced day in, day out. It is not safe for amateurs who have no training and lack the correct equipment to go out and try to become some sort of vigilante. We need to look at the issue in the round. Anne McTaggart talked about the 900,000 people in Scotland who live in fuel poverty and the importance of including them in the winter resilience plans. That is of the utmost importance. People in fuel poverty are the most vulnerable when temperatures plummet. Age UK told us recently that 200 people in the UK will die each day this winter due to cold-related illnesses. That is unacceptable. The draft budget for 2012-13 proposes a £65 million budget for energy efficiency and fuel poverty. That is much less than the 2010-11 budget, which was £70.9 million, and the budget will not recover to that level during the current spending review period. In committee this morning, Energy Action Scotland told us that it would take £200 million a year to deal with fuel poverty and meet the targets, and that £100 million of that would have to come from Government. We need not only low-cost energy for our people in fuel poverty but insulation. Again, Age Scotland’s special adviser told us recently that energy prices per unit in Sweden are 50 per cent higher than those in the UK but the average energy bill there is 30 per cent lower, which is due to insulation alone. It is right that we attack the policies of the big six, but the Government also has a role in dealing with the fuel poor, and it must act now to help them. I want to say a quick word about winter tyres, which is an issue that I raised with the Government, the Treasury and, indeed, different agencies last year. It was not very clear to me what the minister meant when he spoke about purchasing more winter tyres, so I would welcome more detail on that. I have watched health care workers and home care workers travelling in remote areas. The health care workers had contract cars but were unable to fit winter tyres to them because it was too difficult. A home care worker who used her own car had fitted winter tyres, so the health care workers followed her around the area that they had to cover, because it was easier to do that. They commented on the huge difference in traction between the cars without winter tyres and the car that had them. I have been told that it is maybe not safe to fit winter tyres on cars, because it may give people confidence that they should not have. To me, though, safety is imperative for the workers who go out and make their best efforts to reach people who need their care. We need to look again at how we use winter tyres and perhaps snow chains, although I know that there are issues about using those on roads. The review group’s report refers to vulnerable people, which is an area that we must look at. We are all aware of vulnerable people who are known to agencies and who maybe receive home care and the like, but there are others who are totally independent under normal conditions but become homebound because of poor weather conditions. They perhaps cannot get out because of icy pavements or because they are not confident about travelling on the roads, although they need to get food and energy supplies and medicines in. I understand that a framework for dealing with that situation is being put in place, but I wonder what steps are being taken to track those who may be in need and identify their needs. In that respect, there will be people who live in rural areas or off-grid who need supplies of Calor gas or oil. How are such people identified and how are the supplies got to them? Many other issues were mentioned in the debate, such as the effect of severe weather on the economy and on councils’ budgets. I am glad that the minister is moving forward and not looking at the fiasco that we had last year, but we need to appreciate those who helped us out of that fiasco. The Government must take a lead in planning, and it will have our full support if it does that.

The minister could take the money out of the budget for the referendum on separation and keep to the fuel poverty targets that the Parliament set in legislation.

I, too, congratulate Jenny Marra on the debate, which is hugely important and which is well placed because it follows our debate on winter resilience. In that debate, many points were made about the importance of addressing fuel poverty as part of winter-resilience preparation. I will repeat a statistic that I gave in that debate, because it is horrific: Age UK tells us that every day in Britain this winter, 200 people will die of cold-related diseases. The draft budget proposes £65 million for energy efficiency and fuel poverty measures. This morning, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee heard that there should be at least £100 million from the Scottish Government if it is to have any hope of meeting the 2015 target. As well as low-cost energy, we need insulation. In Sweden, people pay much more for their energy, but they pay about 30 per cent less to heat their homes than do people in Scotland, and that is down to insulation. Insulation falls under the Scottish Government’s responsibility, so it must either ensure that adequate grants are available to people who are fuel poor to insulate their homes, or set up a programme to install that insulation. Rather than slash budgets, the Government must introduce measures. That would be a spend-to-save initiative. If we lift people out of fuel poverty, it improves health and educational attainment in young people. A knock-on benefit is that, if we keep the jobs local and give them to small and medium-sized enterprises, we boost local economies. It is a win-win situation, not only for those who are living in fuel poverty and for the other services that benefit by not having to pick up the pieces, but for the people who obtain jobs as a result. We must consider microrenewables, which I have spoken about a number of times. Those who can afford to fit microrenewables then get the feed-in tariffs that quickly pay back the investment. However, fuel-poor people do not have sufficient capital to invest in microrenewables. It would not be difficult to find a solution that would allow people who are fuel poor to benefit from microrenewables and to use feed-in tariffs to repay the costs.

Yes—I am aware of a number of schemes of that nature in which companies take the feed-in tariffs and make that investment. We must use those schemes, but people who are fuel poor tend not to be able to shop around and find such schemes. Therefore, the Government has a responsibility either to push people in that direction or, as I would prefer, to set up a scheme.

I am short of time, so I will plough on, if the member does not mind. I want to talk about the central heating scheme for older people. It remains a real concern to me that people who are off-grid for gas have to install storage heaters, which do not meet housing-quality standards. Those people would prefer to fit oil or gas central heating systems, but they are told that they have to pay the difference, which can sometimes reach many thousands of pounds. Fitting of systems that are not responsive, that are expensive to run and which really do not fit with the housing-quality standards forces people into fuel poverty. I ask the Government to look at that again. The big six energy companies, which have responsibility for helping people and have budgets, which have been outlined by Government, need to look at how they reach out to communities such as those in the Western Isles that do not benefit at the moment. The eradication of fuel poverty is enshrined in legislation; we have to meet the 2015 target.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It is clear that the figures that the cabinet secretary has quoted back to my colleague Lewis Macdonald are not correct. Is it right for him to be able to mislead the Parliament in that way?

I very much welcome the debate. Housing is arguably one of the most important issues that we deal with. It is a basic human right to have a warm, dry home to live in. Our housing affects our health and wellbeing and, indeed, our future choices. Many members have talked about that. Jim Hume, in particular, talked about the effect on young children of being brought up in inadequate housing. Spending on that issue, above most others, would prevent future costs to our social services, our health service and many other services that have to pick up the pieces when children are failed at a young age. The debate was interesting, and thoughtful in many places. There are genuine views and interest in the area and members made many good points. However, it was disappointing in some ways, because we heard the normal rhetoric as well. I cannot start my speech without going back to the SNP’s manifesto pledge of 6,000 social rented houses a year. The SNP knew what the spending position was when it made that pledge to the Scottish people. We need it to confirm that it will stand by the pledge and indeed deliver 6,000 social rented houses per annum. It had the figures, so it cannot pull away from the pledge. We need to make a start for the benefit of the many people who need social rented housing. As Margaret McCulloch said, the building of those houses will also kick-start our economy, giving a genuine boost to the small and medium-sized businesses that will build them. We also need to look at our economy and provide energy efficiency. Again, that will be a boost to SMEs and ensure that, while we are providing housing, we are boosting the economy as well as saving for the future. First-time buyers are a huge concern, as are young people in all areas of the housing market. The Government previously said that it would commit to our first foot scheme and indemnify first-time buyers for part of their capital investment in the house—the up-front payment—but we have not heard any more detail on that. I would welcome some detail on the scheme. Young people tend not to have access to housing lists because they do not score enough points. We heard that the number of 18 to 24-year-olds who are assessed as priority homeless is increasing. Indeed, it increased by 40 per cent between 2007 and 2009. As Siobhan McMahon pointed out, the housing that is put in place for them is not permanent and it is not adequate. We need to look at that to ensure that young people have a good start in life. Another issue that is hugely important when we are speaking about housing is fuel poverty. I agree with what members said about the energy companies and the hike in energy bills. The companies have a social responsibility to look after those who are in fuel poverty. However, it is also the Government’s responsibility. The existing homes alliance Scotland points out that, in 2012-13, the warm homes fund will have a meagre budget of £6.5 million, only part of which will go to initiatives to tackle fuel poverty. The alliance says that the budget falls short of the step change in investment that is necessary. It will not even meet emissions targets, far less eradicate fuel poverty. I was concerned yesterday to hear that the Scottish Government intends to review the definition of fuel poverty. I seek a reassurance that the definition will not be watered down. We must not move the goalposts in order to meet the targets that have been set. I hope that the cabinet secretary will address that when he sums up. I also hope that he will answer the question that I asked yesterday, about whether carers will have access to the energy assistance package. He said that it would be those on carers allowance and that there will be a rolling programme of 7,000 carers a year, but there are almost 600,000 carers who do not qualify for carers allowance. Will they have access to the package as well? I would welcome any move to include them because they are extremely vulnerable. The fact that they do not get carers allowance means that they lose out on much funding that should be available to them. A number of members mentioned housing association grant. The SFHA has said that the most serious issue facing housing associations and co-operatives is that the overall budget for housing supply is falling so steeply, and that the £40,000 subsidy will not fund affordable rented housing while keeping rents genuinely affordable to low-income households. The cabinet secretary intervened earlier and said that the £40,000 is a benchmark. However, Keith Brown said a couple of weeks ago that the grant would be increased only when absolutely necessary. In the rural area that I cover, it would be almost impossible to plan and build a house from start to finish for £40,000. Indeed, for small units of two houses, the amount of money that is required is probably closer to £120,000. The minister has said in the past that bids will be looked at in the round, but housing associations are being asked to put in competitive bids, and if the benchmark is £40,000 I do not see how they can spend money on working up a bid for £120,000 and expect to get it. There are 9,000 people on the Highland housing register. Those 9,000 people need homes, many of them in remote rural areas. I read recently in the papers that Albyn Housing Society has put in a bid for 50 properties but only 14 will be supported with funding. Albyn talked about its concerns about building in rural areas. Aileen McLeod said that the provision of affordable housing in rural areas has always been challenging. It is becoming even more challenging. We need to ensure that money is ring fenced for such areas, so that housing associations do not have to bid competitively and so that we can provide much-needed housing. Maureen Watt made clear the Government’s policy towards housing associations when she confirmed our suspicions that the Government is looking to raid housing associations’ reserves. Housing associations, for the most part, have charitable status, which depends on their having reserves that cover the cost of maintaining their houses in a good state of repair. If the SNP raids those budgets, its legacy will be poor-quality, dilapidated housing in Scotland and the demise of our charitable housing associations.

Housing associations’ reserves are there to ensure that their houses remain in a fit and proper state, not just this week or this month but into the future. Associations must show the charity regulator that they can maintain the houses into the future. There are 160,000 people on waiting lists and we need action. We need affordable, good-quality houses in the right places. The building of 6,000 social rented houses a year would be a start. Will the SNP keep its promise to the Scottish people and deliver those houses?

Will the member give way?

Given that unseasonal weather and high rainfall have led to increased flooding, will the Scottish Government track those patterns to make sure that other areas are not becoming flood areas, as they might need flood prevention schemes if those weather patterns continue?

I, too, welcome the extension of the energy assistance package to people who receive the carers allowance. The minister said in his statement that around 7,000 households would benefit. In 2008, 94,760 people received the carers allowance. How was the 7,000 figure reached? Will the minister consider assisting those who do not qualify for the carers allowance—the hundreds of thousands of people who will not benefit from the package?

16. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is doing all within its power to boost economic activity. (S4O-00199)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that, yesterday, Graeme Brown, the director of Shelter Scotland, said: “A 50% cut in affordable housing investment is a devastating blow to the housing sector and now there is no way the SNP Government will be able to meet one of its flagship manifesto commitments of 30,000 new socially-rented homes over the next five years.” Does the cabinet secretary acknowledge those very real concerns? How will he meet his manifesto promises?

This has been an interesting debate and there is much agreement around the chamber about the importance of a low-carbon economy, not least because of the jobs and inward investment that it will provide. Mark Griffin highlighted the real importance of a low-carbon economy. We need to deliver this as part of our global commitment to countries living with the effects of climate change. We do not have the power simply not to act; but there are benefits to acting, which will help us here. When discussing a low-carbon economy, we must deal with the issue of those living in fuel poverty. It has often been put to me that our rush to renewables is costing those who are in fuel poverty. We must ensure that that does not happen. The real prize is having renewable fuel that allows people to have affordable fuel and heating in the future. We need to ensure that those who are now living in fuel poverty are protected from the investment that is required to move towards that prize. If we do not move towards renewable heating and electricity, power costs will increase and more people will be dragged into fuel poverty. We need to be mindful of that; we really cannot forget it. Liam McArthur mentioned that the heat target is too low. The Government has set a 100 per cent target for electricity from renewables, but the heat target has not really changed. We need to be much more ambitious, as fuel poverty is measured by people’s ability to heat their homes. We need to consider community heating schemes and recapturing heat from power stations. Mark Griffin and Joe FitzPatrick talked about that. We also need to look at microrenewables and how we can get them to those who need them most by utilising feed-in tariffs and ensuring that financing arrangements are available. We need to ensure that those who can least afford to bear the brunt do not do so. It is for the Government to consider proposals such as an infrastructure bank that would provide investments for those who cannot afford things and use that money again to help others down the line. We cannot ignore energy efficiency. Moving to renewables is all very well, but we must be able to use the energy that we generate much more efficiently. We need to look at building standards.

It is anathema to build affordable housing that is not affordable to heat. We must be very careful about doing that. Greater costs are involved, but they need to be borne up front, not left to those like many of my constituents who have night-storage heating and inadequate insulation, for example, and really cannot afford to switch on a heater. Older people and families live in such conditions, so we need to consider the matter. A couple of years ago, I think, I was at the Highland housing expo in Inverness, which showed how we could use insulation and building design to cut down heating costs. Indeed, a house there had no heater. If a person felt a bit chilly, they could put on their oven or their hairdryer for a couple of minutes and the whole house would heat up. We need to work towards that approach. We also need to look at the housing stock that we already have. Social rented housing needs to have a minimum standard of insulation. We need to move towards that. I mentioned microrenewables. We have suggested a green new deal that would insulate 10,000 existing homes. We need to work on such things. Obviously, retrofitting is more expensive. As other members have said, we need to ensure that the work goes to small and medium-sized businesses if we want to benefit our local economies, get an economic boost from it, and create local jobs. That could be tied up with apprenticeships—the minister talked about that earlier. Members have talked about getting communities involved in renewables. That is a big issue that relates to onshore renewables and wind power, and it is missing from the motion and the amendments. The issue has become controversial, but we cannot meet the 100 per cent target without onshore wind power. We need to consider where it has developed and we need a plan to ensure that communities are not overburdened, but we must also ensure that all the communities that are involved benefit. Perhaps we will have to consider shares in developments rather than cash on the table, up front, to involve communities for the lifetime of a development and to allow communities to benefit from fluctuating prices and profits from such projects. We need to consider planning guidelines to ensure that development can happen more easily, but we also need to ensure that communities can be heard during that time. I speak to a lot of constituents who are frustrated because they feel that they are going to have a wind farm imposed on them and no one will listen to what they say. We need to ensure that there is a strategic plan for where such structures will be and that we let communities benefit. I know that I am running out of time, but I need to speak about grid infrastructure. If we are going to meet our targets, we need to be able to move the electricity back and forth. There are areas in my constituency in the Highlands and Islands, especially in the islands, where the grid infrastructure simply is not there, which means that developments cannot get started. For example, I have been told that, in the Uists, the only capacity that is available is what is left over when it is not being used by other people. Communities cannot benefit on that basis, and we need to examine that situation. We must have joined-up policies to ensure that we can deliver a low-carbon economy. I urge the Government to develop them.

I have enjoyed listening to the debate and I agree with many people who have stated that this settlement is wrong. We need to invest to grow our economy. Yesterday, following some of the mood music coming out of Westminster, it seemed that that had been recognised and, hopefully, we will benefit from a plan B. However, the SNP Government knew what the settlement was when it wrote its manifesto and it is our job, as the Opposition, to hold it to that. A huge number of issues have been touched on today and I want to touch on a couple that have not been covered before turning to the debate. The first is the next-generation digital fund, for which there is no new money. I have been asking for a figure for the fund for a number of months. The figure of £50 million was mentioned in the manifesto and I would have expected that to be used to lever in EU funding. I see nothing new today, which is disappointing, because we need to invest in our digital infrastructure. In the Highlands and Islands alone, it will cost £300 million to bring superfast broadband to all our communities. By delivering superfast broadband to our communities, we also deliver savings because services can be delivered through it. It is a spend-to-save commitment and I hope the cabinet secretary will force other public bodies to look at how they use their infrastructure to deliver that. Another pet project of mine is the land fund. During the election campaign, Richard Lochhead made a commitment to re-establish the Scottish land fund, but I cannot find any mention of it in this document. I have not read it line by line, so it may be there; if it is, I would welcome that commitment being brought forward in the minister’s winding-up speech. We also need clarification on public sector pensions. In his opening speech, the cabinet secretary said that, if he is forced to, he will increase employee pension contributions where required by the Westminster Government. He mentioned the teachers pensions scheme in that regard, but my understanding is that increasing contributions for that scheme is a matter for COSLA to implement. It is also my understanding that COSLA is not willing to do that. How will the cabinet secretary force it to do that—will he legislate or instruct it to carry out those changes? Funding for Scottish Water has been reduced, with worrying consequences, as the document admits. That will have an impact on infrastructure and the economy. The Government said previously that it was looking to allow Scottish Water to raise funds through the development of renewables. However, I cannot find anything in the document on this matter and information would be helpful. We read today that 12,000 houses in Glasgow were affected by high aluminium levels in water and that 17 recommendations have been made to prevent that from happening again. How can they be implemented if there are cuts of £120 million? Clarification is needed on the Tesco tax, which has been reintroduced in this budget. The cabinet secretary talked about £500 million being invested in a preventative spending initiative. It is not clear if all that money will be raised by the tax, nor is it clear how it will be shared between local authorities, NHS boards and the third sector. Will the money be ring fenced for preventative measures? When this proposal was made in the previous session, we realised that the devil was in the detail. Has the Government consulted properly and is it clear that it is in a position to bring forward such a policy? It would be interesting to hear the detail of that. Once again, there has been a cut in housing and regeneration funding. I understand that Shelter has described it as a “devastating” blow. The manifesto promised 30,000 social rented houses over the next session, but it is difficult to see how that can be delivered with funding being cut by almost £100 million over the next year alone, and falling further. Housing is important not just for those seeking it but for the economy. The construction industry is totally dependent on house building, as are those who live in fuel poverty and those who are homeless. It is difficult to see how the Government can meet its commitments and manifesto promises with such a cut in the budget. Another promise was that there would be no compulsory redundancies, but it is difficult to see how the Government can deliver on that. I am certainly aware that, instead of people being made redundant, their hours are being cut. For example, many home carers are low-paid women who work part-time, but they have had their hours cut. Providing home carers is preventative spending. If home care fails in the community, the cost falls on acute care in the NHS, which is much more expensive. The Government needs to oversee the impact of cuts to ensure that that does not happen, because it would mean an increased cost in real terms. The Government has pledged to protect front-line services, but it must ensure that it does so in reality. I turn to issues that were raised in the debate. Obviously, health is hugely important. Jackie Baillie pointed out that we lost 1,500 nurses last year and will lose another 1,000 this year. The Government promised that health spending and health budgets would be protected through consequentials. Again, though, I believe that it will be difficult for the Government to keep that promise. We proposed a single care service, which would have built in savings and efficiencies. I recommend that the Government revisit that proposal. On local authorities—and this impacts on job losses in front-line services—will the council tax freeze be fully funded? What will happen to the additional costs of borrowing that will fall on councils? I agree that we should raise capital spending as much as possible to create jobs and develop infrastructure, but we cannot let the cost of that fall on councils, which are then forced to fund front-line services. John Mason touched on the living wage and I was slightly bemused by that, because I understood that it was Government policy to provide a living wage in the public sector and possibly introduce a procurement bill that would provide it in the private sector for those who contract with the Government. However, that appears to be missing from the spending review document.

I am in my last minute. Another significant piece missing from the spending review is the funding for the independence referendum. I may have missed it, although I went through the document in some detail and could not find it. I would have thought that it would have been up there in lights, but it does not appear to be. It is maybe buried in the detail. Maybe the Government has seen sense and decided to ditch it. It is difficult to complain about spending levels when advocating further cuts in spending through lowering corporation tax, so the Government must be careful about how it deals with that. The SNP knew what the bottom line was when it wrote its manifesto. Those were not fantasy figures and we must hold the SNP to its promises to the Scottish people, because they delivered the SNP a majority to deliver on the promises. We will hold the Government to account while it does that.

I, too, welcome the strategy and some of the new commitments within it, such as using renewables to fight fuel poverty, the one-plus scheme to help sole traders to take on a new employee or apprentice and, indeed, more apprenticeships. I welcome the fact that the Government has adopted our policies in those areas. However, there are areas in the strategy that need more detail. I beg the indulgence of the chamber and return to the issue of broadband. I will update members on what has happened since last week. In the programme for government debate, I mentioned that Alex Neil had refused to meet community groups that were considering last-mile solutions for broadband. I very much welcomed Alex Neil’s change of heart when I read in The Press and Journal today that he is now going to meet the Tegola project developers. I hope that, after that meeting, he will visit the communities and see the systems working for himself. I am pleased that that has happened and that the minister has agreed to do that. Buoyed by that success, I will keep pushing. If we are serious about growing our economy across Scotland, we need to invest in broadband. Remote rural communities have the most to gain from digital connectivity when the Government continues to deliver more and more services digitally. Not long ago, I complained bitterly that the rural development programme could be accessed only digitally, which was a bit of a slap in the face for communities who would love to apply in that way if only they could. The delivery of health services could also be vastly improved by the technology. However, it is arguable that good connectivity could have the greatest impact on our rural economies, as it would bring manufacturing businesses closer to their markets, and other industries such as backroom support, accountancy and finance could operate anywhere in the United Kingdom. Both in the Highlands and Islands and in the south of Scotland, we now have projects that are working towards increasing connectivity, but the Scottish Government must ensure that all public bodies get behind them. There is no point in developing different systems for different public bodies. Procurement of connectivity must come from the public purse and not from individual silos. I look forward to seeing the detail of the next generation digital fund, and I hope that it will build on those projects. Last-mile technologies are cheap to install and could be self-funding. Richard Baker talked about the idea of an infrastructure bank that could lend the capital that was required, which could be repaid to the bank through subscription for use of that technology. The strategy document also mentions the use of renewables to tackle fuel poverty. Not only would that tackle fuel poverty, it would create jobs, boosting the economy while creating a fair platform for our fuel poor. The infrastructure bank that we propose would be ideally placed to finance microrenewables. The feed-in tariffs would pay back the investment, meaning that those who were unable to raise capital would not be left behind. Along with other members, I met members of the Federation of Master Builders last night, who told us that promoting insulation and microrenewables would not only help the fight against fuel poverty but provide an economic boost for small and medium-sized building firms that currently feel excluded from the public capital works due to the setting up of procurement hubs.

Indeed, I would. I spoke to Scottish Water today and was interested to see how it uses renewables to meet its very high fuel demands. That is an interesting development that I would like Scottish Water and other organisations to build on. I turn back briefly to the procurement hubs, which were an issue that was mentioned last night. Someone commented to me that, because the hubs are the main contractors, they would not be able to involve smaller contractors and subcontract the business. I was told, “You wouldn’t feed the neighbour’s kids if your own were starving.” That says clearly to me that the procurement through hubs will not be devolved to small and medium-sized businesses, which are the backbone of our economy. Fergus Ewing was there last night and promised to meet those business organisations to see whether he could find a resolution to the problem. I very much hope that that will happen. We cannot talk about the economy without talking about the labour force survey. It is sad that young people are losing out because employers are not recruiting and because small and medium-sized enterprises are not taking on apprentices. The unemployment rate among young people is at its highest since January 1997. It is equally worrying that the number of women who are out of work is increasing and is at its highest rate since 1996. I have heard anecdotal evidence that those who deliver front-line services in the public sector, such as classroom assistants and home carers, are feeling the brunt of the cuts. I ask the Government to deal with that. The Presiding Officer is looking at me, so I will conclude. I hope that the Government will provide the conditions and the infrastructure and will instruct public bodies to protect front-line services.

There is much to welcome in the legislative programme, but there are also huge gaps, which show a lack of ambition for Scotland. For instance, I welcome the proposal to use public procurement to increase apprenticeships and the aspiration to make more public procurement contracts available to small and medium-sized enterprises. However, there is no public procurement bill in the legislative programme. A bill could have promoted environmental, social and financial sustainability. For example, the Government has climate change and carbon reduction targets, none of which is included in public procurement. Contracts do not take account of a supplier or contractor’s distance from the organisation with which it is contracting, although being a distance away adds food miles and material miles. I have experienced large suppliers being given contracts on the basis that the local supply chain is too small and fragile, without account being taken of the environmental impact of transporting goods over long distances and without account being taken of price. Local contractors are often able to supply at a much lower price. Contracts do not take account of social sustainability, either. Contractors should be legally obliged to pay the living wage not just to staff who are involved in the contract but to all their staff. Indeed, a contractor should be paying its staff a living wage before it is allowed to bid at all. We need to ensure that small and medium-sized enterprises have a chance in bidding for public contracts. The Western Isles schools contract was far too big to allow the islands’ builders even to tender for it; they did not have the economies of scale that would enable them to complete the contract in the given time. The Government needs to look at how it spends its capital moneys, to allow smaller contracts to be put out to tender, with longer lead times. The hubs that the Scottish Government is promoting push out all other contractors. Large contractors and very small contractors will not get a look-in in the current economy. We need to legislate to ensure that contractors have proportionate disabled employment. Disabled people tend not to get employed and have great difficulty in securing employment. We could say to contractors that to be able to contract publicly they must have a percentage of registered disabled workers on their books. Local employment and service procurement would have to be in the contracts, too. We must look at best value, by which I mean best value to the public purse and not just to the organisation that is procuring. We need to get out of the silo mentality and consider the knock-on costs to other agencies. What impact does bringing in workers from another area have on a local economy, when enterprise companies are trying to create jobs locally? The cost of unemployment is huge and needs to be considered. A procurement bill could have had an impact on such issues, which are crucial to recovery. I welcome the acknowledgement in “Renewing Scotland: The Government’s Programme for Scotland 2011-2012” that broadband is hugely important to the Scottish economy and I look forward to seeing the detail of the next-generation digital fund. However, no legislation is proposed. Legislation could have made an impact. Planning regulations could have been changed, to insist that fibre cable is included in every new development. Legislation could have provided for the setting up of a public record of where spare capacity and fibre are available. I talked to Scottish and Southern Energy in the summer and it is clear that fibre is available on its pylons. The Beauly to Denny line will have excess fibre available, which other organisations could use. SSE suggested to me that fibre might also be available from Network Rail, Scottish Water and other organisations. However, the information is not made public and is not available to anyone who wants to plan for rolling out broadband. We must consider how we use the public infrastructure. Highland Council’s pathfinder network is not available for remote and rural communities to use to access broadband. The Government’s aspiration is that next-generation broadband will be available by 2020. The Royal Society of Edinburgh said that broadband should be available for all communities by 2015. There are community solutions available. There are last-mile developments. I wrote to the minister and asked him to come and look at some of those developments, but he refused to come—he said, “Speak to my officials.” The issue is of absolute importance if we are going to get people connected. The areas that can benefit most from broadband connectivity are the remote and rural areas. If the minister cannot be bothered to come and see them, we will never find a solution to the problem. Industry has said that, unless the Government gets involved, island communities will be left behind. The Government criticises Broadband Delivery UK. So do I. Its funding is inadequate. However, it tells me that the Government has not engaged with it. I encourage the Government to engage with BDUK as a matter of urgency. I have many more points to make, but I am aware of the time, so I will close on the very important point that broadband is essential to our recovery and our infrastructure.

Does Jean Urquhart agree that if Highland Council tenants had agreed to transfer their housing, their debt would have been wiped out and the council would now be in a position to invest more in council housing?

I want to ask the minister about some of the targets in the 2020 document. The Scottish Government proposes 375 new electric vehicle charging points; we in the Labour Party have proposed 10,000 charging points by 2015. Will the Government review its commitment, bearing in mind that 20 per cent of carbon emissions come from transport? The Government’s target for renewable heat is also reasonably modest, at 11 per cent by 2020. Current output is ahead of the Government’s trajectory, so will the Government increase that target too?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that, due to distances that have to be travelled in the Highlands and Islands, health boards in those areas will incur further costs with the increase in VAT on fuel. Will she join us in calling on the Westminster Government to reduce VAT on fuel?

I welcome this debate, which is of crucial significance to many of my constituents who would dearly love to have access to broadband. There are particular issues with regard to connectivity in rural areas. Peter Peacock, in his speech to Parliament last year, welcomed the “Digital Britain” report’s recognition that private markets would not provide broadband to large parts of the UK. He spent a long time fighting for recognition of the need for broadband in our rural areas, and I am happy to continue that work. I am pleased that the issue appears to have won recognition among all the parties, and that members are aware of the significance of such infrastructure and the need for access. In rural areas, connectivity will allow us to break down geographical barriers and save costs in service delivery. It can boost our economy by encouraging businesses in, and it can improve the competitiveness of our indigenous businesses. It can also allow access to jobs through teleworking, on which companies such as BT have led the charge, with many of their employees working from home. Connectivity is important for the delivery of education. The University of the Highlands and Islands has been a leader in online education, but we are only scratching the surface in that regard. Due to numbers, rural schools do not have the same depth of curriculum choice as urban schools do. If we co-ordinated timetables across a number of schools, that would allow pupils more choice because they could access classes in other schools through information technology. They would have access to education without having to travel large distances. Fiona McLeod talked about telehealth, which hardly needs an introduction. Connectivity can deliver health benefits close to home in rural areas at a fraction of the cost, and that is just a flavour of the benefits that it can provide. However, the Government’s targets for Scotland lack ambition. Private markets will not provide broadband to rural Scotland without Government intervention, so the Government’s offer to facilitate collaboration is not enough, and nor is the target that it sets out in the report “A Digital Ambition for Scotland” of getting superfast broadband to all by 2020. As Elaine Murray said in her opening remarks, the Royal Society of Edinburgh’s “Digital Scotland” report is far more ambitious and suggests that it would be possible to provide that access by 2015. We must look at what other countries are doing. Finland has made access to broadband a legal right—95 per cent of its population already have access—but it is legislating to ensure that the hard-to-reach areas are not left behind. It has vowed to have everyone connected to at least 100 megabits by 2015.

I am aware that the power lies with Westminster, but I would like the ambition of this Parliament and this Government to be for us to have what other countries have promised and developed. France’s courts have declared that access is a human right, and the United Nations shares that view. We need to be more ambitious. We need to ensure that, within our powers, which are many, we have a target that is ambitious for Scotland. There are challenges, in that the technology moves on quickly. The Government has invested in solutions—connected communities and Avanti are two—but they are not a panacea because the technology keeps moving on. I am delighted that HIE has received funding from broadband delivery UK to pilot delivery of superfast broadband in rural areas. That is now out to tender. It is clear to me that, in order to bring connectivity to rural areas, we require a mix of technologies. Communities have often taken matters into their own hands—examples include the Tegola project in Skye and the Rutland project in Leicestershire—but Government sometimes hampers those efforts. The Tegola trial in Knoydart, which was capable of delivering speeds of 100 megabits, was hampered and halted by bureaucracy. Highland Council refused to allow access to its pathfinder network until its security and contractual concerns could be satisfied. That is bureaucracy standing in the way of progress. Last week, I received an e-mail from a constituent saying that he was reconsidering a business move to the Western Isles due to the lack of broadband service. The Tolsta community council in Lewis secured some LEADER funding back in December to provide two broadband relay sites to enable an extension of connected communities. Fortunately, my constituent is now going ahead with the move after we advised him of that. That example highlights the fact that communities have the will to find solutions. The LEADER funding is welcome, but we need more of it. Improvements to the mobile networks are also essential. Mobile telephone company 3 has four 3G masts in the Western Isles and it has told us that it is keen to expand services in the area. It believes that there is a demand for that, and so do I. However, such expansion depends wholly on its ability to acquire low-frequency spectrum in next year’s mobile spectrum auction. I sincerely hope that Ofcom follows through on the proposal to stimulate competition in the mobile markets. The recent consultation on opening up mobile spectrum is most welcome. I welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to broadband, but it needs to do more. It needs to use all the resources that are available to it. This is probably the most important infrastructure development that we will have in the current decade. I will meet Scottish and Southern Energy in the next few days to discuss how spare capacity in the fibre optic cable that will run on the Beauly to Denny line can be used to improve connectivity. The SNP stated in its manifesto that it would provide £50 million from the Scottish futures fund. That is a start, but more will be needed. Private industry alone will not sort it out. If sufficient public funding is in place, the industry will invest. BT has given us a briefing on its investments, but we also need the Government to become involved. It needs to lever in more investment than it proposes at present. That should be a priority for the new borrowing powers, given that the investment can create savings to the public purse. Failure to act will leave our rural communities at a great disadvantage both socially and economically.

I have questions in response to the cabinet secretary’s answer to Gavin Brown. Which projects were brought forward for funding from next year to this year? What is the value of those projects and the subsequent savings in relation to next year’s budget? Is one of those projects the first foot scheme, which the cabinet secretary recently announced? How does he intend to spend the £130 million end-year flexibility money that he has been able to carry forward? In light of the Christie commission report, will he look at funding preventative spending measures, such as reinstating the healthy living centres?

I, too, welcome the cabinet secretary and the minister to their new posts. Infrastructure is the backdrop from which other things that we do grow. We need infrastructure to access services and grow our economy. It is for the Government to provide and manage the provision of infrastructure through its own funding and through the planning system. Where private development puts pressure on infrastructure or requires infrastructure upgrades, it is for the planning system to ensure that that requirement is met and obligations are placed on developers. Where private developers do not find the development of infrastructure to be economically viable, the Government must step in. That is why this wide-ranging debate is so important. I want to touch on some topics that have been raised. Many members have emphasised the importance of housing. In his opening speech, Lewis Macdonald talked about the SNP’s promise in its manifesto to have 6,000 socially rented houses. I hope that the SNP will take the opportunity that is provided by the debate to emphasise that it will stick to that target. If it will not do so, will it say what its target is? Malcolm Chisholm said that he has been told locally that that target will not be met and, indeed, that there will be cuts in socially rented housing development in his area. Paul Wheelhouse also touched briefly on the matter. He used his time to talk about reserved issues, but he also talked about the housing association grant, which has been halved in recent years. That will not help the Government to meet its targets. We need good-quality housing, because housing impacts on people’s health. Margaret McDougall made that point. How can we meet such targets if there is a 30 per cent drop in the housing budget? Not only does investment in housing bring economic benefits; it brings jobs and apprenticeships and boosts local economies. Investment in good-quality housing delivers health and wellbeing for those who live in it. In his opening remarks, the cabinet secretary said that the funding that has been put aside has already been oversubscribed. That is worrying. We understand that housing associations used to be front funded for new developments, but that has changed, and they are now end funded. That means that there was a peak in housing development last year, but it leaves us with problems for the future. How will that budget be managed without end-year flexibility? If housing development is back funded, how can we be sure when the development will be complete and when the funding will be drawn down? The Government needs to think about those issues and how it will manage housing budgets in the future. I welcome the Government’s adoption of our first foot scheme for first-time buyers, which is an indemnity insurance that allows first-time buyers to put down a smaller deposit to buy a home. We fought for that in the election campaign, and I am pleased that the Government has adopted that policy. Chic Brodie and Maureen Watt touched on the huge issues of energy and investment in piers and harbours. How can we meet the Government’s renewables targets if we do not have piers and harbours that are able to deal with the traffic that will go through them to support that industry and its infrastructure? How will the Government provide funding for the necessary expansion and development of harbours? How will it consider transmission routes? There have been huge delays in the Beauly to Denny transmission line due to planning. I understand that we need further transmission routes if we are going to meet the 100 per cent target for electricity generated from renewable sources. It is not for the Government to provide those, but it is for the Government to provide the backdrop to enable that provision to happen quickly. Roads are another huge infrastructure issue. Very little has been said about roads, apart from about transgressing the M74. That joke has been done to death, but I wanted to use it again. Something that is not very funny is the quote from the transport minister, Keith Brown, in today’s Press and Journal, in which he says that it could take “decades” to upgrade the A9. Can we have a timeframe for it? People believed that it was going to come an awful lot sooner and, if we do not have a timeframe to debunk the “decades” comment, they will be left to believe that the north of Scotland has again been ignored with regard to infrastructure. There are many other issues that we must deal with, but I notice that I am running out of time. One such issue is water. Will a water bill be introduced? Will Scottish Water remain in public ownership? How will its borrowing powers be delivered, and how can it operate with a funding freeze? We need to look at how we progress capital funding mechanisms while allowing organisations to progress renewables in their own areas. Ferries are another huge issue. We need to see the outcome of the ferries review, but we also need to look at the Rosyth to Zeebrugge route, which Jim Hume and Helen Eadie mentioned. A number of members spoke about the trams. Mark McDonald and Marco Biagi were strident in their criticism, but I say to them gently—

I say to them that the mark of a good Government is not what it promises but what it delivers. I ask the Government to look at the trams project clearly and see whether it can deliver it. We need to emphasise housing, which fits with today’s Christie commission recommendations in that it can provide health benefits as well as homes and jobs.

On that note, where will the money come from for the upgrading of the A9? Will it take decades?

The cabinet secretary may be aware of calls by Calum MacDonald for a crofters renewables act, which would make it easier for crofters to develop renewables on their own land. Will he introduce such legislation or support a member’s bill on the subject?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that the NHS scheme is in surplus. What discussions has he had with the Treasury on that, given that an increase in contributions is tantamount to increasing taxation for health service workers at a time of pay restraint? Will he outline what power he has to act differently from the UK Government in respect of the various public sector schemes?

I welcome the debate, and I believe that we can reach some consensus on the issue—certainly in principle. Capital borrowing powers were introduced by the Calman commission and incorporated in the Scotland Bill. I took the opportunity to look at the Scotland Bill Committee’s report to find out what it said on the matter. Capital borrowing powers are probably the best-known borrowing powers. They are required for large-scale developments. The committee welcomed the proposal—as I imagine we all do. In the first years of the Parliament there were increases in public spending, and financing projects was not an issue. To an extent, public-private partnerships were used to borrow for projects, spreading the cost over the lifetime of a building. Budgets are now being cut, and they will continue to be cut for some time into the future. Against that backdrop, we need to develop large strategic projects such as the Forth replacement crossing, which threaten to consume most of our capital budget. The bill committee expressed concerns regarding the limits that had been set for borrowing. It is clear that the limits that will be required must be workable and affordable within our taxation revenue. There were concerns that the powers should be available earlier. I welcome today’s announcement that there might be progress on the matter—that the Westminster Government might be willing to allow the powers to come in earlier. I voice a note of caution, however. We are all agreed that we need borrowing powers, but it is not free money: the borrowing needs to be paid back with interest. In essence, it is a matter of bringing forward spending and spreading the cost of that spending over a longer period. The point is that the borrowing has to be paid for. The temptation will be to borrow to cover the shortfall in the budget but, in a climate of falling budgets, that will only impact more severely in coming years. When decisions are being made about borrowing, they must be based on borrowing being economically sensible, rather than politically expedient. The Parliament must assess the impact of borrowing on future spending. In the present climate, there is a temptation to spend to grow. I am not saying that we should not do that, but we need to ensure that that spending will lead to savings in the future that can offset the cost of the borrowing. There is a further borrowing power that has the potential to alleviate some of the pressure, depending on how it is set up. Short-term borrowing is designed to cover dips in the taxation that is collected. That is an important borrowing power if we are to raise and gather our own taxation. Because we have never used the Scottish variable rate of tax in the past, it has never been an issue before. Now that further taxation powers are being devolved under the Scotland Bill—powers that we will have to use in the future—it is imperative that we consider the issues very carefully. The borrowing powers must be workable, and they must give the Government of the day the flexibility to deal with peaks and troughs in income from taxation. The bill committee expressed concern about a number of issues in that regard. First, on the levels of taxation that will be forecast and any surplus or deficit that will be paid into or out of the Scottish cash reserve, the bill committee suggested that underspends should also be added to the reserve. That needs further investigation. Could that enable Governments to manage better their finances and budget for the future? The committee was also concerned that the forecast taxation income would be fixed throughout the spending review period, even if better estimates came to hand at a later date. If the banking crisis shows us anything, it is that we cannot foresee changes in our economic circumstances, which can change dramatically in a very short space of time. If we have to work within original estimates once a situation has changed dramatically, we could find ourselves in an extremely difficult position. If surpluses could be paid into the reserve, would that allow spending to be altered immediately to deal with changing situations? That point is worth exploring. It is my understanding that the current proposals only allow received taxation that is above the estimate to be added to the reserve. The bill committee suggested that short-term borrowing levels should be increased to reflect the level of taxation income and the percentage of fluctuations that could occur. However, the inability to change estimates might lead to a need for greater borrowing powers to cover deficits that could be created by sticking to estimates of income that had been set too high over a spending review period. The prudent way forward would be to work from the best estimations of taxation available at the time. If that was possible, and it was also possible to add to the reserve, could the money be used to offset future pressures on the budget? When borrowing was committed to fund capital spending, any reserve moneys could be used to offset the future costs of that, too. If such an ability to relieve pressure on future budgets is possible, it would mean spreading the cost even further by budgeting for it for the future. Such issues need to be carefully considered before the borrowing powers are finalised. The matter is crucial to our economy and our future. Therefore, I urge the Government to work constructively with the Westminster Government to explore the issues further. I also ask the Government to work with all parties in the Parliament to examine the implications of changes, so that we can ensure that the final settlement is in the best interests of the Scottish people.

Is the member seriously suggesting that we should have let the banks go down, with all the problems that that would have caused?

I welcome you to your new post, Presiding Officer. I also welcome the minister to his post, and I congratulate all the new members who have made their first speeches today, with such thoughtful contributions. There are many issues to debate regarding green energy, as our amendment shows. I will concentrate on wave and tidal energy. As the minister said, we are currently world leaders in research and development for wave and tidal energy, but we have some way to go before we can harness that power to make it contribute to our energy needs in the future. Although some people overestimate the potential production, it is clear that it can make a significant contribution to energy production. Tidal power is not weather dependent, which is one of the main concerns that has been expressed regarding wind power. We must renew our commitment to those technologies and their development. Much of the investment can come from the private sector, but we need to create the conditions and the infrastructure that keep the companies involved working in Scotland. I recently visited the European Marine Energy Centre in Orkney and was fascinated by what is being done there. EMEC, which is the first centre of its kind in the world, offers developers the opportunity to test prototypes in a range of wave and tidal conditions, from sheltered nursery sites through to fully worked-up, grid-connected open-water sites. I was struck by the facilities that are already in place, but it became clear that in order for the centre to be a focal point for research and development, further investment in infrastructure is needed. Companies tend to do their research and development elsewhere and to take their prototypes to Orkney for testing. It appears that we are missing an opportunity. If there were facilities in Orkney in which companies could work locally, companies could continue to develop their technologies on site. The approach would have the added benefit of creating an atmosphere of collaboration, which would speed up development. Companies might not want to move north in their entirety, but if facilities were available in the area there would be an opportunity for companies to base some of their work there. Companies also need to ensure that they have access to policy and planning expertise. The Government could lead the way in that regard. The minister talked about a one-stop shop for developers of renewable energy; it would be good if such an organisation could be based in Orkney, so that companies that are developing in the field could access it immediately. In the past, our investment in research and development, for example in oil and gas, has paid dividends. We need to ensure that we remain world leaders in tidal power. It would be unforgivable to lose that expertise and the inward investment that it will bring. We are importing technologies in which we failed to invest in the past—wind power is a recent example. We need to consider community benefit in the context of offshore generation. In the past, communities that have rights over land have been able to benefit financially from wind power, by becoming joint developers or by taking a percentage dividend because of the loss of amenity in their area. The issue is much more complex in relation to offshore energy. There are obvious benefits to the public purse, which will be gained through taxation, but those benefits will bypass local communities. We have seen that happen in communities that gained nothing from onshore wind farms in their locality, which created very little by way of local jobs and community benefit. When people were investing in oil and gas, Shetland set up an oil fund, which continues to benefit the communities. Shetland also gained the jobs and inward investment that developments in oil and gas brought. The wider community will continue to benefit from the oil fund. Mary Scanlon was critical of Viking Energy, which is partly owned by the fund, but the company will consider investing in renewables, which will secure the community benefit for future generations, so we need to consider the situation.

I concur with Mary Scanlon that anyone who is developing onshore or offshore energy needs to work with the local community. My point is that communities need to benefit from developments in their locality. We cannot generate electricity without having a grid that is capable of transporting the energy to population centres. There is an argument for basing onshore wind power generation near population centres, but that does not apply to wave and tidal power, which is always generated in our most remote areas. I have been told that the west coast of Lewis is probably one of the most productive sites for wave and tidal power, but the interconnector there is already at full capacity. The matter needs to be dealt with now, and I ask the minister to update us on progress on the interconnector when he sums up. Renewables technology will continue to be expensive for some time, as is always the case when research and development are required. However, it will help to reduce our carbon footprint, so as a society we must be prepared to invest. As Mark Griffin said, we must take seriously the challenges of fuel poverty. Microrenewables are affordable for people who have money to invest; people who suffer from fuel poverty and would benefit from microrenewables do not have money to invest. We need to ensure that the Government deals with the issue and sets up the structures that will allow people who suffer from fuel poverty to invest in renewable technologies.

I congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing the debate. She was right to pay tribute to Dorothy-Grace Elder, but Mary has taken up the role of being an advocate for chronic pain services and has kept the subject very much within the view of the whole Parliament and the Health and Sport Committee. I am sure that the Minister for Public Health and Sport will agree with that—she probably does not get much peace from Mary Scanlon on this subject. Mary Scanlon’s motion mentions the centre of excellence in Bath. Those who access that centre will testify to the good work that is done there. It makes a huge difference to people’s lives if they get the right treatment, not just for chronic pain but for hugely painful conditions such as rheumatic diseases and ME. The figure of £620,000 of costs since 2008-09 shows that only a very small number of people get to access that service. I have a fair amount of sympathy with what Mary Scanlon said about looking at the numbers and determining whether or not we need our own centre of excellence in Scotland. Given the changes that are taking place with the health service in England, it may be that the costs of using the centre of excellence in Bath will rise. This could be the time to carry out an audit to ascertain whether we can provide our own centre of excellence in Scotland. In a way, however, that does not deal with the problem of the distances that people must travel. Even if there were a centre of excellence in the central belt, it would be difficult for people in the Highlands and Islands, which I cover, to access it. It would be a good thing to build a centre of excellence, with specialists in the community who are much closer to patients and who could give them the help that they require. I note that referral rates are low. I have some sympathy with GPs who are not referring and who might instead be handing out painkillers. If the required services are not there and if there are long waiting times, GPs must feel frustrated in trying to deal with that. We need a good pathway, but the services need to be in place to help people. The costs of keeping people out of the workforce are huge and we need to factor them in, too. Jamie Stone mentioned telemedicine and Dunbar hospital. The issue is close to our hearts. Jamie, Mary Scanlon, David Thompson and I fought to keep open the rheumatology unit in Dingwall and we had a successful cross-party campaign. People saw the good of that service and the difference that it made to people’s lives. Luckily, that unit has been saved. The hospice service provides good advice and assistance to people who suffer chronic pain. It deals more with people with cancer, but there are times when hospice staff have gone out and helped people suffering from chronic pain for other reasons. That has been a huge boost for the people who have needed its services. Perhaps we should get those services to work together so that people in that situation can go to their GP and find a solution that allows them to live their lives and to be productive members of society in the long term.

I am very pleased that we have reached stage 3 of the bill and that its consideration is coming to an end. I tend to disagree with Ian McKee, in that I think that the bill is very technical, but I agree that it is incredibly important. As was said at stage 2 and again today, the Shipman inquiry led to the bill and our work on it to see how it would affect the issues raised. It was acknowledged early in the process that it would be impossible to stop another Shipman, but the bill might act as a deterrent. I hope that it will also lead to better recording of the reasons for death. I have a number of points on the pilots and implementation, and I make no apology for repeating much of what I said in the stage 1 debate. When I raised issues to do with the collection of fees by registrars and asked what would happen if a death were registered by a police officer or a neighbour, the minister said that she hoped that she could send out a reassuring message on that but, rather than reassurance, we need a clear solution. I ask her to bring forward such a solution, which should be available not only to people such as police officers, who might be asked to register a death, but to the likes of neighbours and friends of the deceased, who might wish to help a bereaved family in that way. I welcomed the minister’s assurance in the stage 1 debate that non-payment of the fee would not delay certification, but clear guidance must be provided so that registrars know what to do in the process. Another issue that I raised in the stage 1 debate was that of the delay that might be caused by a death being reviewed, which could be extremely distressing for cultural and religious reasons. The minister said that she would look at having test sites to see how the policy would work, and she suggested Glasgow as a possible test site for dealing with issues regarding faith groups. I welcome that commitment, but I ask that another of the test sites be in one of our island authority areas, where the local culture is that the body would normally remain at home prior to the funeral. That would enable us to look into how the operational issues could be dealt with in those areas. Given the timing of the bill and of the setting up of the pilots, it might not be possible to test the proposed system in the winter months, so I ask the minister to ensure that the people who work in the test site areas look at the implications of poor weather and possible transport disruption. Last weekend, I had an interesting experience travelling to Shetland, which took quite a while longer than I expected and included an overnight stay in Kirkwall in Orkney, as well as a visit to Aberdeen. That is frustrating enough for people who have plans, but it could be extremely distressing for a bereaved family that was waiting for a medical examiner to pitch up, as it could delay the making of funeral arrangements. The possibility of such delays might lead to a requirement for refrigerated mortuaries on our islands and in our remote communities, and that would come with an additional cost. Winter conditions are challenging for obvious reasons, but ferries and planes can also be affected during the summer months, when it can be difficult to get on and off islands because of tourist travel. In that period, it is often difficult to book a ferry or a plane ticket. We must ensure that the policy works in practice, otherwise it will lead to distress and possibly to additional costs for authorities that attempt to implement the bill. We must also ensure that our remote, rural and island communities receive a service and safeguards that are equivalent to those that more urban areas receive. A process needs to be put in place that will deal with all those issues and deliver the same protection for all our communities. The bill is technical, but it is important nonetheless, and we need to ensure that the system that it puts in place is right so that we can protect the people whom we seek to serve.

Before I speak to amendment 1, I thank the minister and his civil servants for their help in lodging the amendments. It was very much appreciated and I hope that we have reached consensus on them. Amendment 1 will make two changes to the bill as a consequence of the Damages (Scotland) Bill, which Parliament has recently approved. Stage 3 took place just the other week. Section 1 of the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill inserts a new section 8A into the Protection from Harassment Act 1997. Section 1(5) amends the definition of personal injuries in the Damages (Scotland) Act 1976 so that it covers section 8A of the 1997 act, as well as section 8. However, the Damages (Scotland) Act 1976 will be repealed by Bill Butler’s Damages (Scotland) Bill. Amendment 1 will therefore amend section 1(5) of the bill to delete the reference to section 10(1) of the 1976 act. Harassment leading to personal injury will be covered by the general definition of personal injury. Section 2 of the Damages (Scotland) Bill refers to section 8 of the 1997 act. That ensures that rights to damages that arise from actions of harassment under section 8 of the 1997 act will continue to transmit to the deceased person’s executor. Amendment 1 will amend section 2 of the Damages (Scotland) Bill so that it also extends to actions under new section 8A of the 1997 act. Given that stage 3 proceedings on the bills were held so close together, we were in a bit of a quandary about how best to deal with the changes, and the amendments were agreed as the best way forward. I doubt that any other bill has been amended as quickly as the Damages (Scotland) Bill has been following its passage at stage 3. I move amendment 1.

Amendment 2 will amend section 3(1)(za), so that it refers to the determination being granted under the new section that will be inserted by amendment 4. The effect is that section 3(1)(za) will no longer reflect the category of persons that are being protected by the interdict. Instead, it will refer to the determination made by the court under the new section that will be inserted by amendment 4. Under section 3(2), a person who breaches an interdict to which section 3 applies is guilty of an offence under section 3(1). The section applies when an interdict has been granted on or after the date on which the sections come into force, a determination has been made that the interdict is a domestic abuse interdict and the determination is in effect, and a power of arrest is attached to the interdict under the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001 and is in effect. Following amendment 1, a determination must also be made by the court that an interdict is a domestic abuse interdict and that that determination is in effect, together with a live power of arrest, for breach of the interdict to be a criminal offence. Amendment 3 is a consequential amendment, in that it ensures that the reference in section 3 to the term “interdict” including interim interdict extends to the new section that will be inserted by amendment 4. Amendment 4 makes a provision in relation to the determination by the court that the interdict is a domestic abuse interdict. Proposed new subsection (1) provides that a person who is applying for or has obtained an interdict may apply to the court “for a determination that the interdict is a domestic abuse interdict.” Under proposed new subsection (2), the court may make the determination only if “the interdict is, or is to be, granted for the protection of the applicant against a person who is (or was)— (a) the applicant’s spouse, (b) the applicant’s civil partner, (c) living with the applicant as if they were husband and wife or civil partners, or (d) in an intimate personal relationship with the applicant.” That last point is probably the most difficult in the bill. The Government amended the bill at stage 2 to include spouses, civil partners and cohabitees. However, the amendment removed boyfriends and girlfriends—people in a relationship who have not formalised the relationship and do not live together—from the bill’s protection. Approximately 11,000 cases of domestic abuse are reported to the police by people who fall into that category as current partners and almost 19,000 are reported by people in that category who are ex-partners. It is unreasonable not to protect such a large number of people in the bill. The Government agreed and we worked together to find a resolution to the problem. We were keen that the protection was not extended to family members, flatmates or business partners. The best way to define the category is “an intimate personal relationship”. By that phrase, we mean a relationship that spans from dating to one that is fully sexual, and the spectrum in between. It also covers same-sex relationships within that spectrum. It is difficult to determine when domestic abuse will start within a relationship; it depends on each individual offence. Amendment 4 also provides, in proposed new subsection (3), that “Before making a determination ... the court must give the person against whom the interdict is, or is to be, granted ... an opportunity to make representations.” Proposed new subsection (4) provides that the determination has “no effect for the purposes of section 3 until a copy of the interlocutor containing the determination has been served on” the interdicted person. That means that the breach of the interdict, and extant powers of arrest, is not a criminal offence until the court’s determination that the interdict is a domestic abuse interdict and that it has been served on the interdicted person. Proposed new subsection (5) provides that where the court varies the relevant interdict, it must review it to establish whether it is still a domestic abuse interdict and, if it is not, the court must recall the determination. Proposed new subsection (6) provides that if a determination is recalled it “ceases to have effect for the purposes of section 3”. That means that any breach of the interdict would not be a criminal offence. I move amendment 2.

I concur with what the minister said. The only thing that I would add concerns what Robert Brown said about latitude in the amendment. We have not defined domestic abuse on the face of the bill and, therefore, I think that it is only right to give the court some latitude in that regard. Amendment 2 agreed to. Amendment 3 moved—[Rhoda Grant]—and agreed to. After section 3 Amendment 4 moved—[Rhoda Grant]—and agreed to.

It gives me great pleasure to open the debate. The bill has taken a long time to bring forward, and there were times when I thought that we would never get here. Through the process, I have come to realise that there is a lot more to do in tackling domestic abuse—often, that knowledge almost derailed the bill. Everyone to whom I spoke had another list of things that needed to be done, but much of that work cannot, in my opinion, be done in a member’s bill—for example, making restriction orders easier to obtain and ensuring that the victim and children can remain in the home. Work also needs to be done to protect children from domestic abuse, as being a victim of such abuse damages their life chances. Scottish Women’s Aid carries out good work with children, but we are some way behind other countries in protecting children and repairing the damage that domestic abuse does to them. When I introduced the bill, I came up against human rights arguments. Although the clearest human rights argument I could find was that the state has a duty to protect citizens, that appeared to pale in comparison with the arguments that were put forward with regard to the offender’s rights. When the bill was first introduced it contained a section on access to legal aid, which was subsequently removed for two reasons, the first being a human rights one. If the victim got legal aid, the defendant would need to get it too. It appears that the needs of the perpetrator take precedence over those of the victim. I believe that human rights legislation is there to protect citizens and victims, not offenders. Until we get our interpretation of those laws right, they will remain a bone of contention. The second issue relating to legal aid was the inability to calculate the cost of the provisions in the bill. Legal aid that is paid in respect of domestic abuse is not measured separately, and there are therefore no robust figures to work from. That created enough doubt in Government and committee minds about the costs associated with the provision that they would not back it. Subsequently, the Scottish Legal Aid Board gave reassurance on their procedures for emergency situations, whereby victims who are fleeing abuse can access legal aid immediately, which enables them to access protection. Such procedures are required by those who qualify for legal aid but cannot prove it because they have no access to their own paperwork, having fled an abusive relationship, or by people who have funds but are unable to access them if that might lead the perpetrator to track them down. In both cases, emergency legal aid is available. In the second case, repayment or a contribution towards the costs would be required to be made only when it was safe for the person to access their funds. However, if such procedures are in place, why would the provisions in the bill have led to increased costs? Legal aid legislation allows ministers to make legal aid available, free from contributions, to people who are in such a position. Primary legislation would not be required. We are still picking up concerns about financial barriers to protection, and I urge the minister to examine that carefully and monitor the situation to find out whether such barriers exist. If they do, the cost for removing them should be brought back to the Parliament. Nobody should lack protection because of financial constraints; as a state, we have a duty to protect. The second contentious issue in the bill was the inclusion of boyfriends, girlfriends and partners who are not or were not cohabiting. We struggled to find a definition for those people after stage 2, and were in danger of omitting them from the bill’s protection. In 2009-10, the police recorded 11,000 domestic abuse incidents between partners and almost 19,000 incidents between ex-partners. We all know and use the terms “boyfriend”, “girlfriend” and “partner”, and we know what they mean. We know the nature of the relationship and we have no difficulty with it. It is disappointing that plain English does not suffice in legislation. I recently spoke to Maureen Macmillan, who told me that during the passage of the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Bill a similar problem with cohabitees arose—obviously, that is no longer a problem in law. Our legal system has to be fit for purpose. We need to use language that we all know and understand. That is a rant for another day, however. I hope that we will not have problems in defining boyfriends and girlfriends in future. The form of words that the Parliament agreed is “an intimate personal relationship”, a definition that covers the spectrum of boyfriend/girlfriend relationships and partners in a relationship. The spectrum needs to cover every stage of the relationship from the start right up where another definition, such as married or cohabitee, applies. It is also clear that the definition covers same-sex relationships. There were arguments about what stage of a relationship domestic abuse is likely to occur at and whether those who cohabit are at greater risk of abuse. It is clear from the figures that a significant number of people who suffer from domestic abuse do not live with the perpetrator. The bill must cover them. From anecdotal evidence, it is clear that domestic abuse can occur at any point in a relationship. In essence, domestic abuse is power-based abuse. It occurs when the perpetrator has the ability to exercise a degree of power over their victim. In some relationships, domestic abuse takes years to develop; in others, it takes just days. Someone does not have to share a home with the perpetrator to suffer, but if the victim is a cohabitee, they need further protection. That protection is not offered in the bill. I ask the Government to take on board the need for a review of the protection that is offered in law to victims of domestic abuse and their children. Domestic abuse does not happen only in relationships that are fully sexual—relationships in which intercourse has taken place. It is about not the degree of physical intimacy but the ability to exercise power and control and to coerce. We need to protect all those who fall victim to this horrendous crime—a crime that is perpetrated by a person who is supposed to love and protect but who instead hurts and humiliates. I ask members to support the bill at decision time. As I said, it is not the last word in tackling domestic abuse, but it is another step in the right direction. I look forward to the day when we as a Parliament and a society can eradicate this scourge. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I thank all members who took part in the debate for their kind words—in fact, their words were so kind that when Roseanna Cunningham came into the chamber she asked whether I was standing down at the election, because people were being so nice to me. I tell her that it is not my intention to stand down, but that is up to the voters. Before I address the points that arose in the debate, I will take a couple of minutes to thank some people, without whose help the bill would not be in front of us today. First, I thank all those who responded to the consultation. Special mention must go to Scottish Women’s Aid, both nationally and the various local offices. There are far too many people to mention, but I appreciate all their help, especially that of Louise Johnson, who helped every step of the way. I also need to thank my staff and researchers, who have come and gone over the piece. Special thanks go to Marian Grimes, who helped me focus, and Liza Gilhooly, who has accompanied me throughout the whole parliamentary process. I am sure that Liza will be delighted that Nigel Don has studied the financial memorandum, because she put a lot of blood, sweat and tears into it. I thank Unison, which sponsored the bill. I thank Dave Watson, Fiona Montgomery, Norma Black and Unison’s women’s committee. I also thank Norman MacAskill for designing the consultation document and Catriona Burness for pulling together case studies. A huge thank you goes to James Clark, because the bill would not have got to this stage without him. I also thank Clare Connelly, who came up with the solution for how the bill could be shaped to tackle the issues. Clare carried out the 2003 study on civil protection orders, “An Evaluation of the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001”, which gave her a clear understanding of what needed to be done. I also want to thank parliamentary staff—committee clerks and support staff. Mike Pringle said that they are sometimes the unsung heroes and I am very grateful for all their help and support. I need to extend a special thanks to the Parliament’s legislation team, who were wonderful, particularly Frances Bell. Frances was in the chamber for the earlier stages of the debate, when I was on my toes. One instance of how hard she works is that she phoned me at midnight over the Easter weekend last year, when she was still in the office and I was at home with a glass of wine. I am extremely grateful for that level of dedication. I thank the committees for their scrutiny of the bill, and Fergus Ewing and his staff and officials for their help in drafting the amendments and their work to solve some of the highly technical issues that we faced. I say a big thank you to Carol—that is not her real name—who allowed her story to be told to illustrate how the bill would help victims of domestic abuse. Last but not least, I thank Maureen Macmillan, who suggested the bill in the first place. I am not sure whether I should be thanking her or just saying, “That’s another fine mess you got me into.” I appreciate the really good comments that members made during the debate. I am grateful to the minister for undertaking to investigate the barriers that exist. The problem may not be with legal aid, but with solicitors who may not be using the available provisions. I would be grateful if that were looked at as part of the research that the minister is to have carried out. I am grateful to SLAB and the minister for agreeing to further publicise the protections that are available for people who suffer from domestic abuse. Robert Brown talked about the police and how they are now dealing seriously with domestic abuse. The bill will give them the tools that they badly need to help them to tackle the issue. The domestic abuse figures have fallen as a result of the work that they have been doing, and I hope that that will continue. Indeed, I hope that no victim will need to use the bill and that the police will offer them the assistance that they need without their having to go to court. Stewart Maxwell and Bill Butler reminded us of the need for legislation by giving us stark statistics that highlight why we need to protect people. James Kelly said that the bill will improve access to justice and protection, and I very much hope that it will. Bill Aitken said that he hoped that I did not think that I was getting half a loaf; I do not. I am very pleased with the support that I have had, for which I am extremely grateful, and I thank Bill for his help throughout the process. As others said, non-harassment orders will be much easier to obtain. As Bill Butler said, it was wrong that a course of conduct had to be shown before someone could get a non-harassment order. The bill will stop that happening. It will also mean that the state will deal with breach of domestic abuse interdicts. Nigel Don suggested that perhaps we should go further and have the state deal with all breaches of interdicts, but I, for one, am pleased that the bill will mean that people who suffer from domestic abuse will get that specific protection. Victims will no longer be responsible for going back to court to get redress. A number of members, including Richard Baker and Stewart Maxwell, talked about the increase in domestic abuse that takes place around Christmas, around football matches and around alcohol consumption, but let us be clear that there is no excuse for domestic abuse—none of those things is an excuse for it. As I said, the bill is not the last word on domestic abuse. It is merely another step along the way. I hope that a day will come when, as a society, we will not tolerate such abuse and victims will no longer live in fear.

As the member is aware, many small rural filling stations have told us about the high cost of wholesale fuel, which puts pressure on their businesses and, indeed, can make them unsustainable. How could we help those filling stations to stay in business? After all, the further that people have to travel to access fuel, the higher the cost they will have to pay.

I am pleased to speak in this stage 3 debate on what is a very much improved bill. As other members have said, the Health and Sport Committee could not recommend the bill to the Parliament at stage 1. Basically, the bill as introduced did not improve patient rights and was in danger of creating a hierarchy of rights, by emphasising those in the bill and unintentionally undermining those that were not in the bill. The bill as introduced provided no new rights in relation to the complaints procedure and was in danger of creating different systems in different areas. I am glad that the bill has now been improved sufficiently to allow all parties in the Parliament to pass it today. There are still patients who feel that the bill does not go far enough, but it is difficult to retain a health service based on mutuality if it is also surrounded by litigation. I hope that the bill will ensure that problems can be dealt with before they reach the stage of litigation and that patients will always be afforded dignity and the involvement that they should have in their care. If that happens, litigation will not be necessary other than in extreme circumstances. It is also clear that there is a fine balance between rights and responsibilities in the health service. We need a health service that is based on mutual respect between all staff and patients. There must also be respect throughout the ranks of the health service, where old-fashioned hierarchies often still exist. The bill has been amended to instruct the Government to pull together all patient rights into a patient rights charter—a single point of reference that encompasses all rights and responsibilities. Every patient has the right to the same level of respect, treatment and involvement in their care, regardless of their age and circumstances. I was dismayed recently to see that elderly patients do not always appear to receive the same level of care as patients in other areas. Staffing levels appear to be different, as are basic resources such as blankets and pillows. That is unacceptable. Elderly patients have the same rights as everybody else; indeed, because they are more vulnerable, they should probably receive more care. The bill means that NHS boards will have to uphold the health care principles rather than have regard to them. The first principle is: “anything done in relation to the patient must take into account the patient’s needs”. That can only benefit elderly patients. The bill has also been amended to allow the patient advice and support service to provide holistic advice and support. We received evidence that the citizens advice bureaux currently provide a holistic service in that they advise on patient rights and complaints but can also offer advice to the same patients on much wider issues such as benefits. When people are unwell, an additional burden is placed on them if they have to access a number of agencies to receive the help and advice that they require. The CABx’ one-stop-shop approach is really helpful and means that the adviser has a full picture of the patient’s needs. The one problem with the existing service is that it is not uniform across NHS boards—it is up to individual boards to contract for the service. Some boards take it seriously, funding and advertising it properly, but others do not. That means that there is a postcode lottery regarding service levels. Following amendment, the bill now builds on the best practice of the old service and should ensure that a uniform service is provided throughout all health board areas. The bill brings something new and meaningful to patients by creating a charter of all rights, and it will make those rights much more transparent and accessible to patients. It will also ensure that patients receive the advice and assistance that they require. However, it will not be the last word on patient rights; it will be for successive Governments to build on the health care principles and ensure that the health service delivers for patients. They will also need to ensure that there is equity of resource, to empower staff to deliver those principles across all disciplines.

I welcome this debate on early intervention in health and education, which is crucially important to future generations. Every child deserves a good start in life regardless of where and to whom they were born. When we took evidence in the Health and Sport Committee on spending priorities a couple of years ago, I remember that the evidence was stark. We were told that the health budget should be targeted towards the early years, as those years will impact on a child’s mental and physical health throughout their lives. The children who face the biggest disadvantage are those whose parents are drug or alcohol dependent. Without support, their future mental health suffers because they do not learn resilience. As a society, we have a big job to do to protect those young people. There is always a dilemma about what form intervention should take. There are those who would remove children from their home where their parents are drug or alcohol dependent, and I have some sympathy with that view. However, history has shown us that looked-after children can be more vulnerable than those who are left at home. A child may be reluctant to seek help and confide in adults if they are afraid that speaking out will lead to them being taken into care and removed from their parents. Parental love is probably the most important thing for a child when they are growing up, but wider family support is also crucial. Children of addicted parents are likely to suffer from poverty, poor housing and poor nutrition, and they are less likely to participate fully in education. Those are dangerous conditions for a child’s development and welfare, and we often see several generations of the same family suffering from the same problems. Children need the state to intervene to help them to break the cycle, and it will never be a cheap option. The best way of doing that is working with the family. That work must be intensive and continuous, because a lifestyle that has been learned over generations cannot be put right by a couple of short parenting classes. Resources are tight, and finding funding for such intensive intervention is not easy. However, if we do not fund it, the costs to us will be even higher, because it is also clear that the later the intervention, the greater the cost. I remember the discussion in the Health and Sport Committee in which it was suggested that we should concentrate all our efforts on children and forgo any intervention with the parents, but I find that approach difficult because parents are the most important influence on a child’s life. Helping the parent will ultimately help the child. However, the later in a person’s life that intervention happens, the higher the cost to the person and to wider society. If the intervention comes only when the child grows up and becomes a parent, the problem has doubled. Therefore, it is imperative that at-risk groups are identified quickly. Other issues besides living in poverty and having parents with addiction problems indicate which children are most at risk. They include living in disadvantaged areas, being brought up in households in which there are poor parenting skills or in which there is conflict and domestic abuse, and living in a home where they are not provided with adequate support, perhaps because of illness or disability. Health visitors have their part to play, as their intervention with the family during the early years will pick up those issues and they are able to guide parents towards solutions. However, we cannot leave it to one group of professionals alone. If we do that, we will fail. For example, midwives interact with women in pregnancy. Early intervention should start at that stage. Drug and alcohol consumption, as well as a poor diet, in pregnancy can affect the unborn child. Greater reporting to social work and child protection agencies should be encouraged through continuous professional development within the health and education sectors. The Benefits Agency also has a role to play but seldom gets involved. Anyone on benefits will be pretty close to poverty. Surely staff in the benefits offices have a role in identifying those who are at risk and pointing them to support services. A study this week showed that children who had poor diets and ate more processed food at the age of three had lower intelligence quotients in future years. How do we tackle that? We all know that processed food is cheaper. Some families really cannot afford to provide a balanced, healthy diet. The Labour Party has long promoted policies to help young people in that position. We introduced free nursery care, breakfast clubs and the child trust fund, increased child benefit and introduced tax credits that were designed to lift children out of poverty. The Conservative party in the Parliament has used its debating time to highlight the importance of early intervention. I am grateful for that, but I say to the Conservative members—this is meant to be constructive—that they should try to extend their influence to their Conservative colleagues in Westminster, impress on them the importance of the issue and urge them to stop dismantling the much-needed support that vulnerable families receive. They should ask their Westminster colleagues not to freeze child benefit and to remove the restrictions on family tax credits. Yesterday, I listened to news reports that child care is more expensive in Scotland. That prevents low-income parents from working and damns their children to poverty. The abolition of the child trust fund also takes money from the most needy in our society. I was also horrified to hear that the Child Support Agency will top-slice absent parents’ contributions to their children’s upbringing. That literally takes the food out of the mouths of children. The Conservative party would do us all a great service if it used its influence with its Westminster colleagues to stop those policies, but we cannot forget about the cuts that are being imposed on local authorities by yesterday’s SNP Government budget, which the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats in the Parliament supported. The budget will lead to the closure of breakfast clubs, as well as to cuts in the numbers of teachers and support staff—the very professionals who are trained to assess children’s needs. We owe it to future generations to get it right. By getting it right for every child, we benefit not only financially but as a society.

I imagine that the hospital will need to be replaced, because I do not think that it is fit for purpose. It is not possible even to move trolleys around the building, because the corridors are so narrow. When the cabinet secretary is considering the matter, will she also look at the accident and emergency part of the hospital? There is no piped oxygen and the facilities are not really capable of dealing with some of the emergencies that come in. Although staff are not trained to do so, they need to hold patients while they wait for emergency retrieval teams to come. They must have the expertise and equipment that are required to keep people stabilised at that point.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans there are to secure a specialist MS nurse for the Western Isles. (S3O-12872)

The Scottish Government currently pays centrally for patient travel. If NHS Western Isles appointed a specialist MS nurse, there would be savings to that centrally held budget. Will the minister consider making some of those savings available to the NHS board to enable it to employ a specialist MS nurse so that the public purse saves overall?

I, too, have had many constituents contact me on the issue. There is a lot of concern in the Dunoon area. Some of them have pointed out to me that the community was involved in setting up the hospice in the first place. Can the cabinet secretary give the health board some guidance on how to deal with situations in which a community has set up a service that the health board subsequently wants to take over and change?

This was not the most gripping of bills, but it is safe to say that it is one that will affect us all eventually. The bill seeks to change the process under which death certification is carried out. As the minister said, the work towards the bill was instigated as a result of the Shipman inquiry and the need to try to provide more robust checks. However, witnesses told us that, if anything, the bill will give less protection. Evidence also stated that the sample to be reviewed was not of any statistical use and would act only as a deterrent rather than provide adequate scrutiny—even though the Government has stated that it will raise the sample size to 4 per cent. In evidence we were told that a sample of 10 per cent would be required to pick up any anomalies. The policy memorandum stated that the average time to organise a funeral is around seven days and that, therefore, there is ample time to carry out the review without delaying the burial process. However, that does not take account of social customs or religious beliefs that dictate a much quicker burial. The Jewish and Muslim communities require burial to be on the day of death if at all possible. Their formal grieving process cannot start until the burial has taken place. Therefore, any delay will lead to further distress. The Government responded to those points by saying that medical reviewers would have the flexibility to fast-track the process to deal with those issues. In response to that, we have had further written evidence from the Scottish Council of Jewish Communities, which suggests some fairly straightforward remedies that would speed up the process. It has asked that the bill be amended to require a presumption that registration take place in parallel with a review. It would be for the medical reviewer to state if that was not the case. The council also asked that it be clear in the bill that the expedited procedure permits disposal as well as registration. That way, funeral directors would begin their work immediately. Otherwise, they would wait until the body was released for disposal before making arrangements, which would build in a further delay. The council states that there should be an out-of-hours service and that adequate cover should be available when the reviewer is attending to their training duties. It went on to quote a case where there was a delay in burial due to a registrar being unable to register a death timeously because they were taken up with other duties—I think that they were conducting weddings on that day—which meant that the funeral was delayed, which caused the family further distress. Our laws need to be sensitive to those needs. In our rural and island communities, there are customs that require rapid burial on a timescale of two to three days after death. The deceased’s body is normally brought home, where it remains until the funeral. In some communities, family and friends are able to view the body at this time, which is essential to them in their grieving process. If there was a delay in burial, the body would need to be stored in refrigerated conditions. That poses two issues. First, it would mean that the bereaved could not take the remains home, which would give rise to distress. Secondly, as Ishbel Gall from the Association of Anatomical Pathology Technology—that is hard to get my tongue round at this time of night—pointed out, there are very few mortuaries in remote and rural communities, and where they exist they are not likely to be refrigerated. If storage is not available locally, bodies need to be kept some distance away. With regards to island communities, that could culminate in delays to funerals, if weather conditions delay the movement of the body, and it would add to funeral costs and arrangements. Delay can also be caused by access to a medical reviewer. Their numbers are limited and it is unclear where they will be situated. If every island group were to have its own reviewer, few would be based in the centres of population. If they are not based on islands and in rural communities, what happens when a body is randomly selected for review? In normal circumstances, the reviewer would have to make travel arrangements to get to islands, which can be challenging for a range of reasons, but would probably take longer than two to three days, which is the normal timescale for burial in those communities. We should also remember that flights and ferries can often be full in the summer, because of holidaymakers, or cancelled or delayed in the winter, because of adverse weather conditions. A process must be put in place that deals with all those issues but which is still able to deliver the same level of protection to the communities that are affected. I welcome the minister’s commitment to considering the matter and working with those communities to find solutions to those issues. There was some debate about who would collect fees for the process. The general consensus was that registrars should collect the fees, because that is the one duty that is carried out in relation to death. However, registrars were not keen on that. They felt that that could delay registration of death, because deaths are not always registered by family members or people with an interest in the estate. Quite often, a neighbour, a funeral director or a police officer registers a death, and they are not in a position to pay the fee. The Government needs to consider what can be done in such a situation to ensure that people do not put off registering deaths. On the whole, this is a technical bill, which means that the community is dependent on experts who give evidence. There are tensions in the bill between keeping down costs and providing a robust service. It is clear that the bill will impact on people when they are especially vulnerable, so we need to ensure that what is in place is sensitive to community traditions as well as to religious beliefs. I believe that there is a will to get it right, and I hope that the Government will take those suggestions on board.

The issue was about when the police or a neighbour or someone who might not want a copy of the death certificate registers the death to help the bereaved family, or because the family is not around, for example. The registrars felt that those people might not be so willing to go along because they would be faced with having to pay a fee when it is not their role to do so; it is more appropriate for the family or estate to make that payment.

Highland Community Care Forum has supported service users and carers throughout the Highlands for more than 19 years. It receives much of its core funding from Highland Council and NHS Highland. Its role is to offer advice to carers and service users and to build capacity in communities. It operates through a headquarters and 11 local area forums that are based throughout the Highlands. The forums are directly supported by seven workers. Carers in every area of Scotland talk about the isolation that they feel when they first become full-time carers and the difficulty that they have in accessing services. The geography of the Highlands only adds to that isolation, so Highland Community Care Forum is a lifeline for carers in the area. The forum’s current contract is for a number of services. The mental health aspect of collective advocacy is delivered through Highland users group—HUG—while the learning disability aspect is delivered through people first. The forum also tackles the stigma that is attached to mental health; provides an individual advocacy service for carers; supports service user and carer involvement, engagement and consultation; and supports young carer involvement, engagement and consultation. Part of the contract is being renegotiated, part is being retendered, and the part that deals with service user and carer involvement, engagement and consultation is being ended, with the consultation aspect being brought in-house. The combined impact of the changes threatens the core of the organisation, as it will lose the employed support that helps local forums to exist. Care forums support the wider voluntary sector and organisations providing services for their client groups, as well as providing vital and close links to carers and service users. The forums also help voluntary groups to source and secure funding from various charities and other organisations. Anyone who works in the voluntary sector knows that that job is complex and can be hugely frustrating. Removing the organisation that supports that work will mean a loss of expertise and community groups no longer being able to access funds. That will eventually lead to greater dependence on the public sector. A lot of the Highland Community Care Forum’s work relates to adults, although it also provides support for young carers. It has worked with young people in promoting disability awareness, too. The forum also has local awareness and problem-solving roles. It recently identified a problem in an area that had been targeted for loft and cavity wall insulation for older people. The scheme was likely to be undersubscribed, as the older people concerned were not fit to empty their lofts. That perhaps says something about how we develop policy for older people. However, the local forum identified the problem and found a solution, and older people benefited from the much-needed insulation. The forum supports voluntary bodies that organise lunch clubs and social activities for the elderly. I was recently contacted by constituents who were concerned that Highland Council had increased costs to people using day centres. The council’s argument was that day centres were for people who needed intensive intervention, and that lunch clubs would be more appropriate for those who were more independent. We now face the prospect of losing the very organisation that supports volunteers in running such clubs. I hope that other groups are developed to meet those real needs. Older people are being forced out of day centres, and no other services are provided to help them to deal with their needs. Many of them will lose their social contacts and, with that, their confidence and independence, and they will face even greater isolation. It could be argued that the consultation aspect of the Highland Community Care Forum’s work is the most important one. How can services be tailored to the needs of users if they are not involved in the decisions? I understand that consultation is to be taken in-house, but I question whether a consultation that is undertaken in-house by the body with a vested interest in the outcome can be fully accountable and transparent. Highland Council and NHS Highland are currently consulting about taking all elderly care into NHS control. Although I believe that there is merit to that policy if it is implemented correctly, and I am sure that it will benefit older people, there are already concerns that the exercise is a consultation in name only and that those two organisations have made up their minds as to the outcome. Now more than ever, an independent body is needed as an honest broker in that process. It is doubly disappointing that the change in service provision is being used as a reason to take the service in-house. Although it is funded by the public sector, Highland Community Care Forum is an independent organisation that can act as an advocate for carers and service users. The forum’s close relationship with those groups of people means that it is ideally placed to reach out to them for the purposes of the very consultations that I have just spoken about. Care is moving from acute institutions to become more community based. We must ensure that that does not place a bigger burden on carers. If they are unable to cope, they need support and information, and that support is often not joined up. My parents recently needed additional help because of illness, so I have first-hand knowledge of how challenging it can be to organise such support. We had a fair idea of what was possible and who we should speak to, but it took us weeks to get the care organised. The process was complex, and complexity leads to communication failures. We spoke to people in hospital, but the relevant information was not passed on to those concerned in the community. We needed to start again with them, and then to liaise between social workers, home carers and care managers until we had a care package in place. It was more like a negotiation about what was needed, what was allowed and what was possible. Had my parents not had our support, I am sure that they would not have received the care that they needed. When people face such problems they need an independent advocate who will work on their behalf. I do not believe that people will be willing to pursue that advocacy from very same organisation that let them down. It is Highland Community Care Forum and other organisations like it that take on that sort of role and, at times of diminishing budgets, they are needed more than ever. It is really sad that when cuts to services are faced, it is often the most vulnerable in our communities who lose most. Because of their responsibilities, carers do not have a load of spare time to volunteer and support others. We know that they suffer financially, so any time that they have needs to be spent working to earn an income. Without the support of paid employees, local forums would cease to exist. Carers and service users need our support, especially now, when they are at the bottom of the pile and tend to lose out more. They need a voice and a strong advocate. Highland Council and NHS Highland may not always like what Highland Community Care Forum says, but it voices the thoughts and concerns of the people it seeks to represent. It is the first point of contact for many carers, who cannot afford to lose it.

Will the member give way?

What additional costs will there be to Scottish health boards and authorities as a result of the legislative consent motion on the Health and Social Care Bill at Westminster? Where reciprocal arrangements are in place, how will they be affected by that bill?

I, too, congratulate Alasdair Allan on securing the debate. The issue is of great concern to the whole of my region, with its many island communities and mainland coastal areas. I am very pleased that the Western Isles has set up a task force, given its history of successful task forces. I am also pleased that the task force is working closely with the Shetland islands campaign. I hope that the two communities can work closely together. This is not about who gains a coastguard station; it is about retaining all our 24-hour coastguard stations. As Duncan McNeil said, the Clyde coastguard station covers parts of the Highlands and Islands. We need therefore to work on a cross-party and cross-community basis. It is important that the campaign attracts the broadest possible support; the issue is far too important for the campaign to become partisan and parochial. Too often we have seen communities being pitted against one another to fight for lifeline services. We cannot afford to take that bait. When I heard about the proposals, I wrote immediately to the minister, Mike Penning MP. In his response, he confirmed that there would be “two Maritime Operations Centres supported by six sub-centres, five of which would operate only during the day”. I am not an expert, but common sense dictates that search and rescue becomes more difficult at night, and that that is when local knowledge of tides and hazards really comes into its own. In my view, therefore, search and rescue cannot be co-ordinated from just anywhere, especially at night. We already have concerns about environmental damage arising from ships running aground; Rob Gibson mentioned the Braer. Are memories so short? Following the Braer disaster, new tugs were situated in Lewis and the Shetlands, but they, too, are now being removed. Today’s ditching of a Tornado emphasises the danger. Closure of the stations and removal of the tugs will leave that remote part of our coastline absolutely unprotected, will cost lives and will mean that environmental disasters impact on our communities for generations to come. The lack of joined-up thinking goes further. The replacement Nimrod was to be based in Kinloss but has been scrapped. That decision was made with little regard paid to how we support the coastguard in rescues that are beyond the reach of search and rescue helicopters. The search and rescue service is also subject to change. All those decisions are being taken in their own little silos, but practice on the ground is that the services work together to protect our shipping and fishing industries. We should add to that the development of renewable energy in the seas around the Pentland Firth to the north and to the west. Those areas are ideal for the supply of energy, but tapping that energy is dangerous. All the decisions to which I have referred need to be halted and co-ordinated. We must take an approach that is based on how we can best serve our communities, rather than simply on bureaucrats doing the arithmetic. I understand that a public meeting will take place in Stornoway tonight. We are with those at the meeting in spirit, if not in person. I hope that this debate, that meeting and the massive petition that has been launched in Shetland will be listened to by those who make the decisions and that they will stop and think about the impact that they are having on our communities.

The cabinet secretary is aware that Argyll and Bute Council has a huge number of islands to cover. Why does it face one of the largest cuts in spending compared with the Scottish average?

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to roll out the domestic abuse court to other parts of Scotland. (S3O-12643)

I thank the minister for his reply and, indeed, welcome the toolkit. He will be aware that the advocacy provided at the domestic abuse court in Glasgow has been hailed as a great success in its provision of support and information to domestic abuse victims. Will he roll out that facility to other courts to ensure that victims in other areas of Scotland do not face a postcode lottery?

Will the minister give way?

It gives me great pleasure to speak to the motion that asks the Parliament to support the general principles of my bill, the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill. I am hugely grateful for the help that I have received in taking the bill this far. It has taken a long time to get here. After the last election, I had lunch with Maureen Macmillan. As we chatted about what she would do with her time, she said, “Rhoda, there is a little thing that you could do for me.” She went on to explain that, to her mind, there were some gaps in the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001. Although that act was introduced as a committee bill, Maureen had proposed it and was instrumental in steering it through the Parliament. The next time that Maureen asks me to do a little thing for her, I will be a lot more wary. That said, it did not take long for her to persuade me that something had to be done. I embarked on the bill way back then. I am grateful for the support of the Justice Committee and the Minister for Community Safety on sections 1 and 3 of the bill, the evidence in support of which was overwhelming. Section 1 makes non-harassment orders, which provide robust protection for victims, much easier to obtain. Current civil non-harassment orders are granted only when a course of conduct can be shown, which means two or more instances of abuse. I am clear that one instance of abuse is one too many; protection should be available at that point. Section 3 makes the interdicts that protect a victim of domestic abuse more robust with powers of arrest. Currently, when those interdicts are breached, it is left to the victim to pursue the abuser through the courts for contempt of court. That is not tenable, when the victim is afraid for their life. Section 3 makes a breach of those interdicts a criminal offence, so any breach will be dealt with by the police and the criminal courts; the victim’s role will be that of a witness. That removes the stress and onus from the victim and provides the police with the tools that they need to deal quickly and effectively with on-going abuse. In 2009-10, 57 per cent of cases that the police recorded were repeat offences. Stopping repeat offending will protect the victim and be of benefit to the police and, ultimately, the public purse. Sections 2 and 4 are more controversial. Section 2 provides legal aid without the need for contribution from victims who are seeking the protection of these orders and interdicts. Section 4 defines domestic abuse. Although the vast majority of victims qualify for legal aid, particularly following the increase in the income allowance, a small minority do not. Some victims who flee abusive situations have no access to the documents that prove that they are eligible for legal aid. In those cases, victims are often unable to take out orders for their own protection. Also, those who do not qualify on financial grounds may not have access to their own money or property. The very nature of domestic abuse is an abuse of power. Normally, it starts with controlling behaviour that may not amount to physical abuse. Alienating friends and family and removing financial independence and the freedom to interact with other people are all examples of such behaviour. Those steps, along with undermining self-esteem and independence, prevent the victim from seeking help when the violence begins. At the point of flight, very few victims have control over their finances. Victims are also afraid to access bank accounts for fear that they may leave a trail that could lead the perpetrator to them. Section 2 removes the barriers that people face in seeking and obtaining the protection that they need. Neither the committee nor the minister is keen on the solution that I have proposed in the bill. I am eager to hear alternative approaches that will provide the same protection in the situations that I have outlined.

I do not believe that what I propose would unbalance the legal aid system. However, I take on board the member’s comments. I have been in talks with the minister on this point to try to find solutions on which the whole Parliament can agree and that will provide people with the protection that they seek while the needful provisions of the bill continue to progress through the Parliament. Section 4 is probably the most controversial section of the bill for those who enthusiastically support the bill’s aims. The definition of domestic abuse that is currently in the bill is wide, and most supporters are keen for it to be narrowed or removed. The only definition that can really be agreed to is the current definition in guidance, but it is almost impossible to draft that legally. I therefore have two options: to remove the definition to allow the normal meaning of the term to be used, or to attempt to redraft the definition. There are problems with both approaches. Withdrawing the definition is workable but would leave the bill open to interpretation, which would mean that, ultimately, domestic abuse would be defined by case law. However, providing a definition is also tricky. Defining abuse is not really an issue, because it has already been defined in the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001. The problem comes when we try to define domestic. Many would argue that it covers only those who cohabit in some form, if it is used with its ordinary meaning. However, we know that domestic abuse can occur in relationships that have not yet reached the stage of cohabitation and that it happens after relationships have ended. At the moment, I think that we should remove the definition and include in the bill a name for interdicts relating to domestic abuse, which would make them quite different from other interdicts that may be sought. I am interested in hearing members’ views on the most controversial elements of the bill—sections 2 and 4. I believe that the aims of those sections are just as important as those of the other sections in the bill, but I enter the debate with an open mind on how we can achieve them. If the Justice Committee or the Parliament vote down section 2 at stage 2 or stage 3 without taking steps to find a solution to the problems that the section seeks to address, we will leave victims with no protection. None of us would wish to find ourselves in that position. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill.

I thank everyone who has spoken in the debate. It has been a constructive debate and I have found it to be very helpful. Members, including Cathie Craigie, spoke about the impact that domestic abuse has had on our society. Although the bill is a step in the right direction, it is widely recognised throughout the Parliament that we have to do an awful lot more to tackle domestic abuse. Some members spoke about non-harassment orders. I know that Robert Brown has concerns about harassment, and indeed about non-harassment orders. He talked about repeat victimisation in the future, and that is part of what a non-harassment order is about—it is about stopping future victimisation. Section 1 of the bill, on non-harassment orders, and section 3 will work closely together, in that they will give the victim and their legal representatives a choice of interdicts and orders. They offer similar protection, but there will be a choice and it will be down to the victim and their legal advisers to decide how best to use it. Others talked about the course of conduct requirement. I agree that its removal will protect victims from constant abuse. They will be able to seek a non-harassment order following the first incident of abuse, which will prevent people from being victimised repeatedly. Section 2 is obviously the most controversial section of the bill. I agree with Fergus Ewing that it is difficult to tie down the costs and figures. We were working with figures that were given to us by SLAB, and it was difficult to extrapolate which cases actually dealt with domestic abuse. Indeed, the figures that we provided to the committee included both defenders and victims because we were unable to pull the figures apart. We believe that some of the figures that are being bandied about are unrealistic. If they were realistic, there would be a huge unmet need, and that would be echoing around the chamber. As I said, it is difficult to quantify incidents and it would be useful if the minister would consider how we can go about doing that. Some of the blocks might occur when a victim goes to a solicitor for help. The solicitor might deem that an application for legal aid might not be warranted and therefore put the person off. We need to find out where the blocks in the system are, and that is what section 2 seeks to do. It would be helpful if those issues could be looked at. Nigel Don mentioned equality of arms. I agree that it should not be beyond the wit of man to sort this out. I made available to the committee a lengthy document on the matter, and I am willing to make it available to any member who wishes to see it. Having looked at the legislation, we truly believe that equality of arms is not an issue. If members want to see the arguments in full, I am happy to provide them. I have only six minutes to wind up the debate and it would probably take me twice that to go through them, so I will not do that now. There is underreporting of incidents, so that would add to the costs, but this is more about how we deal with domestic abuse and the fear that prevents victims from coming forward than it is about access to finance, so it might not hide an untapped burden on the legal aid budget. I suppose that what we have to consider is whether we really have to look at budgetary constraints when we are looking to protect people. Many people have lost their lives due to domestic abuse, so we need to stop it. Although we all recognise that budgets are tight, we need to ensure that we do that. My preferred option is that domestic abuse is not tolerated in our society, that the police deal with it, and that no victim needs to use the legislation for their own protection because we, as a society, will protect them. However, we are some way from that. Members have supported section 3, but issues were raised about criminal evidence and criminal burdens of proof. The breach of an order under section 3 will be a criminal act. It will have to come under criminal evidence and it will have to have a criminal burden of proof, which is proof beyond reasonable doubt. It is quite different from the civil burden of proof that will be used to take out the order in the first place. Breach of the order will be criminal. I do not intend in any way to try to change Scots law on the back of a member’s bill. That would be biting off a lot more than I could chew. I turn to the definition of domestic abuse, because I am quickly running out of time. I listened to what members said, and I think that there is a growing consensus about using the definition of abuse that is already in legislation and about allowing “domestic” to gain its broad dictionary definition. The term is already used in legislation; the Family Law (Scotland) Act 2006 uses the term “domestic abuse” but does not seek to define it. If I were to try to define it in this bill, that would impact on future legislation. The Lord Advocate said in her letter: “While the terms of the interdict will be a matter for the civil proceedings, to avoid any difficulties in the criminal context, the interdict will require to make it clear that the Sheriff has deemed the conduct referred to in the interdict to amount to domestic abuse.” We are pursuing options around naming the interdict so that it becomes clear to the sheriff dealing with the breach that it is indeed a breach of an interdict for domestic abuse and that, in that case, it is a criminal offence rather than a civil offence. We will continue to pursue that with the minister. I am very much aware that I am running out of time. I thank everybody who took part in the debate. Some members spoke about the impact of domestic abuse; John Lamont mentioned the impact on children. We need to tackle the issue; otherwise, future generations will have to live with it through their adulthood. We need to make a change and supporting the bill at this stage would help us to take one small step in that direction.

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has received regarding school closures in the Highlands and Islands. (S3O-12543)

The minister is on record as stating that eight or nine of the schools earmarked for closure in Argyll and Bute should be closed. Will he now name them?

I am sure that the cabinet secretary will agree that the schools need to be saved. However, what appears to be missing from his rhetoric is recognition of the fact that there are good educational arguments for that. Instead, he has turned the whole issue into a political football with the intention of furthering his own political career rather than of saving the schools. [ Interruption. ]

His behaviour is jeopardising those schools. Will he now apologise for that behaviour?

I welcome this debate on violence against women, but, like everybody else, I regret that we still need to have it. This horrendous scourge blights our society, and it is concerning that domestic violence in same-sex relationships is on the increase, as is violence against men. The difference is that violence against women covers a wider spectrum than just domestic abuse and tends to be power based. Any violence in society is unacceptable, but violence by those who are supposed to love and care for their victims is totally unacceptable. My member's bill, the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill, seeks to provide greater protection for victims of domestic abuse, regardless of their gender or sexuality. However, from the evidence that I have received and the available statistics, I believe that the bill will predominantly help women—83 per cent of domestic abuse cases involve offences against women. It is a tragedy that a third of murders of females are committed by a partner or ex-partner and that  two women a week are killed by domestic abuse. No legislation can halt a murderer who is intent on killing, but the bill can provide victims with more robust support and the police with the tools that they need to prevent further abuse. The bill will make non-harassment orders easier to obtain. A victim currently needs to have two incidents of abuse before they can seek such an order: one incident of abuse is too many, therefore two is totally unacceptable. The bill will also make breaching an interdict with powers of arrest a criminal offence, which will make such interdicts much more effective. The interdict itself does not criminalise a person, but if they breach it they should, and will, feel the full force of the law. In addition, the bill seeks to provide greater access to justice by increasing accessibility to legal aid for those who seek protection. When someone is fleeing, they do not often stop to collect their bank statements or financial information. In many cases they cannot access bank accounts, because statements are mailed to the victim's residence and the ATM trail will enable the abuser to track down the victim, which might lead to further abuse. My bill is not the last word on domestic abuse—far from it. This is a process. I have been struck by the number of people and organisations that have asked me to broaden my bill to take on other issues. Given that it is a member's bill, the difficulty is how to do that without making it so complex that it endangers the whole. A lot more needs to be done. When I was in Australia and New Zealand last year, I was struck by the actions that those Governments are taking at a national and state level. In Australia, the police are proactive. They have the power to raise interdicts without the victim's consent. Those interdicts include exclusion orders, which enable the victim and their children to remain in the home while forcing out the perpetrator. In Scotland, it is often the case that the victim is forced to leave their home and possessions and children are forced to leave their friends and home. The Governments in Australia and New Zealand have carried out a lot of work on the effect of domestic abuse on children. Scottish Women's Aid works with children, but we are a long way behind in recognising the effect that domestic abuse has on young people. Their future prospects and self-esteem are badly damaged. That is why, in New Zealand, a perpetrator is not allowed access to their children until they can show that their behaviour has changed and that they recognise the impact of their actions. I am therefore grateful to the minister for his confirmation that he will keep the funding for Scottish Women's Aid's children's programme. That programme allows young people  to access services in their own right, even when their mother is too afraid to seek those services or support. There are many programmes for perpetrators, some of them in Scotland, but they are new, so there is little information on how successful they are in addressing behaviour. What is clear is that the state needs to take an active role in providing protection and resources to victims, but we also need to provide victims with the ability to protect themselves. I welcome the debate and look forward to bringing my bill to the Parliament. I hope that it will obtain support.

I, too, welcome the minister to her new post. How many staff based in the Highlands and Islands does she expect to be offered voluntary redundancy, and what proportion is that of the staff who are based there?

To ask the Scottish Executive what financial incentives are in place to promote renewable energy. (S3O-11981)

The minister will be aware of the recent difficulties of Skykon, which manufactured wind turbines in Kintyre. He will also be aware that the company received £2.4 million in regional selective assistance. Will that money be recouped so that it can be used to attract another manufacturer to the Kintyre site? That would protect jobs and ensure that we retained our turbine manufacturing base.

Although I support the principle of free prescriptions, I, too, have one or two concerns that I want to highlight. The Labour Party in Scotland has long advocated that the Government should make prescriptions free for cancer sufferers prior to the measure being extended to the whole population. Cancer patients in England and Wales now get free prescriptions, so it is a shame that those in Scotland will have to wait until next year before they are on the same footing. Through rebalancing of the phasing process, it would have been possible to extend the measure to cancer sufferers before now.

The evidence that we have received, certainly from cancer charities, tells us that cancer is a special case, because cancer patients tend to suffer from fuel poverty and, when they receive treatment for their disease, they have a lowered immune system, which makes them more susceptible to viruses and the like. Although I accept that people with many other conditions would benefit from having free treatment now, there is certainly a special case to be made for cancer. The cabinet secretary said in an intervention on Helen Eadie that those who qualify for free prescriptions will continue to qualify for free treatment for minor ailments from a pharmacist. That statement means that those cancer patients who do not qualify for free medication now—as well as people with chronic illnesses who do not qualify for free prescriptions now—will not qualify for access to free minor ailments treatment through their pharmacist in the future. As I said, people who are undergoing chemotherapy have poor immune systems and are susceptible to minor ailments, as are many people with other chronic conditions. If they are to access free medicines for those minor ailments, they will need  to go to their GPs to get prescriptions and that will lead to a delay in their being treated and, indeed, to a greater burden on GPs. Although I am sure that that is not the cabinet secretary's intention, I ask her to consider amending the criteria for access to free minor ailments treatment now so that cancer patients and others with chronic diseases that lead to a predisposition to minor ailments will receive treatment free of charge. Ross Finnie's amendment raises a number of good points about prescribing. In yesterday's health debate, Elaine Smith said that the prescription of thyroxine is problematic for people who require it because they need to be prescribed the same brand if they are to benefit properly. She told us that GPs and pharmacists are unaware of that and that people's health is being compromised because they are receiving different types of treatment. That issue should be considered. We have the same problem with other generic drugs in that some people are sensitive to a small change in their drug treatment. Although we need to encourage GPs and others to use generic drugs as much as possible, it might be worth pulling together some guidance on the drugs to which people are more sensitive, so that GPs are allowed to prescribe an alternative in such cases while considering generic drugs to be the norm. Another issue that has been raised before in the chamber, and certainly by Mary Scanlon, is the recycling of underused medicines. Back when Mary Scanlon started raising the subject, there was a problem with the idea because medicines tended to come loose in bottles and could be tampered with easily or become contaminated in some way. However, drugs are now mostly dispensed in blister packs. With a little care, it should be possible to recycle them, which would help to cut costs. Others have touched on the cost of drugs and the inflation in the cost of drug treatments. We need to try to encourage health boards to buy together and look at ways of saving on those costs in order to tackle the inflation in the cost of drug treatments and get value for money for our services. I ask the cabinet secretary to reflect on the points that have been raised today in a genuine attempt to improve prescribing practice and help the most vulnerable in our society to benefit most from their health treatment.

The only honest way to describe the bill is as a disappointment. It does not do what it says on the tin. I am certain that everyone in the Parliament is signed up to the concept of improving patients' rights, so this bill, of all bills, should have been given a fair wind. It is a sign of how short it falls of that aim that the committee could not recommend to the Parliament that its general principles be agreed to at stage 1. I am deeply disappointed that the cabinet secretary appears not to have taken seriously the committee's concerns. The real dilemma is whether the bill can be amended so radically at stage 2 that it will improve the situation of patients. I for one am willing to try. If we cannot do that, the bill will need to be voted down at stage 3, because in its present form it would be detrimental to patients. As others have said, the bill as it stands  enshrines some current rights but leaves out others. We fear that it would create a hierarchy of rights. Are the ones that are identified in the bill more important than those that are the subject of ministerial directions? The bill would not provide a remedy for patients whose rights have not been met. No one wants American-style litigation in our health service, but if people are to be provided with a right they must have a remedy in the event that they cannot access it. In its report, the committee suggested something along the lines of mediation, but I am not so sure. If a patient's waiting time guarantee has been breached, they need action, not discussion. There are other issues that the bill does not cover. Some of the hardest cases that I have to deal with involve people whose health has suffered or who have lost loved ones because of the actions of clinicians. The current complaints procedure is wholly inadequate in dealing with such cases, because boards and professionals tend to close ranks for fear of litigation or of a doctor being struck off. They do not deal with the issues or respond satisfactorily. The Scottish Public Services Ombudsman cannot help, because it looks just at the process rather than the substance of the complaint. The only option that patients are left with is to go to law. They are not experts, so they need to find a professional who is willing to review the case, which comes at a cost. They have limited resources to take on the full force of a health board and its insurer in the court system. Needless to say, people are reluctant to do that, not just because of the cost but because they do not know where to start. Such people often come to MSPs to ask them to right the wrong, in the belief that if the state has let them down, it is for the state to right that wrong, but we have no tools to use on their behalf other than mediation, which, frankly, does not work in such cases. I am hugely frustrated by that. It is wrong when all that we can do is offer sympathy. The Stafford hospital inquiry is a pretty sobering example of what happens when complaints are not dealt with properly. I do not have all the answers, but we need to examine the issue further. One option might be to consider setting up a body along the lines of the Independent Police Complaints Commission, which provides independent scrutiny. That would obviously have a cost, but it might be a better use of the money that has been put aside for a new complaints service. On the proposed patient advice and support service, the evidence was strong that the current independent advice and support service works well when health boards pay for that service for their patients. The current service is provided by  citizens advice bureaux, and it works well by ensuring that patients receive advice on health care and any other issues that might concern them, such as benefits. There is real concern that a new service would stop that joined-up approach and cause patients to have to deal with myriad people when they are possibly not best placed to do so. It is clear that all patients need to be able to access the service, regardless of their health board. Perhaps that should be done on a national basis, with the Government top-slicing the funding rather than leaving the decision to the health boards. When money is tight, health boards obviously will look for savings, and that kind of service becomes vulnerable if it is not protected. As I said, not all rights are enshrined in the bill. It is clear that legislating for some rights and setting them in stone would be problematic. For example, the waiting time guarantee might change. Services that have no guarantee will not be included. Also, of course, legislation cannot be amended day and daily when patients' rights change. Some members are keen on a patient charter, which has merit. An accessible statement of rights and responsibilities for patients would be helpful, but that does not need legislation. Indeed, to make it accessible, we should really avoid enshrining it in legal mumbo-jumbo. The bill could place a duty on the Government to produce a charter that gives patients a clear statement of their rights and responsibilities and the remedies when they are denied. The only part of the bill that got unanimous support was the health care principles in the schedule. They provide a statement of intent about how patients should be treated when they engage with the health service, and they should be the basis of a new ethos for health care. We need more than warm words. For the bill to work, it must do something, and if it is to progress into law, it will have to be changed radically. I hope that those changes can be made.

At first glance, the amendments in the group look reasonable, and I was keen on a polluter-pays regime when we started to take evidence, but it became clear that penalties are in place that are seldom used. In addition, on closer examination, it became apparent that it is not always easy to identify those  who are breaking the law. For example, if someone is drinking outside or even at home and is causing disorder, how can we identify where they bought that drink and whether it would have been reasonable for the establishment in question to know that they would behave in that manner? If they are found in a licensed premises or in the vicinity of one, how do we know that they were sold alcohol there or whether the licensee could have refused to serve them? The bottom line is that it is almost impossible to identify the polluter. When they can be identified, they should have their licence revoked rather than have to pay a fine by way of a social responsibility levy. I have sympathy with Murdo Fraser and other members who are trying to come to grips with the levy, as the truth is that the bill contains no detail on it, with the result that members have been left to fill that void. However, Murdo Fraser's amendments would be counterproductive. We need to look at the whole picture. The Subordinate Legislation Committee's amendment 40 seeks to ensure that the regulations to bring the levy into force will be subject to the super-affirmative process, which will allow the consultation and discussion that are required to ensure that the levy works when it is eventually introduced.

The First Minister will be aware of the tragic death of Mandy Mathieson in Tomintoul last month. Press reports indicate that Ms Mathieson had a heart attack and that, although there was an ambulance 800yd away, it did not attend. Will the First Minister investigate the incident as a matter of urgency in order to provide answers for Mandy's family? Why did local staff not attend, and why was there an apparent delay in alerting the air ambulance? Will he also review the cover, skills and employment practices of the Scottish Ambulance Service in remote and rural areas to ensure that they are fit for purpose?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to use the vessel MV Isle of Arran, which sails on the Islay route, on other CalMac Ferries routes  when MV Finlaggan comes into service. (S3O-11829)

The cabinet secretary will recall the mayhem caused this summer by the breakdown of MV Clansman, which left Uist and Barra with a totally inadequate service. Will he use MV Isle of Arran as a standby vessel for those routes? I suggest that any cost could be mitigated by utilising the vessel on the Lochboisdale to Mallaig route when it was not needed on other routes.

Has work been carried out to identify how many family members work in the public services in the area and what impact their loss would have on service delivery locally?

She is behind you.

The subject matter of this debate is the use of technology, but the committee's report is really in two distinct parts. The first part considers a single patient record portal and the second part considers e-health. It could be argued that the first issue is very much part of the second issue, but they were separated because of the way in which we took evidence. I suppose that the first part is to do with an administrative system and the second part deals with direct patient care. As technology grows, we will need to look at all the various aspects of e-technology and perhaps break them down further into groups such as paediatrics and elder care. I will talk about the portal first. I was struck by several issues, including the fact that there is a myriad of IT systems in the health service. There  are different systems in use not just between health boards, but between departments in the same hospital. That means that information cannot be shared among local units, far less among health board areas. Important information being unavailable caused slow diagnoses and repeat tests. Sharing information among health board areas is desirable, given that people are more mobile and that such information could be life saving. We also need to look at the huge waste of resources that occurs when tests and results are duplicated because they are not accessible to different departments in the same hospital. The evidence that we took shows that GPs appear to have the most comprehensive patient records, but even they do not form complete records and they are often held in paper form. Common sense says that there should be one system for the same health board and the whole health service in the country. England and Wales have taken that route, but we discovered that they had hit complications. The Scottish health service therefore went in a different direction. A number of Scottish health boards have been developing versions of a portal that can interrogate different systems and pull forward certain essential information, but there are patient confidentiality concerns that relate to that model. Members have talked about shared log-in details and passwords. They are essential in our health service because of the time delays that there are in issuing new passwords and log-in details, given the use of locum and bank staff. We need to consider ways of eliminating those delays from the system. The best audit process that I can see, having followed the evidence, is to give patients access to their records and to have those records include an audit trail of who has accessed them. Before we do that, we must be sure that the log-ins and passwords are not shared, that patient access is secure and that people can access only their own record. However, those problems should not be insurmountable. The situation would certainly not be tolerated in any other business, because of the inherent inefficiency of people searching for information and running duplicate tests. That ties in with an issue that I have raised with NHS Highland regarding the transmission of laboratory results. Ideally, they should be transferred electronically in a format that can be incorporated into GPs' computer records automatically. However, currently, the results are transferred in paper form. They are printed out in the lab and posted to GPs, who then have staff inputting the results at the other end. I intervened and asked for the process be changed. I have been told that lab results will be scanned at the lab and sent electronically to GPs. That will speed up the transmission of the information, but it will not  create greater efficiency for staff, because someone in the lab wiII have to scan the information and someone in the GPs' office will have to put it on to the computer system in a way that can be interrogated to show patterns. I move on to e-health more generally. It is timely that Liam McArthur will speak next, because I was up in Orkney recently and was shown round the Balfour hospital in his constituency. I was impressed by the videoconference facilities in its accident and emergency department. Local staff can pull in expert opinion that allows them to make decisions about a patient's further treatment. Remote areas are much keener to incorporate e-health, but they need buy-in from the specialists. That is happening, but it must become the norm. Like Mary Scanlon, I am concerned that the Balfour hospital is the only rural general hospital in Scotland that does not have a CT scanner. As she said, such a scanner is essential for stroke care, but it can be used for many other problems. A scan can inform whether someone can be treated locally or should be referred for more specialist treatment at another unit. That can be done by sending scans electronically. When I was in the Balfour hospital, I was told that another benefit of a scanner is that it can inform staff if a patient is untreatable. In a remote community, that information can save patients who are in their last hours from being moved from hospital to hospital without their family around them and without the support that their friends can give them at that terrible time. It means that precious remaining hours can be spent with loved ones, rather than chasing round the country. We need to use technology to reduce hospital stays. Pre-operation checks should be done as close to home as possible. DanMedical has pioneered equipment that can be used to carry out those checks at home. Doing so can shorten hospital stays and reduce the number of last-minute cancellations. Currently, in remote communities, pre-op checks might mean an additional day in hospital if someone needs to be checked the day before their operation and cannot return home. That leads to cancelled operations when there are complications. The use of technology could build efficiency into the system. There are many more issues that I could talk about, such as care in the community. Mary Scanlon talked about Argyll and Bute. There are issues about treating people with Alzheimer's in the community and ensuring that people are safe at home. Helen Eadie talked about the eye screening pilot in Fife. I am glad that, after I raised that issue with NHS Highland, it agreed to consider whether it can implement such a programme.  We have some way to go with e-health. We began the journey many years ago, but we have not travelled far. The current IT systems are not fit for purpose, so making them appropriate for modern use must be a priority.

Housing is one of the most important issues that we face. We are really struggling to meet our homelessness targets, and without a house building programme that shows a year-on-year increase in the number of houses that we build, we will not meet them. This summer, we received the figures for the new affordable homes that were built last year. Those figures show the effect of bringing forward spending on housing last year. I agreed with the policy of bringing forward that spending, but I am concerned that it led to our having a much smaller budget this year and that we are therefore unlikely to be able to build on the increase that we saw this summer. That will affect not only people who are homeless or inadequately housed, but construction workers and the wider economy. We  need to build houses not only to provide homes but to provide jobs and apprenticeships. At a time when building companies will deliver good value for money, we should be building those homes, and we should be building public buildings for the same reasons. Nicola Sturgeon boasts that our largest hospital is being built in Glasgow using traditional funding methods. [ Interruption .]

Although we all welcome the building of that hospital, it will take an enormous chunk of the Government's overall capital budget. If it was funded differently, say through a public-private partnership, we would have that additional capital available for house building, which is not so easily procured through PPP. The Government is looking at funding the new Forth crossing in a similar way, although that might prove impossible as it would wipe out the capital budget for a number of years. We need to look at ways of funding major building projects that also allow us to continue building homes, schools and hospitals. That said, we also need to look at alternative ways of funding housing. I welcome the minister's comments this morning, but, as always, the devil is in the detail. I look forward to seeing some more of that detail. In the present economic climate, it is important that we ensure that the whole public sector is looking at innovative ways to continue building. It is disappointing that the Government, which has dumped so many of its ideological beliefs and reneged on so many of its promises, still holds one dear. It is also deeply disturbing that its opposition to PPP is putting those in the construction industry out of work, robbing young people of jobs, and leaving our children learning in inadequate schools. The Government pledged to match our building programme brick for brick and to build new schools and hospitals using the Scottish Futures Trust, but that is a procurement body and not a funding body, and again the pledge has been dumped. It is time for the Government to wake up to the reality that we find ourselves in and take some action. We need to get the country back building homes, schools and hospitals. I turn to rural housing and an issue that has concerned me for a long time. I feel a bit like a stuck record, but I make no apologies for continuing to mention the issue until it is sorted. The Government has to get rid of the assumed rent in calculating additional housing association grants for rural areas. I see no reason for imposing that rent. Affordable rent levels in the local area will be available as a comparator for those that are proposed by the housing association.

I very much welcome the change in the formula for rural areas, but there is still an assumed rent. Rent levels have to be determined by the housing association in the local area. The formula that is in place is still not adequate for building some houses. It covers many rural buildings, but some are really expensive due to servicing, land prices and the like and need further action. John Wilson talked about the important issue of the ability of housing associations to use reserves. The assumed rent and what financial institutions require as rent levels stop building. I welcome the fact that the minister is considering those issues, which are quite complex, and welcome the change in the formula, but there is still work to be done. I welcome that work being carried out. When we talk about affordable housing, we need to talk about not only affordable rents, but the affordability of maintenance and heating. When I visited the Scottish housing expo with Mary Mulligan this summer, I was fascinated to see what could be done by design and technology to cut costs. While we were walking around, we got to the point at which we saw that a house's heating costs were more than £200 per annum and asked why it was so expensive to heat. Houses had renewables incorporated into them—normally air-source heat pumps—but they mostly depended on insulation and design to cut costs. The insulation that was used was of a higher specification than that in the current regulations, but it appeared to me that such insulation would pay for itself very quickly. One house had no heating at all; rather, design and heat exchange were used to keep it warm. I remain slightly sceptical about how that would work in the winter months, but I was assured that the technology had come from Scandinavia, which enjoys even worse winters than we do. The expo challenged many of the ideas that I had about housing design. It was really worth while for policy makers, developers and architects to exchange policies and ideas, and I hope that it will not be the last such expo. I hope that we will look at finding other ways of exchanging ideas and best practice. Fuel poverty remains a huge challenge, not only with respect to new stock; we need to look at our older stock, too. Insulating older buildings is more challenging, but many of our elderly people live in such buildings. Therefore, we need to take that on board.  In conclusion, I hope that the minister will take my comments on board. Obviously, some of those comments are less palatable than others. I welcome the progress that is being made and hope that my comments will be considered further. I am grateful for having had the opportunity to speak in this debate.

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will announce the funding formula for the Councils for Voluntary Service network. (S3O-11209)

Despite having jumped through the hoops that the minister has given to them—which they have done—CVSs are still waiting for their funding formula. I met CVSs in my area over the summer, and rumours abound that most of them face funding cuts in the region of 50 per cent. Will the minister confirm that there is no truth  in that rumour, and will he give the CVSs the reassurance that they require to continue their work in that most valuable area?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of the Scottish Ambulance Service and what issues were discussed. (S3O-11168)

The cabinet secretary might be aware that the Scottish Ambulance Service has been unable to recruit to a vacant post in Strontian and Ardnamurchan, which means that the area is often covered by a single-crewed ambulance and is sometimes not covered at all. The situation is now deteriorating, with a further vacancy arising. Will the cabinet secretary ensure that there is adequate cover for the area until the situation is resolved, and will she ensure that the Scottish Ambulance Service examines its shift patterns to ensure that the jobs are attractive to would-be applicants?

Given the reassurances that the cabinet secretary has provided, I seek leave to withdraw amendment 194.  Amendment 194, by agreement, withdrawn.

Under section 305 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, acts of adjournal can be made only in relation to criminal court practice and procedure. An act of adjournal is a piece of legislation that can be brought forward by judges of the High Court without recourse to Parliament.  Section 115 of the bill permits the court to create acts of adjournal "for the purposes of ... or for giving full effect to" part 6, which is on the conduct of criminal proceedings with regard to disclosure. Such acts would no longer be restricted to matters about the conduct of the process, but could be about anything that is within the jurisdiction of the court that comes under part 6. The Subordinate Legislation Committee was concerned that the provision in the bill would allow acts of adjournal to come into force on areas of substantive law without Parliament's having the opportunity to scrutinise the proposal.  At stage 1, the committee asked the Government why the existing powers regarding practice and procedure under section 305 of the 1995 act are not sufficient for the purposes of part 6. At that point, the Government responded that more flexibility is needed to allow the High Court to do what it would need to do to ensure that the statutory scheme works efficiently. However, it gave no examples of when that would be the case. Acts of adjournal are not subject to parliamentary procedure, so the provision in section 115 as it stands would give the courts the power to legislate in areas of substantive law, without any parliamentary scrutiny. Amendment 194 makes it clear that the powers that will be conferred by section 115, beyond those that are conferred by the 1995 act, must be scrutinised by Parliament under the negative procedure. That means that the desired flexibility is still in the bill, but there are checks and balances on that ability. I move amendment 194.

Do I have time to take an intervention?

I am sorry. The reference to a course of conduct means that, if somebody watches someone else's activity but does no other activity to form the crime of stalking, the problem will not arise. I hope that I have convinced Patrick Harvie to back amendments 70 and 71.

I support Government amendment 32, as opposed to amendment 188, in the name of John Lamont. He said in his opening comments that there were problems with it in that it covered only people who were married or cohabiting in a heterosexual relationship. We all know that people who are fleeing an abusive relationship are in most danger. Amendment 188 would not help such people. It would not help same-sex couples, elderly people who are being abused in their own home and children who are being abused. I urge the Parliament not to support amendment 188, although I recognise that it was intended to be helpful. I thank the Government for its amendments to section 31B, on stalking, and for the work that it did with me and Ann Moulds to ensure that we were happy. I do not support amendment 14, because it is not required. The defences in section 31B include showing that behaviour was lawful and reasonable. Any industrial action or public protest would fall into those categories.  Patrick Harvie expressed concerns about the insertion of the words "any means" and "monitoring". The crime of stalking must involve a course of conduct, not one incident. Stalking is insidious and involves behaviour that could be legal on its own.

Will the minister give way on that point?

I am clear that Scotland has a problem with alcohol: we drink when we are happy, we drink when we are sad, we drink to celebrate and we drink to commiserate. Very little of what we do socially does not involve alcohol. This is a cultural issue; one that is catching on across the globe. The cost of alcohol abuse to the NHS in the Highlands and Islands is in the region of £12.3 million a year, which is massive, but the cost to families, particularly children, is immeasurable. Doing nothing is not an option. To the Government's credit, it introduced the bill in an attempt to tackle the issue. That said, what the bill proposes and what is missing from it need to be challenged. Some measures in the bill will work well, but others will not. In its briefing, Children 1st said: "Minimum pricing is not a 'silver bullet' but we support it because it will help to put an end to cheap alcohol." Minimum pricing has gained such support because it is seen as the only option. That is not the case. It is our duty to ensure that the options that are put forward are workable and effective. I was part of the Health and Sport Committee delegation to France and Finland, where we looked at policies and problems. In Finland, the price of alcohol is historically high due to taxation and the country always having a strong temperance movement. All off-licences are operated by Alko, the state-owned monopoly; supermarkets cannot sell alcohol apart from low-alcohol beer. That means that anyone who wants to buy alcohol has to go to Alko, where there are no special offers, no promotions and no enticements to drink more. When Estonia joined the EU, the Finnish Government recognised that Finland would be subject to cross-border trade and lowered taxation on alcohol to mitigate the effect. That led to a substantial increase in Finnish alcohol consumption, as a result of which the Government again increased taxation on alcohol over a number of years. It is clear that the falling price led to an increase in consumption. However, the rise in price did not lead to a fall in consumption. In France, things are different. Historically, the French have had a very high alcohol consumption rate. Because of the strong wine industry lobby, it is almost impossible for the Government to raise taxes on wine, therefore it remains a low-cost product. However the Government has increased taxation on spirits, making them much more expensive. The overall rate of alcohol consumption in France has fallen, but that fall has masked a rise in spirit drinking—it is wine consumption that has fallen dramatically. Again,  rising prices appear to have had little or no impact on consumption. In both countries, people pointed to a range of factors that had helped to decrease drinking. In France, it was believed that wine consumption had fallen due to drink driving laws. Wine had been the drink of choice of the older generation, who tended to live in rural areas. When drink driving laws were enforced, those who had to drive had to stop drinking. In Finland, there has been a drop in consumption in the 18-to-24 age group. No research has been carried out into the reasons for that; the only explanation that people could offer was Alko's advertising campaign, which focused on parents, encouraging them not to drink when their children were present and showing the impact on young people of their parents' drinking. In France, people believed that they were moving from a Mediterranean drinking culture to a more global drinking culture that had much more in common with the drinking culture of northern Europe and involved young people binge drinking on spirits. The main policy direction of the bill is minimum unit pricing, but there is no empirical evidence that a price increase leads to a decrease in consumption. However, there is clear evidence that lowering price leads to increased consumption. The bill looks at promotions, but it is not clear that it goes far enough in that area. In effect, promotions lower price, and it has been shown that lower price increases consumption. The bill needs to be strengthened in that regard. Minimum pricing will not have the effect that is sought. That is borne out by the experience of other countries. The only supporting evidence is the Sheffield report, which uses modelling rather than empirical evidence to show effect. Increasing price has not impacted anywhere else, and there is no evidence that Scotland will be different. I will touch on the social responsibility levy. The committee attempted to take evidence on the policy, but that became impossible due to a lack of detail. It appeared to me that there were three policy choices: a polluter-pays levy, a blanket levy and a levy with incentives for good practice. Different sections of the community and industry believed that levies would work, but it was difficult to build a consensus, due to the lack of detail. In the written answer to a question from my colleague Richard Simpson, it emerged that the cabinet secretary had not met the industry since August 2009, which makes it difficult to work through the process and to get more detail on the policy. The Government argued to the committee that the levy could help to recoup the largesse of the minimum pricing policy. However, it was not clear whether only off-licences would have to pay the  levy. It appeared that the on-trade, which would not benefit financially from minimum pricing, might also have to pay. Others argued that recent changes to the licensing laws had not been properly implemented and that proper implementation of those changes would negate the need for a social responsibility levy. However, it was clear that the levy could provide finance to help local authorities to deal with the cost of problem drinking. Again, that issue needs further work. As I indicated, the cost of drinking to the NHS is massive. I ask the cabinet secretary to consider ways of ensuring that funding from the levy can be used to offset some of that cost. The cabinet secretary needs to return to the committee at stage 2 with a great deal more detail on the proposals, to enable the committee to scrutinise them effectively and to bring forward a policy that is fair and that works. Regardless of whether it is or is not legal, minimum pricing will not tackle Scotland's problem with alcohol. The Government needs to bring forward robust measures to tackle the problem, or the opportunity that the bill presents will be missed.

We are proud of the NHS, and our constituents rightly expect us to ensure that the service continues to deliver for them. That expectation is why so many parties in the latest UK general election stated that they would protect health spending. Unfortunately, in Scotland, where we have an increased budget, NHS boards are now facing cuts. More nats, fewer nurses. Those cuts are happening now. Between Christmas and the end of the financial year, NHS Highland closed beds in an essential rheumatology unit to make cash savings. It did not pretend that that was done to improve patient care; rather, it needed to save money. It is now reviewing that service in order to move it closer to patients, but it has stated that any changes must be cost neutral. Everyone knows that it takes more staff to deliver services closer to people's homes, especially in remote and rural areas, where professionals must travel large distances to get to their patients. How can the changes be cost neutral when more staff will inevitably be needed to deliver the same level of service? The only conclusion that I can reach is that that is another cut rather than a service improvement.  The rebalancing care argument has been used to cut beds in various local hospitals throughout the Highlands, but there has been no corresponding rise in staffing numbers in the community. The Government and health boards deny that those cuts impact on patient care. However, following recent bed closures at Portree hospital, a patient told me that they were forced to travel to Broadford hospital because no beds were available in Portree. They were required to make a journey of more than 26 miles on poor roads that can be treacherous in the winter. I cannot see any efficiencies in that or any improvement in patient care. I want to touch on the inequalities of health board funding allocations due to the NHS Scotland resource allocation committee formula. That formula was implemented in 2008, despite the adverse impact that it would have on remote and rural health boards.

I want to make my point. At that time, the cabinet secretary acknowledged that the data that were used for the formula were poor at best. Because of that, she set up the technical advisory group on resource allocation to review the data and refine the formula. That group has been sitting since then, but the formula remains unchanged. I was told in an answer to a written question that it met only four times last year and that it would report early this year. From subsequent questions, I have learned that it will not report until August. Why the delay? What action has the cabinet secretary taken to speed up the review? I suspect that the advisory group could more aptly be called the long grass group. Perhaps the Minister for Public Health and Sport will reassure me.

I do not think that any party supports a formula that is based on data that are not right. The cabinet secretary has admitted that the data are incorrect and she has set up an advisory group, which is indeed a long grass group. [ Interruption .]

Delivering health care in remote and rural areas is more expensive because of sparsity and geography. NRAC has forced NHS  Highland to consider cuts that were previously thought to be too scary and untouchable. It does not take an advisory group to tell the cabinet secretary that the formula is wrong and that it needs to be changed. I and other Highland MSPs recently met NHS Highland, which told us that it was looking at a staffing cut of 100 people—70 from management and administration and 30 from the nursing staff. That begs the question how services can be delivered closer to the community with fewer nurses. Therefore, we rightly complain about cuts in nursing jobs. There will be cost savings by caring for patients in the community, but they will not come from cutting nurses. We cannot ignore the jobs of backroom staff either. Less administrative support will mean that medical and nursing staff will take more time away from direct patient care to do administrative work. My mother was in hospital recently, and most of my dealings were with nurses and doctors, but I was given valuable information and support by ward receptionists and medical secretaries. If that support were removed, it would place an additional burden on front-line staff. Although we rightly guard nurse numbers, we must also ensure that we value the support workers and their jobs. New technology can create efficiencies. However, the health service is not renowned for its fast implementation of technology. We face problems with the number of junior doctors, which has fallen from 4,500 in 2008-09 to 2,400 this year. In the past, health boards faced challenges filling junior doctor posts in some of their most remote and rural areas, and indeed in some specialties. In August last year, NHS Highland had 27 unfilled vacancies, seven of which have still to be filled. With numbers falling, it is impossible to see how the situation will not be worse this year. If those posts are not filled, locums will be required to fill the gaps, leading to higher costs. I raised those concerns with the cabinet secretary in health questions, and she appeared unconcerned. I ask her to look again at the issue to ensure that it does not become a problem. Efficiency is welcome, but cuts are not. The Scottish people rightly value their health service and its dedicated staff. Those staff do not need uncertainty. They do not need to see their jobs slashed—such cuts would be a false economy. The health service needs to be modernised and to use technologies to deliver services more efficiently. Cutting front-line staff to balance the budget is not the answer.

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has made to the BBC trust regarding BBC Alba being made available on Freeview. (S3O-10185)

I share the minister's disappointment and am glad that she has pointed out to the trust the political consensus that exists on the issue. It is important that we increase access to BBC Alba not only for Gaelic speakers, but for Gaelic learners. Will the minister work closely with the chairman of BBC Alba, Alasdair Morrison, and the Secretary of State for Scotland to ensure that a speedy and satisfactory conclusion is reached?

Will the member give way?

I am pleased to speak in this debate on the construction industry. I declare an interest in that my husband is an electrician. I am as aware as anybody of the problems in the construction  industry, both through my mailbag and through personal experience. It is important that the Government provides the construction industry with a clear indication of the public work that will be available. Without a level of stability and some knowledge of future public works programmes, companies cannot commit to taking on apprentices. Ninety apprentices in the Highlands and Islands have lost their jobs in the past year. That is a disaster not only for them but for the economy. Not so long ago, we had a shortage of skilled tradespeople and we were unable to cope with the demand for workers. We need to learn that lesson and ensure that we have an adequately skilled workforce that is ready for the recovery. The funding package for apprentices ended in March. We need a further programme to replace it. We also need new placements for those who have already lost their jobs. In addition, there needs to be a clear picture of expected public procurement. The Scottish Government needs to use every means at its disposal to build schools, hospitals and affordable homes.

What we need is a guarantee to young people who want to take up an apprenticeship that they can get one. It is important that that form of training remains in place and I am grateful to the minister for intervening to confirm that the programme will continue. I am sure that many construction companies will be delighted by that news. I have been pushing the Government for some time about housing association grant. Cutting the grant when housing associations have difficulty borrowing stops them building. That affects the availability of affordable homes and jobs. I have been critical of the assumed rent that is imposed by the Government when housing associations need to apply for additional housing association grant. Additional grant is often required for small projects in remote and rural areas where there are no economies of scale. In order to access the additional grant, housing associations have to use the assumed rent in their calculations. The assumed rent does not take account of what people in the area can afford;  many people in rural areas are on lower incomes and cannot afford the assumed rent. Forcing housing associations to use a rental income figure that is not realistic in the local economy means that the housing projects do not stack up financially. There is a funding gap for those projects, because housing associations can borrow only against actual rent. If a different figure is used to calculate housing association grant, the figures simply do not stack up. The Government has made funding available to councils to provide them with grant of up to £25,000 for each house that they build, but only certain councils are able to access that additional council house funding. They have to bid for the funding and councils with large housing debt are not eligible to receive it. In Highland Council, the SNP campaigned against stock transfer, under which the council's housing debt would have been written off. The SNP Government is now penalising councils that have not had their debt written off. It needs to change that policy and provide for councils that cannot afford to build. In addition to large cuts in the housing budget this year, the profile of funding and the cost stipulations put forward mean that it is impossible to build projects that do not enjoy economies of scale. They also make it difficult for new homes to be environmentally sustainable and to incorporate renewables, so those houses will not assist the Government in reaching its carbon emissions targets. It also means that the Government's policy has all but halted building in rural areas, some of which are still pressurised. Local people earning local wages are unable to buy. The Scottish Futures Trust is yet to build anything. It appears that the only decision that the trust has taken is to create further bureaucracy in public procurement while doing nothing to maximise finance for public projects. It has devised procurement hubs throughout Scotland and has sought bids for them from partners. Only one construction company can be the main partner. Although the company can subcontract, the current climate is such that that in effect shuts out other construction companies from public contracts for at least 10 years. Only large companies can become part of that, because the pre-qualification process is time consuming and very expensive. At a time when the Government is refusing to use public-private partnerships to lever in private finance, that will spell disaster for many companies that are already facing difficulties because of the downturn in the housing market. It also means that smaller companies that are involved in smaller projects will be unable to take part. That is especially true in rural areas. Although there is an opt-out for projects under £75,000, it is unlikely that that will happen if the  hub procurement route is used for all public projects. The Government's focus is bureaucracy and centralisation at a time when our companies need flexibility and opportunity. The Government could helpfully provide guidance on best practice, such as on EU public procurement for councils, which would create efficiency and cut bureaucracy, but it is doing the opposite. Our construction industry is fundamental to the Scottish economy. Our young people are now losing out on training that will benefit them and our economy in the future. The economic downturn means that people need affordable homes and jobs. It is time for the Government to act.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to recruit and retain junior doctors, particularly in remote and rural areas. (S3O-9893)

I thank the minister for that response, but she will be aware that there are real concerns about the lack of junior doctors and the impact that that will have on health care in remote and rural areas. A shortage of doctors could lead to some services in those areas becoming unsustainable. How many unfilled junior doctor posts are there at the moment? How many posts will be available in August, and how many junior doctors will be available to fill them?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of NHS Highland and what issues were discussed. (S3O-9708)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the norovirus outbreak at Raigmore hospital. She might also be aware that there was a delay of five days in making information about the outbreak available to the public. What guidance is available to NHS boards on how they should publicise such outbreaks in order that staff, patients and visitors can take steps to protect themselves and others?

I welcome the debate. It is right that we think about what happens after 2013. Subsidies have protected our farmers and crofters to the point at which they are now dependent on them. They have skewed the industry's direction, and in many cases that has been detrimental. It was not so long ago that overgrazing was a big problem in the upland areas of Scotland, because of the headage payment. Then, the LFASS was moved to an area-based payment, which gave big landlords money for nothing, whereas those in need received even less. Then came the single farm payment, which was based on historical payments—and stocking levels have collapsed in the Highlands and Islands. Tinkering with the system and trying to make it easy for bureaucrats to administer simply does not work. I am concerned that Brian Pack talks about a simplified system. We need simplified systems for the people who farm, but we also need to ensure that the systems are complex enough not to skew the direction of farming.  Back when single farm payments were first discussed, they were linked to single farm contracts. My understanding of the thinking behind that at the time was that people would be able to change the way in which they farmed, moving away from maximising headage to attract subsidy. However, the simple decoupling has led to a huge decline in stocking levels, which has now reached such a point that the knock-on effects will be hard to deal with or redress. Rural communities are interdependent. One job lost on a farm or croft means that one family will lack spending power in the local shops. They might even need to move away, leaving the school roll too small to sustain. How do local auction marts work without throughput? How will the supply chain work, at a time when we are trying to promote local food? We need local slaughter facilities, but those will be much more difficult to pursue when numbers fall. The situation not only affects the viability of fragile rural communities, but has the same catastrophic effect on our environment that overgrazing had. When communities are no longer viable, who will look after the environment? We must ensure that whatever scheme is put in place is underpinned by public money for public goods. To my mind, there are a number of public goods that could underpin a scheme: food production, environmental benefit, climate change targets, the creation of sustainable rural communities and job creation. For any scheme, capping must be determined in line with the number of jobs that are provided. Ultimately, people need livelihoods, and the industry must be economically viable. It needs to be based on quality and environmental sensitivity. Had single farm payments been married with single farm contracts, which can take public goods into account, they could have worked. Challenges arise when the bureaucrats cannot cope. Individual single farm contracts would need to be drawn up, taking into account the land and the circumstances of each unit. The overall public goods provided—such as environmental benefits and food production—must also be gauged. Our farming industry is interdependent, too. Those who farm the poorest-quality ground in fragile rural areas are at the mercy of those who buy and finish their stock, as they are unable to finish the stock themselves. That means that upland farmers need to co-exist with a stable lowland farming industry, but it does not mean that both should be treated in the same way, as they face different challenges. It is wrong that 85 per cent of Scotland's land is graded as less favoured. The support must go to those who farm and croft in areas where doing so would otherwise be unviable. We need farming in those areas to  provide local food and environmental and social benefits. Those are public goods, and they must be paid for if we wish to protect those areas. The supply chain is too long to make farmers and crofters in the most fragile areas market orientated. Only by helping them to provide for local or specialist markets will the supply chain be shortened. We need public bodies to purchase locally to make that work. The Parliament is scrutinising the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill, which, in my opinion, does nothing at all to help crofting. What will save crofting is ensuring that the schemes that are in place now provide support to crofters and their communities. The bill piles on further costs through bureaucracy while doing nothing to make crofting more viable. To make all agriculture in fragile areas work, we must consider all schemes in the round, agree on what we want from them and then draw up complementary schemes, along with an overarching policy for rural areas. Farming and crofting form but one element of the rural economy, and policies in other areas should not adversely affect what we are trying to do in agriculture. We also need understanding in Edinburgh of the restrictions in rural communities. The idea that applications for funding should be made online, when the areas that are most in need of funding have no broadband, is bizarre. Such a suggestion shows an extreme lack of knowledge and understanding of the areas concerned. If we are to get over that lack of knowledge, we must ensure that rural policy decision makers are rooted in their communities and are not just faceless urban bureaucrats.

The rising rate of obesity is alarming and threatens to wipe out the health gains that have been made by many years of work aimed at reducing heart disease and smoking. It is also a complex issue, especially when dealing with young people. Young people need a balanced diet to develop properly, so extreme dieting can cause them health problems later in life. We must also be aware of the stress that is placed on young people to conform to certain images. That is a problem with girls, in particular, but it is an increasing problem with boys, too. For that reason, we need to be careful that, when tackling obesity in young people, we do not give the impression that super skinny is good, which leads to problems with eating disorders. We cannot afford to ignore these life-threatening issues. I am concerned that there is a general lack of knowledge in Scotland about nutrition, which means that people cannot make informed choices. People are also unsure about how to cook certain food. Our society depends heavily on convenience food, which tends to be less nutritious and more expensive. To change that, we need to return to teaching cooking and nutrition in school, to ensure that all young people are equipped with the knowledge that they need to make healthy choices. The loss of healthy living centres impacts on the issue, as we have a generation of people who are now parents who lack knowledge of nutrition. It should be no surprise that their children are growing up increasingly obese. The parents do not know about a balanced diet and are unable to provide it, far less pass on that knowledge to their children. As a society, we are less active. Children no longer play outside because of a fear of danger. We need to look at the availability of opportunities to exercise that allow parents to feel that their children are safe while taking part in activities. Although children are not at greater danger than they have been in past generations, parents perceive that they are. We must, therefore, ensure that there are safe activities in which young people can get involved that acknowledge those real concerns. Many organised activities come with a price tag, which disadvantages families on lower  incomes. Organised activities tend to be less common in deprived areas because of a lack of demand, which is due to the costs involved. In our society, there is a lack of tolerance of the noise that children make when they play. "No ball games" signs spring up in residential areas, but the same estates have no play areas—or, if they do, they are deemed unsafe. It is little wonder that the problem is increasing. In its briefing, the Scottish Sports Association tells us that, since 1970, our calorific intake has fallen by 750 calories a day, yet the incidence of obesity rises. Much of that increase is due to the lack of activity in our lives. Cathy Jamieson spoke about safe streets, and the briefing from Living Streets suggests a number of ways in which our streets could be changed to make them safer and to provide people with the security that they need to walk rather than take the car. Having lower speed limits in residential areas is one such idea. The previous Government carried out a lot of work creating safer routes to school, and that work must be built on if we are to get people out and about. There is an issue around encouraging young people to get involved in activities—and it is notoriously difficult to get young girls involved. I visited Atlantis Leisure in Oban, which has been innovative when it comes to involving young people in sporting activities. It has a climbing wall and provides dance classes that are very popular with young women. In order to engage young women, physical activities need to be provided in a format that they are happy with, and dance is a very good example. In addition, the facilities in sports centres should be geared to their needs. Communal showers and changing rooms can be off-putting to teenage girls, who are at an age when they are very self-conscious. There is a tremendous pressure on them to look good. Getting their hair wet means that they need hairdryers, straighteners and so on. It is pointless saying that they should not be concerned about such things—they are, and they will get involved only if such facilities are available. Several members have highlighted the fact that the poor tend to suffer more from obesity. Parents on low incomes have the challenge of feeding their families on a budget. We all know that unhealthy food is cheaper. If we compare the cost of sausage roll and chips with that of chicken and vegetables, it is not hard to see why those choices are made. If fruit and vegetables were more affordable, parents would buy them for their families. There must be a way of making them available more cheaply to low-income families. Projects such as Good for Ewe in Wester Ross are good examples of how a community can come  together, with people helping one another to access fresh vegetables. The project allows people to rent polytunnel space and to work with others in planting and growing their own food. In other areas—more affluent areas, it seems, rather than areas where there is more need—there is a rise in the number of people who are looking for allotments so that they can grow their own vegetables. Projects like Good for Ewe should be rolled out into more urban communities. Obesity increases the risk of type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure, heart attack, colon cancer and angina. The cost to the health service is huge: there are the costs of the treatment of the associated diseases; and there is the increase in the costs of drug treatment for the obesity itself. The personal cost is immeasurable. There is no simple answer to the problem. A range of issues need to be addressed in order to encourage people to eat more healthily and take more exercise, and I have advanced only a few.

The minister is aware of the problems that are experienced in many parts of the Highlands due to an inadequate patient transport service that lacks both resources and staff. What is she doing to rectify that position so that patients in those areas who miss appointments day and daily do not continue to do so?

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body whether parliament staff are offered the opportunity to donate blood at private or organised group sessions and whether staff continue to be paid while taking time to donate blood. (S3O-9556)

Given that most donor sessions tend to take place on Monday when MSPs and their staff are out of the Parliament, what steps is the SPCB taking to encourage those people to give blood? Is it, as I asked in my initial question, making the facility available at no cost to staff?

I welcome the minister's comments about working with licensed premises and the machine manufacturers to consider diversification and secure ways of selling cigarettes from behind the bar, which is an important part of the argument. I do not intend to press amendment 1 and therefore will not move amendments 2 and 3.

Amendment 1 seeks to allow radio-controlled cigarette vending machines to be retained in  licensed premises. Anyone who wishes to purchase something from such a machine must ask a member of staff to activate it. If the member of staff suspects that the person is under 18, they must challenge them in the same way that they have been trained to challenge young people who try to buy alcohol. After the member of staff activates the machine, the customer has 30 seconds to make the purchase before the machine switches off automatically. The machine also switches off immediately after a single purchase. Amendment 1 does not allow vending machines in unlicensed premises. Should a licensee or their staff sell tobacco to someone under 18, they will be subject to the penalties outlined in the bill and will also lose their right to have a vending machine. Furthermore, under the amendment, the Government will be able to ban machines through secondary legislation if it turns out that the radio-controlled approach does not work. I have lodged the amendment because I feel that vending machines are a more secure option than the provisions in the bill. Under the bill, licensed premises are not prohibited from selling tobacco products, which may be sold from behind the bar. I am concerned that that will make them more accessible to children. If a bar is family run and has living premises attached to it, the chances are that children will be behind the bar and have access to cigarettes, which not only puts temptation in their way but leaves them open to bullying and coercion. As a result, amendment 1 is more in keeping with the bill's policy intentions. I note that the Government has not told Parliament when it will implement the legislation. If it does so within months, the companies involved will not have enough time to diversify, consigning their staff to unemployment; if there is a long lead-in time, young people will have less protection over that period. I find the Government's decision not to accept my proposal for a pilot of the system unreasonable. After all, if it works, it works; if it does not, the minister will be able to move to ban these machines in the same proposed timeframe. If she does not accept the amendment, many people will be concerned about their jobs. She needs to take that prospect seriously and move quickly to work with the companies involved. That said, of course, the saving of lives will always outweigh the saving of jobs. However, that is not the reason for amendment 1, which is about providing secure sales to protect young people while tobacco is still legally available. The other amendments in the group are consequential to amendment 1. I move amendment 1.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to deal with potential flooding situations resulting from the current severe weather conditions. (S3O-9172)

The minister is aware that alongside the continued thaw, there is a risk of heavy rain and that more snow is forecast. Will she reassure me that all steps are being taken by the Scottish Government and local authorities to ensure that all areas prone to flooding are fully protected? Will she consider having a central fund so that areas of most need are prioritised?

I am pleased to take part in the debate. It could be viewed as a debate on two separate topics, unless one agrees with the Conservatives that one policy directly influences the other. I do not, but both issues are important and I am grateful for the opportunity to debate them. As my colleagues outlined earlier, the Labour Party in Scotland has long advocated that the Government should make prescriptions free for cancer sufferers. That is the case in England and Wales, and we believe that that should be a priority for Scotland. It should happen now rather than be phased in. It is unacceptable that, due to the Government's policy, cancer sufferers north of the border still have to pay prescription charges.

I am not creating artificial divisions. I am not talking about stopping the minister's policy of free prescriptions for all; I am talking about rebalancing her policy and phasing it in differently, in a way that would allow cancer patients to have free prescriptions now. It would mean that people like me would have to wait a little longer to get free prescriptions, but I, for one, would be willing to do that so that cancer patients could be prioritised. Cathy Jamieson mentioned the well-known fact that cancer patients suffer economically due to lengthy periods off work and the cost of their illness. Macmillan Cancer Support and Citizens Advice Scotland have considered the issue of fuel poverty, but there are many other costs—a point that a CAB report a couple of years ago made strongly. Free prescriptions would alleviate some of that financial pressure at a difficult time.

I do not think that the member has listened to a word I have said. I suggest free ear syringing for him. The motion talks about health visitors, and suggests that the money that would be used to reduce the prescription charge could instead be used to increase health visitor numbers. As Christine Grahame mentioned, the Health and  Sport Committee recently carried out an inquiry into child and adolescent mental health services. It became obvious that health visitors had a crucial role to play, both by identifying children in their early years who were developing mental health issues and by identifying mothers who were suffering from post-natal depression. I think that most of us would agree that we need more health visitors. Those resources need to be targeted towards families in most need, and the current policy needs to be refocused to ensure that it is universal for longer. Families need a minimum service throughout the early years. At the moment, some families fall through the safety net because of where they live or because their family is seen as not being in a priority group. It is obvious that a family needs a high level of intervention if they live in deprivation or have a drug or alcohol problem, but the universal service lasts only eight weeks, which means that families who develop problems after eight weeks have little or no support. One of the problems is that the number of people training as health visitors has fallen. Although we had a high in 2001-02, it has been falling steadily ever since. Unless we increase the number of people in training, we will not be able to fill any additional posts that we create. In places such as Highland, no health visitors are being trained because of the review of nursing in the community pilot, which seeks to assimilate the health visitor role into the new community nurse role. Fewer people will consider health visiting as a career because of the uncertainty hanging over the profession.

Yes, there certainly is. I ask the minister to intervene to ensure that health boards that have stopped training reverse that retrograde step so that the career of health visitor is retained and recognised. Our nursing and health visiting professions have an age profile that means that large numbers will retire at the same time in the near future. I have raised that with the minister to ensure that we have enough training places for newly trained midwives to fill the gap. We need to do the same with health visitors. I return to the review of nursing in the community pilots. I am puzzled that health visitors were included when community midwives were not, although their roles are interlinked. Rather than creating a new community nurse role, I suggest that we look at developing a team that works closely together and includes social workers, midwives, community nurses and health visitors. That would be more challenging in rural  areas, but we have heard of GPs and nurses who are highly skilled generalists working in that way. I ask the minister to look at how highly skilled generalists are rewarded and how their careers can progress. Specialists with similar levels of training have that recognised in their qualifications and therefore their pay, but skilled generalists are not recognised in a qualification, which means that they do not have the same career progression or pay. I ask the minister to reflect on those issues and hope that she will find a solution for rural areas.

The American declaration of independence declares that people have "certain unalienable Rights" and "that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness." Happiness is not attainable by those with poor mental health. We need to tackle that issue to enable children to grow up leading fulfilled and happy lives. We need to ensure that all our citizens have a right to good mental health, to help them with their pursuit of happiness. We need to start at a young age, to help young people to develop resilience and emotional wellbeing; Action for Children highlighted that issue in its submission to the Health and Sport Committee's inquiry. The report's discussion of the consequences of poor mental health makes stark reading. Having inadequate services in place for children and young people who have mental health problems is inexcusable: the effect on their development and life chances is severe. Malcolm Chisholm talked about the American research that has been done into the issue. Our prison statistics show that the vast majority of prisoners have mental health problems. Our inability to deal with mental health issues at an early age creates problems for the future, as well as a cost to our society. However, the cost to the person who is affected is immeasurable. Those who gave evidence to the committee made it clear that "The Mental Health of Children and Young People: A Framework for Promotion, Prevention and Care" was the right way forward; the problem was in its implementation. The Government is committed to implementing the framework by 2015. The long lead-in time means that work towards implementation of the framework is often patchy and inconsistent. The committee is keen that interim targets should be put in place, to ensure that progress is measured. That would also allow inconsistencies to be identified. Waiting times are far too long. As we have heard, in Highland some people wait for more than a year for an out-patient appointment. That is unacceptable for an adult, but it is even more unacceptable for a child in its formative years. Each day, week or month that goes by without  intervention makes that intervention more difficult and makes treatment longer. In its report, the committee discussed the lack of research and the need to increase staffing levels to allow research time, as well as to cut waiting times and to increase service provision. Research is fundamental to improving the way in which treatment is offered. It is a false economy to reduce research in order to increase patient care—both are required. Possibly the most unacceptable wait is for reports to the children's panel. When young people find themselves at a children's panel, they are already at crisis point. The panel needs to be able to react quickly and to intervene to address the situation in which that young person finds themselves. Waiting times of up to five months were quoted in evidence; that is too long for a young person who is already in crisis. Staffing levels directly affect service delivery, research work and the work of the children's panel. We therefore need more investment in the training and recruitment of professionals to increase the workforce. The committee looked at the transition from CAMHS to adult services. It became obvious that the two services worked very differently and that many young people had difficulties with the transition. There were several aspects to the issue: the handover, the way of dealing with patients in the two services, and the way in which patients could be transferred. As we have already heard, children's services often use a broader definition of mental health that does not fit easily with adult service provision. Action for Children made the point that it is important to keep that wide definition within children's services, to allow for early intervention. It must be possible for professionals from both services to work together to draw up a single pathway that is geared to the needs of the individual. In our casework, we often hear of families who feel abandoned when a child leaves school and falls into adult service provision. There is a lack of support and advice and a lack of protected workplaces or college places. The committee was frustrated by that issue and recommended the setting up of a transitional service to bridge the gap between young people's services and adult services. We have been discussing for many years the effect of the stigma that is attached to mental health issues. I agree with Action for Children's statement that work needs to be carried out locally and nationally to deal with the issue. If we do not deal with it, those needing help will be reluctant to ask for it. It is therefore even more crucial to provide an immediate response to those who ask  for help, given that they may already have suffered in silence for some time. School counselling is one way of providing help in familiar settings, which helps to remove stigma. However, the British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy tells us that Scotland is lagging behind: "the Governments of Wales and Northern Ireland have in place national strategies for school counselling and its implementation, and provide ring fenced funding for the provision of these services in every secondary school". We must ensure that we keep pace and provide these services to all children. There are many other issues that have not been touched on in the report, including services to deaf people and tailored services for those who suffer from anorexia. Both groups need to travel out of Scotland for specialist care, which, at a time when people need the support of their families and friends, can only hamper their recovery. We need those services locally. The committee's report is sound and well balanced. I therefore appeal to the Government to implement its recommendations.

The minister says that he listened to crofting counties, but the one thing missing from the bill is the reinstatement of the croft housing loan scheme. Will he commit to that scheme, having heard the unanimous voice of crofters all over the Highlands and Islands?

The cabinet secretary needs to be aware that people with clinical need are not receiving a service from the patient transport service. She will be aware—as I have written to her and asked her many questions on the issue—that it is difficult to get information on the subject. Will she ask Audit Scotland to consider the cost to the health service of the lack of transport services? There are costs from missed appointments but, even worse, there are the costs of the taxi fares that are being charged to NHS boards.

Will the member give way?

I make it clear that I propose to make it an offence to breach the interdicts to which Christine Grahame referred. That would mean not only that the power of arrest could be attached but that breaching an interdict could be punished by up to five years—not two days—in prison.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in this important debate. Domestic abuse has been taken seriously by this Parliament, but we still have much to do. We are a long way behind other countries in our response, which is why this week I launched a consultation on a member's bill to improve the protection that we give to victims. There are three parts to the proposal: first, automatic access to non-means-tested legal aid for anyone looking for an injunction with powers of arrest to protect them from abuse; secondly, a provision that a breach of such an injunction would  become a criminal offence, punishable with a prison term; and thirdly, easier access to non-harassment orders by removing the requirement to show a course of conduct. It is my opinion that the state has a duty to protect people from abuse. In any other crime, the state takes on the roles of investigation and prosecution to protect the victim, but that is not always the case with domestic abuse. That means that people who suffer from abuse—let us be clear that the vast majority of them are women—need to access support for themselves, but whether they can protect themselves and their families depends on whether they can afford it. The Government has raised the income level that is taken into account when calculating legal aid contributions, which will make civil legal aid more easily accessible for many, but it is still wrong that someone is required to pay for their own protection in a modern Scotland. When a perpetrator breaches an interdict, they can be arrested and held for a couple of days. If in breaching the interdict they commit a crime—for example, an assault—they will be charged with that offence and prosecuted. However, if they do not commit a crime while breaching an interdict—for example, if they just sit outside someone's house—all that can happen is that they are removed and remanded for a couple of days. The victim can return to the court regarding the breach of interdict, but that involves more cost, time and probably harassment, while the perpetrator gets legal aid to defend himself. There is something wrong with a system that protects the offender but not the victim. The second part of the consultation involves making all breaches of interdicts a crime. That would mean that the state rather than the victim would have to deal with any breach by the perpetrator of the abuse. Currently, interdicts are difficult to get because it is difficult to find corroboration. Due to the lack of real sanctions, they also offer limited protection.

My proposal builds on what is in the 1981 act and the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001. It would give more teeth to those injunctions and ensure that their breach was a crime.

I want to make progress before I take another intervention. Thirdly, I am consulting on non-harassment orders, which are currently available and which  provide more protection for the victim. They can be requested by a procurator fiscal during a disposal, or the victim can apply for them themselves through the civil courts. Breaching a non-harassment order carries a prison sentence of up to five years, and they are therefore a much better deterrent. However, to get a non-harassment order it is necessary to show a course of conduct; the perpetrator needs to have been convicted of a crime of harassment twice before a non-harassment order can be applied for. The very nature of domestic abuse means that, in reality, those orders are out of the reach of many victims. Corroboration is needed to secure a conviction but, because the crimes are committed behind closed doors, it is difficult to find such corroboration once, far less twice. The nature of domestic abuse is such that the victim often tries to hide the crime, which makes detection and prosecution even more difficult. When a victim finds the strength to come forward, the state needs to respond with high levels of protection. It is not clear to me why non-harassment orders require a higher level of proof than a conviction for an offence. A non-harassment order is not a conviction. If someone does not breach it, there is no crime and no conviction. It is a vehicle to prevent future abuse, not to punish past abuse. If a victim can assert that they reasonably suspect that someone might abuse them in the future, they should be granted a non-harassment order. That is the case in Australia, where the courts work on the balance of probability rather than a conviction. Because of the restrictions of members' bills, I cannot include such a provision in my bill, because it is difficult for a member to propose such legislation. While we look at protecting victims, we need to look at protecting the children who are affected by such crimes. In this country, we underestimate the damage caused to children; in countries such as New Zealand, access to the children is not given to parents who are found to have committed domestic violence or are suspected of it. My postbag is full of correspondence about cases in which the justice system has been used as a lever for further abuse when a couple have split up. When an abusive partner gets access to the children, they use that lever to continue to abuse their victim. I have acknowledged that the bill that I am proposing is limited, but that is due to the nature of members' bills—there is a difficulty in progressing complex issues in that way. However, I believe that the bill is a step in the right direction, and I ask members to respond to my consultation and support the process in order that we have better protection for those who suffer abuse.

I will address the changes to non-harassment orders in section 15 of the bill, which I do not think anyone has dealt with yet. I very much welcome section 15, but I feel that it does not go far  enough. Many victims of abuse would benefit from a non-harassment order, but we can see from the financial memorandum that that disposal is seldom used. In 2006, 24 non-harassment orders were granted; in 2007, the figure was 23; and in 2008, there was a slight rise to 29. Contrast that with the figure that David McLetchie quoted of 53,681 cases of domestic abuse reported to the police—that shows a lamentable level of intervention by our courts. When I visited Australia and New Zealand in October, I met people and agencies that are involved in combating domestic abuse. I was impressed by the seamless support that they give. I was especially surprised to see how much it was driven by the police and the justice department. In Australia, the police have powers to put in place a 24-hour injunction without the support or agreement of the victim. The injunction is formalised in court, and justice officials support the victim through the process and ensure that the court hearing occurs prior to the injunction being spent. There is also real recognition of the damage that is done to a child who is brought up witnessing domestic abuse. Children, too, have access to the injunctions in their own right and can seek them with the support of children's services. However, children's services can apply for an injunction on the child's behalf without their agreement. The abuser can then be removed from the home and resources can be put in place to support the children and the non-abusive parent. The victim does not need to take any action and is not responsible for their own protection: the state is. That protects them from retribution, but it also takes into account the distinct nature of domestic abuse. It is the only crime I know of where the victim can be complicit in covering up the crime. That is because, by the time a recognised offence takes place, the victim has been undermined to the extent that they almost accept what is happening to them. The abuser ensures that the victim's confidence and self-esteem is slowly undermined; only then does the physical abuse start. In this country, we prosecute only the physical abuse; there is no offence that covers the mental abuse. That means that, when the relationship becomes violent, the victims often blame themselves. In many circumstances, they also feel unable to exist outside the relationship, so they tend to become the best witness for the defence. That is why Women's Aid puts so much emphasis on building a victim's confidence and self-esteem. Only after that has happened are they able to take steps to protect themselves and their children. We put the onus on victims to protect themselves; that  does not happen with any other crime of assault, far less with crimes against property. The bill amends the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 to enable the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service to apply for a non-harassment order against a person who has been convicted of crimes involving harassment. The order is not a conviction in itself, but it guards against future harassment. A breach of the order is a criminal offence, which can be punished by up to five years in prison. An order can be applied for where there is evidence of a course of conduct, involving convictions for harassment. It cannot therefore be applied for unless there has been at least one previous conviction for harassment and the current incident before the court has also led to a conviction. My reading of section 15 is that the amendment of the 1995 act lowers the barrier from "harassment" to "misconduct towards the victim". However, it is not clear from the bill or the explanatory notes what offence would encompass "misconduct towards the victim" and whether it would be prosecuted or lead to a conviction. However, it is clear from the guidance that a previous conviction is still required, albeit for a lesser charge. The change also makes it easier for evidence of previous convictions to be presented to the court, but that does not remove the need for a previous conviction. It removes the requirement for a course of conduct amounting to harassment, but leaves the requirement for a course of conduct regarding "misconduct towards the victim", which will have to lead to a criminal conviction. It is ludicrous that, in this most difficult of crimes to prosecute, a course of conduct is required. If an offence has been committed, a non-harassment order should be granted; one offence is one too many and any future recurrence should be prevented. I ask the Government to lodge amendments at stage 2 that would give greater protection.

The state needs to protect all victims of crime.

In light of her comments, will the cabinet secretary ensure that the Government's website is amended to give the correct information about hand hygiene?

Will the member give way?

I have previously called for the Vale of Leven inquiry to be extended to cover all C diff cases in Scotland, and I continue to make that call. Each time there is an outbreak, we realise that the lessons that were learnt from previous outbreaks have not been passed on. Each hospital appears to be working in a vacuum, with little central advice and guidance. It is hugely frustrating that there is no clear patient pathway to deal with outbreaks. The Government needs to issue clear advice to boards and their staff on best practice during an outbreak to ensure that it is dealt with appropriately and efficiently. Let me be clear: health professionals deal with this deadly infection daily and most do so in a way that halts the spread, but they never make the headlines. We need all outbreaks to be dealt with  in that way, which requires more information and support from the centre. I appreciate that the Government will wish to take on board the findings of the Vale of Leven inquiry and reflect them in central guidance, but that should not be used as an excuse not to issue clear and accessible guidance now. However, it is a reason to extend the inquiry to the rest of Scotland. Information needs to be made widely available to patients and visitors in hospitals and to people in the community in general. Although it should be easier to deal with the risks of infection spread in the care home sector, given the use of single rooms, there are still issues for staff, clients and visitors to bear in mind in order to stop the spread. We have anecdotal evidence from health professionals that some care homes do not deal adequately with infection spread, which leads to emergency admissions to hospital and the subsequent spread of infection while the problem is being diagnosed and dealt with. There must be clear information for the public about what they should do to stop the spread of infection. That very much applies to my region, where hospitals tends to cover large areas and visitors might know several people in the hospital and visit them all at the same time. Jackie Baillie mentioned the website. I looked at the Government's website as I was preparing my notes for the debate. I found it easily, given that SPICe had sent me a link to it. I looked to see what advice was available to members of the public. In the "frequently asked questions" section, I clicked on the question: "What can I do to prevent infections?" The answer started off well enough: "The most important thing you can do is to wash and dry your hands". However, that was followed by: "(or use alcohol gel if provided)." The use of the word "or" implies that using the alcohol gel is an adequate substitute for washing hands, but it is not, because C diff is not killed by alcohol gel—and yet that is the advice on the Government's own website. Our hospitals have a profusion of bottles of alcohol gel, which provide a false sense of security that is backed up by misleading information on the Government's website. The only way that we can deal with hospital-acquired infections is to wash our hands when arriving, when leaving and between visits to different patients. We should also use the hand gels that are provided for additional protection against MRSA. Until that message is common  knowledge, hospital staff will be fighting a losing battle. In addition to advice and guidance on best practice being made available to patients, they should also be informed of outbreaks on the wards where they are placed. That information, together with additional guidance on hygiene, would be helpful in allowing patients themselves to tackle the spread of infection and it would remove some of the concern that people have when they go into hospital. If they were assured of open, honest information, they would be much more at ease with the prospect of being hospitalised and the risks involved. There needs to be the same emphasis on cleaning in hospitals that there is on general patient care. We have heard reports of patients having to use soiled toilet facilities and of very ill patients attempting to clean up after themselves without equipment or disinfectant. A reactive cleaning service needs to be available to nursing staff when a patient soils a communal area. It is unacceptable that the patient should be left to try to clean up or that that task should fall to already overstretched nursing staff. We need specialist, trained cleaners to be available to provide a rapid response. We also hear of families being asked to wash soiled linen with no advice on how they should do that to eradicate infection. Although families might wish to do washing for loved ones, they should be advised against doing so. If that means that the hospital needs to provide night clothes and gowns—in place of the patients' own clothes—during an outbreak, that is what should happen. In some hospitals, a patient's laundry is given to the family in sealed bags that dissolve in the washing machine. We need good advice and investment in good practice. The Government's purchase of steam cleaners for hospitals was welcome, but that intervention cannot sit alone. When patients are diagnosed with an infection, the risk of spread is apparent. C diff can remain on hospital surfaces and, unless they are cleaned sufficiently with disinfectants that contain bleach, the threat of infection spread remains. Such cleaning must be applied to infected patients' hospital beds and cabinets, which might be moved between wards and single rooms during a patient's treatment. On the patient's recovery, those items should be deep cleaned in the same way that the rooms are deep cleaned, because moving that furniture back into a ward will only spread infection. I am conscious that everything that I have said is about protocols, systems and guidance, which are imperative. However, we cannot afford to lose  sight of the individual stories behind the debate of those who have lost loved ones and those who have been struck down by these infections—their feelings, their dignity and their pain. As we strive to eradicate these deadly infections, we should never lose sight of the fact that each statistic represents a human cost. Each of the families involved is entitled to an inquiry, and those families are being failed by this Government.

To ask the Scottish Executive what incentive schemes national health service boards have in place to ensure the recruitment and retention of medical staff, particularly in remote and rural areas. (S3O-8423)

The minister may be aware that there is a particular problem in NHS Highland with the recruitment and retention of consultants specialising in learning disabilities. That is now a greater problem, following the sad death of Dr Iain White. The minister may also be aware of problems in recruiting and retaining other medical staff, such as dentists and doctors, in remote and rural areas. Will she consider extending the golden hello payments to other forms of staff in remote and rural areas and increasing funding to health boards that find themselves in that position?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether all local authorities pay the minimum national allowance to kinship carers. (S3O-8282)

I find it hugely disappointing that not all local authorities are making the payment or making it at the required level. Will the minister consider ring fencing the money to ensure that it goes to those people? Will he also ensure that all kinship carers get the support of local support groups, which, at the moment, are open only to those who care for looked-after children?

I welcome this debate, but it is disappointing that our focus is on minimum pricing. I want to consider the wider debate. I will be clear. I remain to be convinced about minimum pricing, not because I do not think that there is a problem to be tackled but because I think that it is a blunt instrument. It would punish the whole community for the excesses of the minority, which will remain unaffected. People who are addicted will feed that addiction, regardless of the cost. I do not believe that every person who is addicted to alcohol will turn to crime, but I believe that minimum pricing would impact on families and diets. We all know that alcohol consumption has a greater effect on the health of people with a poor diet than on the health of others. Minimum pricing would mean increases in the outgoings of people on a fixed income, such as those who receive a state pension, who would have to cut their consumption accordingly. It does not take into account our cultural issues with alcohol. Why do Scotland and other northern countries have an attitude towards alcohol that is different from that of our Mediterranean cousins? If minimum pricing worked, surely Norway would have no issues with alcohol to deal with. I raise such issues because they need to be answered if the policy is to succeed. As I said, I wish to explore the wider issues in the debate. I am concerned that many other matters need to be tackled before we adopt such an all-encompassing policy. I am clear, however, that we need to tackle our drinking culture and ensure that people are diverted from their  potentially harmful behaviour before it becomes a health issue. In our culture, we drink both to celebrate and to commiserate. Many of our social interactions are based around a pub culture. That culture makes it difficult for people with drink problems to socialise, and it makes it very difficult for people who are addicted to tackle their drinking without feeling excluded from society. Many aspects of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 have recently been implemented, but we have not yet had the opportunity to measure how those measures are impacting on our drink problem and the wider drinking culture. Bill Aitken spoke about enforcement of the laws that are currently in place. They are not being enforced. He seems to think that enforcement has started, but I disagree. Where I live, I see people staggering out of pubs all the time. Nobody has tried to stop them drinking while on licensed premises. We need to invest more in education, equipping young people with the information that they need to make themselves aware of the health problems that stem from excessive alcohol consumption and allowing them to make informed choices. Nigel Don said that education does not work and will not change our culture. How, then, does he explain our change of attitude to drink-driving? When I was young drink-driving was the norm; now, it is totally unacceptable. We need to provide adequate support for people who find themselves dependent on alcohol. I often hear about people with drink problems who seek help but find that none is available. Where help is available, there are long waiting lists. As with any addiction, help needs to be available when the person is ready to accept it. A delay can lead to deterioration in their condition or, indeed, to a change of heart as the addiction prevails. It is disingenuous of a Government to propose to tackle alcohol abuse by ticking the minimum-pricing box while sitting back and letting establishments such as Beechwood house in Inverness fold. Beechwood house provides support and counselling for those with alcohol problems, and it is often oversubscribed. It also provides a place of safety where the police can take people who have been picked up for being drunk and incapable. That means that there is less pressure on accident and emergency services, and that the people concerned do not find themselves in police cells. As we have seen in the past, locking up people who are very drunk in police cells has led to deaths. Beechwood provides a safe place for them to go, and it allows their excessive drinking to be addressed.  The loss of Beechwood house would have a huge impact on the lives of people in the Inverness area who have drink problems and whose drinking has reached dangerous levels. If the Government is serious about tackling harmful drinking and saving lives, it needs to get real about facilities such as Beechwood, not just by ensuring that they are funded but by providing increased capacity. If minimum pricing was the only avenue left to tackle alcohol abuse, I am sure that I and everybody else would support it. My concern is that steps that could make a real difference are being ignored because of their complexity. Minimum pricing is a headline-grabbing concept, but I remain to be convinced that it will change our culture, let alone save lives.

Will the minister give way?

Presiding Officer, I am grateful that you have allowed me to contribute to the debate, despite my absence for part of it; I also apologise to members who spoke while I was out of the chamber. I was fleetingly on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee when it was drawing up its report, and I was pleased to be involved, as rural housing is an issue that I am very concerned about. The committee's report makes excellent recommendations, although I will deal with only a couple of them today. The first is recommendation 17, in paragraph 201, on "the reinstatement of the loan element in croft house assistance". It is hugely disappointing that the Government has ruled out accepting that recommendation. Over the summer, I attended many meetings with crofters regarding crofting reform legislation. Many of the issues that concerned crofters about the proposed legislation could have been dealt with through the reintroduction of that type of loan. The crofters to whom I spoke were unanimous in support of the recommendation. The Government has ruled out the reinstatement of the loan element on the basis "that the private sector is better equipped to provide financial products." However, the private sector will lend only to those who can guarantee an income that will ensure repayment. That was the case back in the time when bankers were taking risks, and it is doubly so now. The Government has missed a crucial point with regard to crofting: if crofting were profitable and provided a stable income, it would not be in crisis. Like many other people in remote and rural communities, crofters have to work several jobs, some temporary or seasonal, to make a living. That type of work does not provide the stability of income that is required for private borrowing. Therefore, the only way to build on the site is to decroft and possibly sell a plot from the croft to raise some income. However, that is only possible in the more desirable areas of the crofting counties. In the less accessible or less attractive areas, substandard housing is a real issue.  The crofters building grants and loans scheme dealt with that by providing a grant that made a meaningful contribution to the cost of building a house, as well as a top-up loan element, which allowed crofters to have adequate accommodation. Few crofters, if any, ever defaulted, despite the instability of their income. The second issue that I want to mention is recommendation 16, in paragraph 187, on assumed rent income in the housing association grant formula. I expressed concern about the formula in a debate on housing in February, and I do not apologise for doing so again. We are all aware that the cost of building affordable housing in rural areas is higher than it is in urban areas. In rural areas, there are no economies of scale and the cost of getting services such as electricity and water to plots can be huge. In some rural areas, the cost of land is much higher than it is in urban areas. Housing associations need to apply for additional housing association grant to cover such costs. The additional funding is normally forthcoming, but it comes with conditions. The Government assumes a rent level on properties that get additional housing association grant. The assumed rent level is normally significantly higher than the rent that can be charged in the local area and takes no account of wage levels or ability to pay. Given work patterns in remote communities, the higher rents are unaffordable and cannot be passed on to tenants. When the Government uses the assumed rent in its calculations, the funding equation falls apart, because the assumed rent is higher than the actual rent that is charged. Housing associations are able to borrow against the actual rent, but additional housing association grant is calculated on the basis of the assumed rent. The assumed rent lowers the amount of housing association grant payable, but the shortfall cannot be made up from borrowing, because the actual rent is lower and will not support the additional financing. Therefore, there is always a funding gap between housing association grant and mortgage. Small rural housing associations cannot finance that gap and therefore cannot build. The Government's response to recommendation 16 was disappointing. It said: "A small number of rural Housing Associations have reported difficulties when working to the standard HAG appraisal assumptions and the notional rent assumptions deployed in our appraisal process, which are higher in some cases than the rents being charged locally. We do not propose any further adjustment to these assumptions, but will continue to work with RSLs to identify local solutions to the particular difficulties that they identify." I am keen to learn what local solutions have been identified and put in place.  The committee highlighted many areas in which progress would make an impact on the availability of housing in remote and rural communities. I have mentioned two recommendations, both of which are extremely important. If those and other recommendations were taken up, there would be an impact on the lives and opportunities of the people whom we seek to serve.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made to assist people who have been affected by the recent flooding in the Moray area. (S3O-8037)

The minister will be aware that Moray Council has a £5 million excess on its flood insurance, which is due primarily to previous flooding events. Given that there is already pressure on council budgets, does the minister believe that Moray Council has sufficient financial reserves to cover the costs of the clean-up operation? If not, will funding be made available from the Belwin scheme?

I take issue with the member's interpretation of the motion. I do not believe that giving someone paid time off is an incentive; I believe that it is the removal of a barrier that might stop people from donating. The granting of paid time off to go to the doctor certainly does not incentivise me to go to the doctor, for instance.

I am grateful to members who signed my motion. In doing so, they have allowed the debate to take place. On behalf of the Parliament, I thank Thomas Bradley, who has made 600 blood donations since he started to donate in 1967. [ Applause. ] The Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service has told me: "There has hardly been a time in his life when Thomas has not been donating regularly—he still continues to donate platelets every three weeks. He says that he has been very lucky with his health, with only one bad spell back in 1971. Thomas is a motorbike fanatic, and after a serious accident he needed emergency surgery and, ironically, a life saving blood transfusion. Thomas was aware that someone else had donated the blood that he needed, and now sees his donations as a way to return the favour. Thomas has made a fantastic contribution, and has saved hundreds of lives, both directly and by allowing patients to undergo vital treatment. We cannot thank him enough!" Thomas's contribution is humbling. I am envious of it—my donation record is considerably smaller than his. However, each donation can save a life. The decision to give blood was difficult for me because I am terrified of needles. I reflected on that when I was preparing for the debate. I thought that not a lot had changed since I first gave blood, but that is not strictly true. I did not sleep at all the night before I first gave blood because I was absolutely petrified. Things are better now. I sleep the night before; the fear does not really kick in until I am lying on the bed. I still get scared, but being scared is not an excuse. If I can donate blood, anyone can. Of course, that fear pales into  insignificance compared with that which families face when their loved ones are lying seriously ill waiting for a blood transfusion. On one occasion when I was giving blood, I was beside somebody who worked for a major high street chemist. My fellow donor commented to the nurse that she would have to work late that night to make up the time she had spent giving blood. I was shocked. It occurred to me that if she had been unable to work late due to a family commitment or travel arrangements she could not have donated, and I wondered how many others are in the same position. My plea is simple: people should be allowed paid time off to give blood. Employers should give people paid time off to do a range of things. They give people paid time off to keep medical and dental appointments, for example. Many go further and invite the transfusion service to come to their workplace with a donor vehicle or for smaller boardroom donor sessions if they do not have the critical mass of workers to justify the use of a donor vehicle. I pay tribute to those employers for going that extra step. Lives are at stake if people do not donate. Employers should therefore give people paid time off for our collective health care as they do in order that our individual health care needs can be met. I hope that, in her summing up, the minister will emphasise the need for donors and add her voice to my plea. The issue is even more important because experts are warning of a rise in swine flu cases in the autumn: if a rise occurs, donors will be affected just like everyone else, and if they contract swine flu they will not be allowed to donate blood until they are clear of the virus. I think that that will also be the case for people who have been in close contact with someone with swine flu. There is therefore a real possibility that supplies of blood could be hit. More donors would ensure a secure transfusion service. I am sure that many employers will say that, in a time of economic downturn, they cannot countenance what I want. It presents a challenge, but I am not suggesting that people travel long distances to give blood. Giving blood should take no longer than keeping a doctor's appointment. The Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service encourages three donations per person per year. That does not add up to a huge time commitment for individuals or employers, but the contribution to society is immense. On a more serious note, employers need to consider how they would feel if their loved ones needed a blood donation. David Stewart, Peter Peacock and I have implemented a policy whereby our staff are allowed paid time off to donate blood. As a result, we have four new donors in our team and more than 50 per cent of our workforce now donates.  Some had given blood previously but been turned away because they were on medication, but the medication criteria have changed and some people who were unable to donate can now do so. I urge anyone who has been turned away owing to a medical condition or because they were taking medication to check whether they now fall into the category of those who are allowed to give blood. This week, the Public Petitions Committee heard a petition that asked for blood donors to be paid for their donations. I want to make it clear that that is not what I am asking for; people should act selflessly in donating blood—but they should not face financial detriment. Although I do not agree with the terms of the petition, I was heartened to see young people highlight the issue and take part in this important debate. It is great that our young people see the importance of donation and I am glad that they are looking for ways to increase our donor base. I was recently made aware of the Richard Titmus book "The Gift Relationship: From Human Blood to Social Policy". Titmus argues that voluntary blood donation is an example of genuine socialism; that people who gift blood to strangers do so in a truly altruistic action. He goes on to argue that, although giving blood might make us feel a bit queasy for a short while—or a longer time, for some of us—it may also make us feel more human and content with ourselves and others. The argument is relevant to today's debate. Collective action by Government, employers and others is needed to support the gift relationship. People need to be given a real opportunity to donate blood; we need to make it convenient for them to do so. If they were given that opportunity, many more people would choose to give blood, not only for the purely practical reason of increasing the amount of blood that flows through the transfusion service but as an expression of their fellowship with other people and of the intrinsically social nature of their humanity.

I will highlight several issues, the first of which is the provision of a new defence for selling tobacco to underage people, which is that no reasonable person could have suspected that they were underage. The committee's evidence suggested that that would be a retrograde step, especially for test purchasing. Young people grow up quickly, but the due process of the law takes time. A young person who takes part in a test purchase will look a great deal older when the case comes to court. The defence would allow the unscrupulous to challenge test-purchasing cases. The committee noted that it was not an offence for a person under 18 to buy or possess tobacco products. That is clearly out of step with the alcohol legislation and the balance needs to be redressed for the protection of both retailers and the young people involved.

There are still test-purchasing issues. If the Government were to create that new defence the young person would be asked to turn up at court. We might need to look at that. I would be interested to see how that situation might be avoided in cases of test-purchasing of alcohol because I can foresee the same people making the same defence. The committee was in broad agreement on that issue. I want to focus on more contentious issues. First, I differed from the majority of the committee and from my colleagues on cigarette vending machines. I believe that the Scottish ministers should take powers to ban such machines through subordinate legislation if the new restrictions do not work. That would give the licensed trade the opportunity to pilot new machines and to make them more secure. Radio-controlled operation has been piloted in England, but it has not been properly evaluated. We heard in evidence that, although vending machines would be banned, licensees could sell tobacco from behind the bar as long as it was not on public display. Witnesses said that that would create a security problem. If customers and staff were able freely to access cigarettes behind the bar, that would lead to increased theft. More worrying would be the situation in a family-run pub, where children would have free access to those products and could take them for  themselves or even be bullied into taking them for other children. Secondly, a large number of jobs will be at risk if the bill goes through and that cannot be ignored. The information given to the committee when we started our scrutiny of the bill was that a minimal number of jobs would be lost, but we were given evidence that many more would be lost. Thirdly, for those who live in rural areas the local pub can often be the only source of tobacco products. If it is unworkable to sell tobacco products behind the bar, rural areas would not have the same access to them, which would make the legislation unworkable there. For those reasons, I differed from other members of the committee. I turn to part 2 of the bill. There was general agreement to back the RCN's call to give the Scottish ministers the power to extend the range of medical practitioners who are able to bid for a GMS contract. It was felt that the original consultation had not been sufficient to allow the Government to make that change in the bill. Giving ministers the power to do that would allow for further consultation prior to implementation. If that consultation showed that the RCN's members were able to deliver these contracts, it would be a retrograde step if we had to wait for further primary legislation. The committee backed the RCN's plea and I hope that the minister will lodge the necessary amendment at stage 2. That leads me to the thorny issue of the GMS contracts and the commercial sector. I want to be clear: GPs are private contractors. Paragraph 124 of the stage 1 report states: "Around 88% of primary medical services are delivered through a GMS contract; 9% through a section 17C contract and 3% through salaried staff working directly for health boards." That means that 88 per cent of GPs are private contractors. In evidence, no one was able to show a clear difference between a private contractor and a commercial organisation. The BMA tried: apparently, a medical training makes someone a better person and better able to put patients above profit. That would appear to suggest that a GP employed by a commercial contractor was a lesser being—an assertion with which the BMA was equally uncomfortable. The BMA's evidence was poor; it smacked of a group of people who were keen to secure their monopoly. I suppose that, as a representative organisation, it was keen to protect the commercial interests of the majority of its members. However, I have a real difficulty in putting in place legislation that gives one profit-making organisation a commercial advantage over another.

My preference would be that everyone who works for the NHS delivering front-line patient care should be employed by the NHS. [ Interruption. ] I see that my colleagues in the Conservative party are perhaps not so happy with that proposition. The negotiations over the swine flu vaccine should be testament to the fact that the GP contract is crippling the NHS. That is what happens when we give one commercial group a monopoly with no checks and balances. The cabinet secretary refused to give me a hearing on that in the committee, so I am trying again today to make the point. The committee was united in saying that, if the general principles of the bill were agreed, it would need significant amendment to allow social enterprises and community organisations to hold those contracts, too, especially in areas such as the Highlands and Islands, where recruitment is an issue. Removing solutions from our communities would be wrong. In conclusion, I want to bring home the points that I made quite fairly. Tobacco products should be subject to the same purchase controls as alcohol. Vending machines in pubs should have a stay of execution until systems have been piloted and assessed. Ministers should be able to use secondary legislation to allow nurses to hold GMS contracts. I look forward to stage 2 amendments that will deal with those important issues.

In the Health and Sport Committee's work, sport is not often given the prominence that it deserves. Health is a huge area; there is always pressure on our time to discuss more medical-related issues and legislation. It seems from the Government's response to the committee's report that it faces some of the same challenges. The committee is very aware of the need to change the balance of health care from acute to primary care—prevention rather than cure, which  is why the sport element of the committee's remit is so vital. However, like the primary care element of health care, which is also vastly important, the issue lacks immediacy so it can become difficult to shift the focus on to it. After all, a person who is ill needs to be treated right away if their life is to be saved and, with that kind of focus, it is easy to give less priority to the advice and assistance that prevent people from becoming ill in the first place. The same is true of sport in the committee, which is why it decided to use its very limited time to conduct an inquiry into access to sport and sporting facilities for everyone. I found the evidence to be very interesting. Many people who had reached the pinnacle of their sport in their careers had done so almost by accident, either by being in the right place at the right time or by having a chance meeting with someone who became a mentor. It became clear that, in most sports, people need money and parental support if they want to reach competition standard. Of course, there were exceptions to that rule, but they had a pretty tough time of it and needed a huge amount of determination. Given the well-proven health benefits of recreational sport, the committee was also keen to consider the availability of sport to everyone who wants to take part, regardless of their talent. We heard about the lack of facilities in many areas. That lack is something that I can, as a member for the Highlands and Islands, vouch for. There are, of course, exceptions such as the Shetland Islands, where the authorities have emphasised provision of sporting facilities. However, in most parts of my constituency, such resources are few and far between, and what facilities are available are old and do not have the critical mass of people using them to make them financially viable. It is clear that those amenities need public support and funding. However, I can also point to examples of best practice in the Highlands and Islands. For many years now, leisure centres in Moray have been working with local general practitioners either to promote health through exercise or to provide rehabilitation for people who have suffered heart attacks or experienced other health crises in which increased exercise is vital to recovery. I recently visited Atlantis Leisure in Oban, which is another example of best practice. The leisure centre, which is run by a social enterprise, gets young people through the doors by providing a variety of activities such as modern dance for young women, who are notoriously difficult to involve in physical activity. Atlantis provides facilities that young people want, which means that they feel valued and welcome in the centre. Membership numbers are high and the community stands to reap the health rewards of that activity.  However, Atlantis faces funding challenges because of crippling water rates. I have raised the problem with the relevant minister, but I have yet to find a solution. The SNP Government promised free swimming for young people, so I urge it to start to consider innovative ways of delivering that. A reduction in water rates for leisure centres that have swimming facilities might be a good starting point. Swimming is hugely important, not only for health reasons, but because it can save lives. I have been urged by young people and their parents to help them to secure a 50m pool in Inverness, to allow them to prepare locally for competitions. Currently, young people who want to compete have to travel to the central belt to practise in a 50m pool and to take part in events. The costs and time commitment that are involved in that journey prevent many young people from pursuing the sport. The ability to host competitions would also boost the Highland economy.

I was coming to that point. I perhaps do not greet that development with the same enthusiasm as Aileen Campbell. I will explain why. Scottish Swimming has pointed out to me that it has two priority areas for a 50m pool—Aberdeen and Dundee. Those developments will not make any difference at all in the Highlands because young people will have the same travel time to access either facility. Those two priority areas are so close together that either city could benefit from a pool in the other. I ask the minister to consider rebalancing the priorities. That is especially important because we have a once-in-a-generation opportunity to develop a competition-size pool in Inverness. The UHI Millennium Institute and Inverness College are considering developing a new campus. Access to a 50m pool would be a huge incentive for students coming to study in the Highlands. Such a pool would also provide competition facilities for the wider area. Swimmers from as far afield as Caithness would have their journey time shortened considerably. We ignore the health benefits of sport at our peril. Good-quality local facilities are essential for most types of sport. I have focused on swimming as an example, and have covered the competitive and recreational aspects. A reduction in water rates for facilities is one way in which the Government could show a commitment to its promise on free swimming. I urge the minister to support, and to provide input into, the development of a 50m pool at the new UHI  campus. Let us not miss the opportunity. If we do, there will not be another for a generation.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had regarding funding for the voluntary sector. (S3O-7747)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the growing concern in areas such as the Highlands and Islands regarding cuts in funding to the voluntary sector. Although closer working is always welcome, it should not be used to slash by up to 70 per cent funding for councils for voluntary service in areas such as the Highlands and  Islands. Will the minister take this opportunity to reassure CVSs in the Highlands and Islands that they will not face such a funding cut?

I want to ask the cabinet secretary about the on-going work on contingency plans for schools. Will the plans include guidance on school closures and the information that should be made available to parents? When will they be ready?

The bill will not make an impact unless it is enforced. Will the minister ensure that adequate resources will be available to local authorities to ensure that they can test purchase at a level that will prove a deterrent to those who would sell to young people?

To ask the Scottish Executive what budgetary provision it will make for improvements to the A9 over the next five years. (S3O-7314)

The minister is building overtaking lanes instead of stretches of dual carriageway—overtaking lanes that will have to be dug up when dual carriageways are built. That is a clear indication that the minister has no timescale for dualling the A9, and no money and no plans to do so. The Press and Journal reported that, when asked how long it would be before the A9 was dualled, the minister said, "I will be alive." Methuselah springs to mind, but—

In the interests of getting a clearer timescale, will the minister tell the chamber how long he expects to live?

I wrote to the minister about the closure of almost a third of the beds in Portree hospital, which was done without any public consultation and has led to patients having to be transferred to Broadford hospital due to the lack of beds in Portree. Will she ensure that health boards consult on any major changes in such small hospitals and ensure that more services are delivered locally within them?

It is fair to say that the public are at best bemused by the flu pandemic. At first, there was fear about what was happening, but people are now almost annoyed that their worst fears have not been realised. We should be delighted about that. I am sure that it is due to a number of factors, including the time of year, the steps that our Governments  have taken to manage the spread of the virus, and the work of our health professionals. However, there are issues of concern and confusion. Why were people not told when they might have come into contact with people at concerts or on aeroplanes? What is close contact? Why have some passengers been traced while others have not? I dare say that the episode is a learning curve, but we need to be clear about the lessons to be learned so far and ensure that that information is in the public domain. Although this debate might not appear to be the timeliest, it gives the opportunity for that information to be aired and put into the public domain. People need to be able to understand what has happened, what difference the management of the outbreak has made and what precautions they should take for the future. For example, why, as we have been told, could the virus recur later in the year with very different consequences? We need clear information to ensure that people do not become blasé about the threat and relax their vigilance during a subsequent outbreak. I will concentrate on how remote and rural areas will be served during an outbreak. The Government has suggested that people organise a network of flu friends, made up of neighbours who would get shopping and medicines for those affected. In an urban area, that might mean just a quick run down the road, but in rural areas, it requires a much greater time commitment. After all, shops, GP surgeries and pharmacies can be many miles away. In fact, for those who live on some of our islands, a ferry trip can be required. Although neighbours in rural areas tend to go the extra mile, I am not sure that the flu friends proposal will always be such a practical solution. Indeed, Jamie Stone highlighted concerns about "sparsity and distance" with regard to NHS Highland; the health board says that it is looking at the issue but, as far as I can see, no one has found a solution. We must find ways of distributing medicines quickly to remote areas and of ensuring that there are sufficient medical professionals to administer them when required. At today's meeting of the Health and Sport Committee, we considered a statutory instrument that will relax the regulations on medicine storage if we happen to find ourselves in a pandemic. However, as Mary Scanlon has pointed out, the press at the weekend reported concerns about the storage of vaccines. Has the issue been resolved, and will it have any impact on the availability of vaccines and medicines in a flu outbreak? Are there special conditions for the storage of vaccines and Tamiflu? If so, is the Government satisfied that they are available in enough locations?  Given that medical professionals in rural locations have to cover very large geographical areas, have plans been drawn up to deal with the real challenge of finding replacements if they fall ill? Moreover, a lot of staff time in rural areas is being taken up with travelling to and attending planning meetings. We need to find ways of spreading information that do not require taking staff away from their day-to-day work. Other public services face the same challenges. For example, the home care staff who deal with vulnerable people need to have their roles carefully considered as part of those plans; after all, if carers fall ill, vulnerable people might be left without a lifeline. We need emergency provision to ensure that that does not happen. We also need to consider the role that home carers, who often have several clients, might play in spreading the virus to vulnerable people. What training have they received in preventing the spread of the virus, and what support is in place to ensure that they have the information that they need? Furthermore, although most home carers are employed by local government, that is not always the case, and we need to be able to reach those who work only for private clients. We also need to consider the many other public services that involve contact with a large number of people. Will front-line staff and people who work in jobs where they are likely to come in contact with people be treated differently from the majority of the population? For example, because they come into contact with a lot of people, those who work in our transport system must be more vulnerable to infection than others and more likely to spread the virus. When a vaccine becomes available, will those people be given priority? Indeed, will people with chronic illnesses also be given priority? The general public need to know the answers to those questions if they are to be prepared for any deterioration in the situation. Dealing with a real situation over a long period of time will show us where our systems are working and where they need to be updated and changed. When the outbreak has passed, we will need to scrutinise fully what has taken place and learn from it. In the meantime, the most vulnerable in our society and the front-line staff who deliver public services must be protected if the outbreak escalates. I hope that in her summing-up the Minister for Public Health and Sport will clarify some of the issues that I have raised.

With the best will in the world, there is cross-subsidisation. Dispensing GPs are able to employ other people to provide pharmacy services, which means that surgeries are open for longer. Will the minister ensure that, as part of the review of the regulations, communities will continue to be involved in decision making and that the health professionals who work in an area will be consulted on an application?

The First Minister will be aware of the two deaths in Orkney, and one death in Moray, as a direct result of Clostridium difficile. He will also be aware  that there have been two further associated deaths. I am sure that he and all members in the Parliament will join me in offering our condolences to the families who have lost loved ones. Last Friday, I wrote to the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to ask that the public inquiry into C difficile at the Vale of Leven hospital be extended to cover the Orkney cases. In light of the subsequent cases in Moray and the fact that I have today been contacted by a constituent who suggests that the problems at Dr Gray's hospital date back to December, will the First Minister extend the inquiry to cover the whole of Scotland?

Section 84 defines flood protection work as "any operation on land for the purpose of protecting any land from flooding". The definition includes a wide range of operations, but it lacks an emphasis on natural flood management. The committee was concerned that those who are involved in flood prevention work will have a mindset that favours more structural measures, because of their training and experience. Changing the definition to include a paragraph that reads "any work that involves the alteration (including enhancement) or restoration of natural features and  characteristics of any river basin or coastal area" would ensure a shift of emphasis towards more natural solutions in the consideration of structural measures. Amendment 17 is therefore important to the bill. I welcome the minister's support, and I hope that the rest of the Parliament will support the amendment. Amendment 18, which is in my name, is consequential, so I urge members to support it, too.

I congratulate Richard Simpson on securing this valuable debate, and—as Mary Scanlon did—I welcome Liz Pritchard, who is in the public gallery. Each time we talk about telehealth, it is as if it is a new concept but, as Ian McKee told us, it has been around for a long time. Unfortunately it has not been mainstreamed in the way that it should have been, and it depends on a few enthusiasts alone to push it forward. Representing the Highlands and Islands, I am acutely aware of the benefits that could be gained from telehealth. Travel to and from hospitals and health care appointments is the norm—sometimes days of work are lost—and people who suffer from chronic conditions can have much of their lives taken over by travel. We need to deliver health care as locally as possible to allow people in remote rural areas to have the same standard of care as their urban counterparts. Mary Scanlon mentioned DanMedical, the Inverness company that has developed a machine that can monitor the heart, lung capacity, blood pressure and pulse. The readings can be transferred electronically, to be examined remotely  by experts in real time, or stored, to be looked at by a consultant whenever is convenient. The machine could be made available in GP surgeries, meaning that those with real health concerns could have their conditions checked without a lengthy wait for an out-patient appointment. The company has also pioneered a portable machine that health professionals could take to patients at home. I, too, recently visited DanMedical, and I was fascinated by the work that the company is doing. It is a small company, but it has some really practical solutions. Recently, I met Professor Grant Cumming in Moray. He is pioneering another, very different, aspect of telehealth. When we talk about telehealth, we think about video consultations and the electronic transfer of information to specialists, which DanMedical is working on. Professor Cumming is looking into the use of social networking techniques to provide health care. He meets patients with complex conditions, whose needs vary as they progress through their recovery or condition management. To ensure that patients had the right information at the right time, he started by providing them with CD-ROMs; that has allowed them to look at information at a time to suit them and their condition. Professor Cumming's work has progressed to developing websites on which patients can add their experience and share what has worked for them. Such sites allow patients to gain knowledge of their condition. They enable them to self-manage to a much greater extent, leaving clinicians with time to deal with more complex cases, and indeed to deal with hard-to-reach cases, of which we are all well aware. In Shetland, like in Orkney, surgeries are equipped with videoconferencing facilities, which are already being used on the islands to cut down on travel. Although videoconferencing is used within the islands, people sometimes struggle to get clinicians from outwith the area to work on that basis. Where possible, videoconferencing is also used to deliver training and to allow people to take part in meetings. The saving in staff time from holding meetings and providing training electronically is enormous in remote rural areas, where a member of staff can be away for a day or more to attend an hour-long meeting. I have difficulty in understanding why we are so slow to develop this way of working, given the obvious benefits to patients and professionals and the opportunity to save money. Telemedicine should be part of the training curriculum for all health disciplines. That would create familiarity and demonstrate the advantages that it can bring. We always fear what we do not understand, and change brings resistance because of that. However, if the needs of patients are paramount, we need to harness fully the creative potential of  information technology. For those who live in rural areas, it can be a win-win situation.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to assist Highland Council to find long-term alternative transport options in light of the recent decision by the Royal Mail to withdraw five post-bus routes in Caithness, Sutherland and Ross-shire. (S3O-6525)

The minister has said in previous answers to similar questions that he will put in place someone to advise Highland Council on rural transport options and funding. No matter how worthy the person might be, would not the money for that post be better spent on front-line services? Decisions on post buses were taken after budget settlements were made. If the post has to be funded from Highland Council's pot of money, it will mean cuts in other areas. Will the minister provide the finance?

I congratulate Rob Gibson on securing the debate. It is important that our farmers and crofters develop farming techniques that fit with what the consumer requires and take into account our global responsibilities in relation to the environment and climate change. We have to use science in all those areas. We must always follow the precautionary principle, while recognising that scientific development helps our food producers. That is especially important when we face global food shortages. Many of our current crops would not exist without the application of scientific research to crop production, but there has been a concern about genetic modification. Those who are committed to GM would say that that concern is due to ignorance and that the benefits far outweigh the pitfalls. It is clear that the issue is complex. Without research, we are unable to assert arguments on either side, so we must carry out research. Without rigorously researched facts, we are unable to assess the arguments properly. While carrying out research, we must ensure that the setting in which it occurs is secure and that it does not jeopardise our wider industry. Given that I represent the Highlands and Islands, I am bound to recognise the way that crofting plays its part in good environmental practice. In Scotland as a whole, we have a reputation for high environmental and welfare standards. Research projects have to be mindful of that and ensure that that reputation is protected. We also have to reward our farmers and crofters for good practice. To get the full benefit of that, we need local procurement. In the Rural Affairs and  Environment Committee this morning, we heard about the need for local procurement for the pig industry. Local procurement must encompass our whole farming industry. Stuart Ashworth of Quality Meat Scotland told us that public authorities have to show their commitment to Scottish producers; they can do that through local procurement. There is good practice by some health authorities and councils, but that is the exception rather than the rule. We must ensure that such practice is normal. Local procurement supports our local producers and mitigates climate change caused by shipping food long distances. It is disappointing that Highlands and Islands Enterprise has cut funding to the local food network at a time when it should be encouraging that approach. I urge the minister to ask it to revisit that decision. She should go further, and establish organisations to promote local food and advise public sector bodies on local procurement.

I hear what Rob Gibson says, but it is important to consider local food networks and how to promote local procurement. I am pretty sure that he does not disagree with any of that. When we work with scientists we must engage with the widest range of experts, from those who work on organic production to those who are involved in increasing yields, but ensure that our practices are environmentally friendly. We also need to consider the health benefits that can be derived from using science in our farming industry, such as better nutrition and farming in ways that reduce the fat in meat products. Food production must be undertaken hand in hand with science. We must proceed with caution and with safeguards in place and we must have incentives for local procurement. In that way, we will strike the balance between protecting our planet and feeding our people.

I welcome the cabinet secretary's comments about sheep identification tagging. I will ask about an issue over which he might have more control: fallen stock. Free collection has ended and, although islands have a derogation, people in remote crofting counties must pay for fallen stock to be uplifted. Through the rural development programme, will he allow for funding for that purpose that is provided not competitively but in a straightforward and easily accessible way?

What legal advice did the cabinet secretary seek on the proposals? Will he publish that legal advice in its entirety?

Before I come to my substantive points, I place on record my welcome for the Government's change of heart on its leasing proposals in the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. It is regrettable that the proposals were ever made, because they have overshadowed the scrutiny of the bill. Had the ideas been introduced in the original consultation, they would never have seen the light of day in the bill. We have to learn from that. However, if there is a silver lining, it is that the importance of forestry with regard to climate change has been highlighted: forestry is not just a cash cow but a means of capturing carbon and providing sustainable materials for energy and manufacture. We need to acknowledge and appreciate the work of the Forestry Commission. As the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee explored the options, it became clear that the commission worked closely with all its partners, whoever they  were, in industry, government or communities. We need to build on those relationships. Joint ventures have received overwhelming support. They can provide an income stream for new planting. They can also be used to fight climate change by providing renewable, low-carbon energy generation. Joint ventures can involve wind and hydro power developments, for which our forest estate is perfectly placed. Most forestry land is away from settlements, so the negative impact of any developments would not be great. Communities could enter into joint ventures with the Forestry Commission. In the past, when a community has been keen to develop renewables on commission land, the community has had to purchase the land at market value. Joint ventures would remove the need for communities to raise funds to buy such land and would allow them to develop their own energy plans and to develop renewables with the commission. The Forestry Commission has a good track record in working with communities, and that expertise will help in developing projects. The Rural Affairs and Environment Committee scrutinised the use of timber when we considered climate change. Much of the discussion was about timber for energy, but we also need to focus on other uses for timber, such as building. When the leasing proposals were on the table, I was alarmed to learn that many building developments that used timber had stalled because of uncertainty. I urge the minister and the Government to ensure that research and development is restarted. We are in a difficult economic climate, and it is important that the Government ensures that such work takes place. Using timber in building means using more sustainable materials and can also mean providing better insulation. We are all agreed that there needs to be more planting. However, it has become clear that there cannot be a free-for-all. We need to plant the right trees in the right places. Real fears were expressed by NFU Scotland that quality farm land would be used to speed up planting. It is important that that does not happen. Although we have to increase planting, we will have to ensure that we do not store up problems for the future. It is vital that we learn from past mistakes, such as the huge square blocks of unsuitable trees that have been planted in the wrong place and which impact on the environment and scenery with no obvious gain, other than possible tax breaks for the landowner. The Government has already agreed to draw up a land use strategy. However, it appears to be taking a long time to develop. I am not suggesting  that we delay planting until it is complete, but the Government needs to consider the key principles so that decisions can be made on where and what to plant. I welcome the minister's comments on the SRDP, for which we have been calling for some time. The SRDP will speed up planting. I am pleased that we have had the opportunity to have this debate. During the previous debate on forestry, the Labour Party put across good, sound suggestions on the use and development of forestry. At the time, the suggestions appeared to go largely unheeded; the then minister was more interested in retaining a discredited policy. However, now that the policy has been ditched, I hope that the positive ideas that we put forward then, are putting forward again today, and will continue to put forward, will be heeded and acted on.

What discussions has the minister had with local  authorities to encourage them to use their powers to lower speeds on dangerous single-track roads?

Robin Harper misses my point. The problem is that scientists are different from fishery protection. The scientists should have full and free access to fishing data and should work closely with fishermen, but if fishermen feel that they are being policed at the same time, they might not be as open.

I join other members in wishing Roseanna Cunningham well in her new post. I agree with other speakers about the need for a robust and overarching marine policy that is drawn up in collaboration with the rest of the UK and, indeed, Europe, and is informed by the reform of the common fisheries policy. At a Scottish level, our policy direction must be informed by the wider EU and UK strategies. However, we must devolve as far as possible the management of the seas to the communities that are dependent on them for their survival. The consultation is not clear about the interaction and relationship between marine Scotland and the Scottish marine regions. Organisations that responded to the consultation seemed unsure about the area that the marine regions would cover. Will they be big enough to allow strategic planning, or will that power be held by local government or marine Scotland? Are they small enough to ensure that all stakeholders and communities that are dependent on the seas for their livelihoods are involved? The bill is also about structural planning for renewable energy and so on. It also has to be about managing the seas, which means that the involvement of our fisheries sector is imperative. When local communities are involved in the management of the seas, we see benefits with regard to sustainability, as fishermen sign up to conservation initiatives. They need a strong voice in any management system. How are the Scottish marine regions to be devised? What geographical area will they cover? Who is involved in their structure? How do communities become involved? How does the industry become involved? What is the role for non-governmental organisations and industrial developers? Those questions need to be answered if people are to be able to respond more fully. I heard the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment say that he will listen to people's thoughts on those matters before coming to a final decision, but I also ask that that final decision be consulted on. Colleagues have talked about the proposed structure of marine Scotland in detail. It is unfortunate that a decision has been made before any parliamentary scrutiny. Will the structure of  marine Scotland be set out in the bill and will it be possible to amend it at that stage? I hope so. The approach is more about political expediency than it is about what is good for our marine environment. For years, work has taken place between Fisheries Research Services and fishermen. Bringing them together has been a long and tortuous process, but it is bearing fruit. However, the new structure will tear apart that fragile relationship and undo the good practice that has been developed. Placing Fisheries Research Services and the Scottish Fisheries Protection Agency together in one organisation will immediately breed concern, because of the enforcement aspects of the protection agency. I am not an apologist for anyone who has anything to hide from the agency, but I am realistic. Good research is based on an open and transparent flow of information. Putting the organisations together will ensure that the relationship between fishermen and scientists is no longer open and transparent. Which one of us, when driving along observing the highway code, does not feel uncomfortable when a police car draws up behind us and follows us down the road? Every fishing crew that works with fishery researchers on board will feel the same discomfort, because those researchers will be part of the enforcement agency. We will lose the joint working that has had a real impact on our fisheries science and research. The proposals are unnecessary and damaging, and they bring nothing to the table but political dogma. In Prospect's response to the consultation, it states: "the merger of regulation and research could impact upon FRS's ability to collect fisheries data." Prospect goes further and states that the loss of FRS's independence will be damaging, pointing out that it is a respected international centre for independent marine science and advice and that "There is a real danger that FRS will lose its reputation for independent scientific advice if it becomes too close to its customer the Marine Directorate." This week, the cabinet secretary has set up a quota management system that is more about constitutional wrangling than it is about the industry's needs. It is centralising rather than devolving, and it is creating a bureaucracy that will wrap our fishing communities in red tape rather than supporting the industry.

Do I have time, Presiding Officer?

Okay. I am sorry, Mr Lochhead.  In the proposed bill, political ideology again comes ahead of the needs of the communities that we serve. The minister must change the balance and put our communities before that dogma.

Falling stock levels means additional stress on the infrastructure of industries such as hauliers and marts. Once it reaches a tipping point, it will be difficult to restart that infrastructure and, without it, the industry cannot survive. What work has the cabinet secretary carried out to gauge how close we are to that tipping point and what action is being taken to support that infrastructure?

As an MSP for the Highlands and Islands, I cannot but be aware of the challenges that are faced in providing affordable housing in rural areas. There are no economies of scale; indeed, we would not want building on a large scale, as that would have a disproportionate effect on a small community. However, it is vital that people have access to affordable housing. House prices on the open market are often well beyond the means of people in my area, who tend to have to have several jobs, some of which are seasonal and few of which provide the stable income that is required to enable them to borrow privately. We must set against that the fact that the area is sought after by folk who want to buy second homes or who want to move in from other areas. As such people tend to have comparatively large amounts of capital, they often outbid locals. People should be enabled to live in the communities that they were brought up in and should not be forced out. Only yesterday, there was a story in The Press and Journal about a young family from Portmahomack whose private rented lease is coming to an end. Although they cannot afford to buy in the village, they cannot based solely on their local connections be guaranteed one of the nine new Albyn houses that are being built there. They face uprooting their family, moving their children out of school and moving elsewhere. However, we should not become so parochial that no one can move into rural areas. More affordable housing provides the answer to the problem. From speaking to housing associations in my area, I know that the announcement that was  made ahead of the debate—that the housing association grant will be increased by an average of 6 per cent will be welcomed—but that increase will not affect their ability to deliver small developments. The cost of building is much higher in rural areas because of the lack of economies of scale and because of the higher costs of land and of providing water, electricity and other services to developments. That means that rural housing associations will continue to need to apply for additional HAG money. Such additional funding normally comes with conditions. The Government imposes a higher rent level on properties that receive it. I have mentioned the work patterns in smaller communities, which mean that those higher rents cannot be passed on to tenants because they are unaffordable, with the result that the whole funding equation falls apart because the assumed rent is higher than the actual rent. As it is the actual rent that is borrowed against, there will always be a funding gap between the HAG level and the mortgage on the property. For example, on a house that costs about £125,000 to build, the rental income is £2,800 per annum. The funding gap for that property alone is £7,500. Small rural housing associations cannot afford to finance such gaps, so they cannot afford to build. If the Government is to allow small rural housing associations to build, it must stop imposing unaffordable rent levels in such communities. Housing associations know their tenants and they know what rent level is affordable in their area, so they are the right people to set a fair rent that takes into account local circumstances. Many of the housing associations in my area tell me that they cannot build under the present regime, which needs to change. Although HAG rises are welcome, the real problem is the imposition of rent levels. That is without taking into account the effect of the credit crunch, which means that a mortgage that was available under the previous rent assumptions might no longer be available. Something needs to be done. As regards lead developers, I can understand why people might want them, given some of the benefits that they could bring but, unfortunately, we are not working with the right model. I ask the minister to consider the model that has been adopted by the Highland Housing Alliance, which brings all the benefits of a lead developer without causing competition among housing associations. The HHA brings together housing associations, councils and private developers to ensure that development is unblocked and that more housing is developed at efficient costing levels. As a representative of remote and rural communities, the most important issue for me is that the Government should stop imposing rent  assumptions in cases in which additional HAG is provided. That practice must change if much-needed housing is to be provided in such communities. The impact on the public purse would be small, but the impact on the number of affordable houses that could be built in rural areas would be huge.

I, too, congratulate Jamie Stone on securing this very important debate. Like him, I am appalled at the state of Wick high school. With my colleagues Peter Peacock and David Stewart, I visited the school not so long ago and found the facilities to be awful. It was a lovely, dry, sunny day when we visited, but we could not move about during lunch time because of the number of children who were eating their lunches in the dining room, the corridors and anywhere else they could find a space, and as many young people were eating their lunch outside as inside. Had it been raining,  which it is known to do in Wick and Caithness, I do not know how the school would have coped. The classroom facilities were poor and the sports facilities were falling apart. As Rob Gibson said, the swimming pool is closed, which has implications not only for pupils but for the wider community. There is a public swimming pool in Wick, but the one in the school was used by many community groups, including those with vulnerable adults who perhaps do not feel confident about using the public pool. The fact that it can no longer be used is a concern that has been raised with me. Pupils and teachers lose out because the school is in poor condition, but so do the wider community. There were press reports at the weekend that three Highland schools have been given D grades, which means that they are considered to be beyond repair, but there are no plans to replace them. We urgently need to consider schools such as Caol primary school, which has the renowned room 13 project that is nationally recognised and commended. How much more could the children involved have achieved if they had been in a building that was fit for purpose? Lochaber high school in Fort William is another—I could go on because there are many in Highland and, indeed, throughout Scotland. That is why the Labour Party pledged in its manifesto for the most recent election that we would rebuild every school that needed to be rebuilt. During the previous Administration, the Labour Party started a huge school building process and we were determined to finish it. We hoped that the SNP Government would continue that process and match us brick for brick, but it has not done that yet. I urge it to do so. As we have heard, Highland Council does not have the funding for such rebuilding, so the Government needs to intervene and help the children of Wick high school. Letting down any child at such an important stage of their life is letting down one child too many.

This morning's debate is an important one for many of my constituents. In rural areas there are not many permanent full-time jobs. Those that are created by the Forestry Commission are often the backbone of fragile rural communities and make them sustainable. We should also take into account the boost that forestry activity gives through temporary work at felling time and the commission's work to encourage public access and tourism. The Minister for Environment has said again and again that Forestry Commission employees need not fear for their jobs and that they can either transfer to the lease company or remain within the Forestry Commission. However, in many of the areas that I represent, that is not an option. There will be no local forestry jobs with the commission if cutting rights are leased. Forestry Commission staff who have attended information workshops were told that the position for all staff was just as stark. If they refuse to transfer to the new company, they will be deemed to have resigned—no redundancy, no choice, no option. However, it is not just commission staff who face an uncertain future. Employees in the downstream industries such as wood processing and sawmills also face uncertainty. Those industries need a stable supply of wood if they are to continue to operate. A private company with cutting rights will have no loyalty to those industries. It could be argued that the company will be dependant on the industries if it is to sell its timber, but things can change quickly. The timescale that is being discussed makes it impossible to predict what the economic position will be, or indeed what the needs of the industry will be. On today's figures, Scotland is being sold short, but how short time alone will tell. Cutting rights are not the only concern of the downstream industries, as they are also concerned about the research and development of timber products. Many processors do not have the resources to fund research, and anything that affects the budget and scope of the commission will certainly affect research. The uncertainty that the proposal has created is causing problems now. A few weeks ago, I spoke to someone who works in the processing industry, who told me about an exciting new project that uses Scottish timber in construction. The project was in the early stages of development, but it has stalled because of the uncertainty that the proposals have created. How many other projects have stalled? At a time when the Government should be providing stability  and security where possible, it is causing needless concern and insecurity. It is costing us jobs at a time when it should be protecting them. The UK Forest Products Association says in its response to the consultation that the policies "could irreparably damage the forest products sector". That is a real concern. We should consider the experience of other countries that have gone down the same route and regretted it. For example, Sweden lost more than 20 sawmills after it sold substantial parts of its forestry. Our rural economy is fragile. Many areas never experience the economic boosts that come to our more urban areas. Jobs are interdependent. The loss of one job can undermine a teaching job or even the local school, and that can have a knock-on effect on the local shop or post office. Many of the jobs that will be lost under the proposals are in our remote and rural areas. The fact that the Forestry Commission provides public access and encourages tourism in its forests means that the proposal will have further job implications, but I do not have time to discuss those today. Tourism is important in remote and rural areas, but private investors do not have a social responsibility to protect those jobs. We are in the middle of a severe economic downturn. Is this the time to tell people that their jobs are at risk and create uncertainty in our wood processing and sawmill industries? This is the time for the Government to provide leadership and stability. I ask the minister to do that by withdrawing the proposals and investing in our forestry industry to provide security. I support Sarah Boyack's motion.

I was not a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee when it undertook its inquiry into flooding, so to some extent I was playing catch-up when the committee began its scrutiny of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill. However, it became apparent that the evidence that we took on the bill had a striking resemblance to the evidence that the committee had received during its inquiry. Many of the recommendations in the committee's report on the bill are strong echoes of the previous recommendations on flooding, although they are not the same. The Government has taken on board some of the committee's previous recommendations, and I hope that it will act on the new recommendations as well. When I first read through the bill, I was struck by the possibility that, in concentrating on drawing up flood risk management plans, it could result in a hugely bureaucratic process. There is not enough about the management of risk in the implementation of the plans. It was argued in evidence that local authorities would implement plans through current mechanisms, but that simply does not go far enough. The bill must contain more specific duties to ensure that local implementation is prioritised. I am glad that the issue will be considered, because, at worst, the plans could simply sit on the shelf, gathering dust, until they are required to be reviewed. As the recommendation in paragraph 39 of the committee report argues, the bill "should be amended to strengthen the link between the duty to reduce flood risk and the implementation of flood risk management plans." Moreover, the bill contains no powers to ensure that development plans have regard to the flood risk management plan. If development plans, which are probably our most important means of managing and reducing flooding, are not forced to have regard to flood risk management plans, the whole exercise will be worthless. Evidence that we received suggested that a balance has to be struck between flood risk management and other issues such as economic development and social need. That is true, and forcing development plans to have regard to flood risk management plans would not be detrimental to that balance. Instead, it would put flooding on the same footing as other issues that need to be  taken into account when development plans are being drawn up. A duty to have regard to the flood risk management plan would also ensure that any development in a flood risk area would have to incorporate flood alleviation measures—

Very briefly.

I agree. In fact, many councils expressed great concern about financing and suggested that Government hold a pot of money to help small councils that might find themselves in difficulty. Time is short, so I will move on swiftly. The bill requires authorities to have regard to social and economic impacts in carrying out their functions. The committee heard that tools for measuring the social and human costs of flooding are not widely available and that, at the moment, no best practice guidance is being used. As Angela Constance made clear, anyone who has witnessed flooding knows of its high social and human cost. Press reports show that major flooding often forces families into temporary accommodation for a long time. Paragraph 59 of the committee report therefore recommends that the Government produce guidance on measuring social and human costs. That work needs to be undertaken urgently. Given that the initial flood risk assessments will be required in December 2011, guidance needs to be in place sufficiently in advance of that date to enable SEPA to fulfil its requirements under the bill. On deemed planning permission, the committee addressed the issue in its inquiry and is glad that it has been allowed for in the bill. However, I am concerned that the consultation process is not properly laid out in the bill; indeed, the bill might well not be the best place for those provisions. That said, the bill should allow for ministerial guidance to be provided on the consultation process for measures that have deemed planning permission. Complaints have already been made about the planning process, and the bill has to ensure that people are treated as stakeholders and can engage with the process as early as possible. After all, bodies that carry out consultations must listen as well provide information on what they want to do. In fact, that approach is even more important, given the fact that the lead organisation is not  democratically elected. If a council does not consult adequately, the electorate has the last word at the ballot box; the same does not hold true for a Government-appointed organisation, which will naturally look to Government instead of constituents for a lead. Paragraph 177 makes the extremely important recommendation that consultation on proposed flood prevention schemes be "in line with best practice". I am confident that the committee's recommendations can improve the bill and ensure that it is more than a paper exercise. I urge the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment to accept them in their entirety.

rose—

Today's interesting debate has given Parliament the opportunity to consider what needs to be done to support our land managers, and to give a broad welcome to the outcome of the health check. Irene Oldfather highlighted some of the real problems with the CAP, which demonstrate that the health check is not a needless instrument. Indeed, her speech starkly highlighted the damage that the policy can do and the need to continue with the process of reform. As she said, if we started with a blank sheet, we would come up with a very different system. We need to ensure that the needs of our fragile areas are properly represented and taken into account. There is always a fine balance to be struck with regard to our policies, due to the interdependency of the farming industry in Scotland. However, the cabinet secretary referred to a windfall of payments that was available as a result of the exchange rate. A good way of using those windfall payments would be to find a way of  rebalancing the system in favour of our more fragile areas. For example, the less favoured area support scheme does not fully compensate for the challenges of farming and crofting in the worst land, which is also often remote from markets. Crofting and farming in those areas are essential for the sustainability of communities. We need to ensure that people who work in those areas are supported and that we provide them with a level playing field. Liam McArthur and Peter Peacock talked about balancing the distribution of the money that is available so that it benefits the fragile areas, and suggested ways in which that process could proceed. We need to retain the bull hire scheme. I was interested in the cabinet secretary's response to Alasdair Allan, but what he was saying was not clear to me. Rob Gibson, too, mentioned the matter but he obviously had a greater understanding of what the cabinet secretary was proposing. The arguments for the bull hire scheme were well made during Jamie McGrigor's members' business debate last week. I spoke to officials when I was in Brussels yesterday, and it is clear that the de minimis system allows for the scheme to continue. It is not clear, however, how the scheme could be provided under different support systems, so I am interested to hear what the minister has to say on that. To be clear, our motion calls for a bull hire scheme, not for assistance with bull transportation or shelter, and certainly not for advice on how one would hire a bull from a private network. We need to recognise the importance of globalisation in farming, and the impact of the CAP on developing countries. I am interested to know what the SNP Government's policies are on that and how seriously it takes its global responsibilities. We need food production, but we also need global fairness, as Elaine Murray highlighted. I doubt whether any member would disagree that it is often other EU countries that are the main offenders in dumping cheap food on developing countries to the detriment of their farming industries, but we need to take our responsibilities as part of the EU seriously and deal with the problem. The Liberal Democrats' amendment notes a concern about the SRDP. John Scott said that that concern was out of date, but I am not so sure of that, because we have no terms of reference for the review. Access to the scheme is no easier, so we need to take action and press for the review to come forward. A large number of my constituents cannot make online applications as they do not have broadband.  We need to consider stocking levels; that ties in with the bull hire scheme. It is important to decide how we support people who farm in remote and rural areas, as sheep numbers have fallen, to the detriment of our environment. We need to ensure that single farm payments are tied to active farming—we do not want sleeper farmers. Imagine how it would feel to work and farm next door to people who were getting the same amount of support for doing nothing. There is no public or environmental benefit in that, so we need to tackle the problem before it is too late. Without schemes such as the bull hire scheme, the problems that affect sheep stock numbers will affect cattle stock numbers, but in a way that is much worse and which will have a much greater environmental impact. We need to take our environmental problems seriously. My colleague Sarah Boyack made clear that it is not a issue of food production versus the environment—the two things have to work hand in hand. We can increase food production in an environmentally responsible way. Bill Wilson spoke about health and the environment, and how environmentally friendly policies delivered healthier food and biodiversity. Those things can work hand in hand, and it is important that they do so. Climate change will be caused if we do not look after our environment, and that affects developing countries disproportionately. In considering our duty towards our neighbours, we need to think about how we provide environmental benefit when we farm our land. Many members have spoken about food security, and the Conservatives' amendment deals with the issue. We are concerned about food security, and our Westminster colleagues have made clear that it is a top priority. Again, it is not about a conflict with environmental protection—the two go hand in hand. We need to learn from other countries how to do that, and we need to ensure that we have food security. We need to ensure that food is provided locally; members have spoken about importing foreign produce and the effect on climate change of transporting food around the world. We need to consider local procurement in our public services, and to think about sourcing products as locally as possible. The sentiments that Robin Harper expresses in his amendment are correct—the controls that have been implemented in Europe will have to be implemented here, under European law. However, his amendment does not deal with the concerns that have been expressed on that issue, and it is therefore not balanced. Robin Harper is right that we should be concerned about health, not only for the benefit of our food production but because we must take seriously the concerns of our farmers and crofters who work with pesticides. We must also protect the environment—in particular, bees.  We must ensure that fragile areas are protected and we must create a level playing field for them. Not only does the SRDP enhance the disparities, but it delivers a scheme that is accessible only online, which immediately disfranchises people who do not have broadband. The Government is failing people twice: first by not providing them with broadband and, secondly, by disfranchising them. We must ensure that what we offer is compatible with our environment. Our farmers and crofters are used to working with nature and must be involved.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I, too, congratulate Jamie McGrigor on securing this important debate. The bull hire scheme ensures that there is cattle production in the crofting counties, but one of its other main benefits is that it improves herd quality and health. The Crofters Commission buys good- quality bulls and ensures that they are of HI Health status. To maintain that status, the animals need regular health checks. The standards ensure that a premium is achieved when the calves are sold. Crofters who buy their own bulls cannot afford the checks that are required to maintain HI Health status, so those who remain in cattle production will not achieve the same price for their stock and will have a much greater financial outlay. The Minister for Environment has said that crofters will receive bulls free at the end of the scheme, but it is unlikely that HI Health status will be maintained from that point on, due to the cost. That will lead to an immediate economic impact, and in addition the cost of buying a replacement bull will have to be met in three years' time. Based on this year's prices for bulls, the cost could be £3,000 to £4,000. The Crofters Commission guarantees a replacement bull if there is a problem with the original one. If the crofter owns their own bull, there is no back-up and their whole breeding system could be lost. By the time they realise that there is a problem, it will be impossible to buy or rent a replacement.  The Crofters Commission changes the bull that is provided to each crofter every three years, thereby avoiding genetic problems. Crofters who own their bull but cannot afford to replace it every three years will encounter genetic problems due to interbreeding. That will be detrimental to the entire cattle breeding industry in the crofting counties because inconsistent quality reflects not just on the individual crofter but on the whole industry. There are also health and safety issues and concerns about the cost of safe transportation. There are problems throughout the crofting counties with the initial transportation of new bulls, but they are magnified hugely in the case of the islands. Sometimes, several ferry journeys are required in vehicles that are not suitable for the purpose. There are also overwintering costs to consider where the land and facilities are not suitable for the keeping of a bull. When a crofter wants to keep a bull locally, they will need to build new facilities and pay for winter feed, as Jamie McGrigor pointed out. Bulls are dangerous animals and need to be housed and handled properly. Failure to do that raises animal welfare concerns. Those are real issues that are pertinent to the debate. Unfortunately, I do not have time to go into them in detail, but I hope that the minister examined them carefully before he made his decision. The bull hire scheme is an example of good practical help that can sustain farm enterprises in our most remote and rural areas. The cost of the scheme is the same everywhere—in Shetland or in the inner Moray Firth. It breaks down geographical barriers and provides a level playing field. I fear that without it we will see a rapid decline in cattle numbers and further economic and environmental damage. The affected communities are interdependent, and the policy has the potential to have a serious knock-on effect on their sustainability. I make a plea to the minister to listen to the real concerns that have been expressed and to reconsider his decision.

The minister is aware that volunteer patient transport service drivers are crucial to patient transport in remote and rural areas. There are two volunteer drivers in the west Highlands north of Skye, which is not enough to provide the service. Will the minister look at the costs to NHS Highland of providing taxis where the service fails and at the number of missed appointments that are due to failure of the service? Will she guarantee that no patient will lose their patient guarantee if they miss three appointments due to failure of the service?

The Parliament debated kinship care about a year ago, when the minister announced the introduction of kinship care allowance for looked-after children who are placed within their families. At the time, I welcomed the announcement but said that the Government needed to go further. I have not changed my mind. Indeed, if anything, my concerns are greater. For a start, despite kinship care allowances being mentioned in the historic concordat, councils have been given until 2011 to introduce them. Families who qualify under the current narrow criteria are still not receiving a penny. Each year that goes by means that more children do without, and I ask the minister to have urgent discussions with COSLA to ensure that allowances are paid now.  Another concern is that kinship carers who take out guardianship or residency orders are excluded and lose their entitlement to the allowance. I have noticed that councils are encouraging carers to take out such orders. In some cases, councils that have not been paying kinship care allowances have paid for legal assistance to enable people to take out orders. My greatest concern is that the carers of children who are not defined as "looked after" are excluded. When a family member or friend steps in immediately after a crisis to offer a young person a home, councils do not apply for looked-after status for the child, so the carers are not entitled to the allowance, despite their plight. Every story is different. There are children who have lost their parents through drug abuse or whose parents' addiction problems meant that they could not look after them properly. There are children whose parents are seriously ill and there are children who have been orphaned. Such children are already facing a catastrophic loss in their young lives. Their friends or families step in immediately because they refuse to cast vulnerable children to the mercy of local authorities and the uncertainty that that would bring. It is unfortunate that such carers are penalised for stepping in. Many are grandparents who have retired and are living on a fixed income. One grandmother told me that she was afraid to have her grandchildren defined as looked after by the council, in case they would not be placed with her. She and her husband had chronic illnesses and were unable to work. Their income was meagre and she feared that, as the children got older, they would realise that they did not have things that other children have. The children were already different, because their parents were dead; she did not want them to feel more different because of things that they did not have. If families and friends do not step in, councils must pay for foster care. There must surely be a way of helping such people. Could an allowance be paid that would cover the additional expense of bringing up a child but would not include the element of payment that is made to foster families? Such an approach would ease child poverty and be much cheaper than foster care. Children 1 st and other organisations have provided members with briefings in which they say that it is vital that options for placement within the family should be exhausted before a child is placed with strangers. In a pioneering approach, children's organisations have developed family group conferences as a means of identifying family support and involving young people in important decisions about their future.

The debate has been useful, and it signifies that the majority of the Parliament wishes to be constructive and to support team UK in the fisheries negotiations. The Scottish Government plays a pivotal role in that. It is important that all devolved Administrations and the Westminster Government come to the negotiating table united around a strong case with sound arguments, which must be based on good science. Our case is surely strengthened by our fishing industry's pursuit of sustainability. The Scottish Fishermen's Federation must be one of the first fishermen's organisations to produce its own environmental statement. As Sarah Boyack said, its stance is endorsed by RSPB Scotland, which is a high accolade indeed.  It is welcome that the UK lead for the fisheries negotiations, Huw Irranca-Davies, is coming to Scotland to meet representatives of the west coast fishing industry. While the work of the Scottish Government in bringing the case of the Scottish industry to the UK team is crucial, such hands-on involvement by the UK minister is welcome. I accept that the cabinet secretary would prefer to be alone at the negotiating table, although we will always differ on that. However, he must put aside his ideological aims in order to represent the needs of our industries and communities. Indeed, I think that he is doing that, which is commendable. There are no easy solutions to the many issues that have been discussed in this debate, although much of what has been said has been supportive. I will try to cover as many of the issues as possible. Helen Eadie said that perhaps there should be a discussion before the Norway negotiations. Maybe we need to take that on board, because negotiations at EU level sometimes dwarf what goes on at the Norway level, which is important to our fishing industry. Sarah Boyack and Liam McArthur referred to the virtuous triangle of scientists, Government and the industry. Jamie McGrigor built on that idea when he said that, although the Scottish Fishermen's Federation is involved in the talks, we need to talk to other fishermen's associations and involve them as well. That was a useful contribution, and I urge the cabinet secretary to consider ways of bringing the associations on board. They have a lot to say about gear changes.

That intervention is welcome. Megrim has been mentioned in the debate. I recently met fishermen in Shetland for whom the megrim fishery is valuable, and they are concerned that the megrim TAC is not rooted in science, because it is based on landed catches, which are restricted due to TAC levels that do not take into account discards. Indeed, the science on the TAC dates from 1999. The fishermen were so frustrated by the lack of science that they commissioned their own research, which shows that the TAC should be increased. I ask the cabinet secretary to examine that research and decide whether it can be included in our scientific appraisals for the negotiating table. Many members have talked about the need to reduce discards. There is agreement that discards are wasteful and that we need to look at ways of getting round them. However, as John Scott and  Elaine Murray said, that is not straightforward. We cannot make it financially viable to take overquota fish back to port, but at the same time we must make the system attractive enough that people will adhere to it. Mention was also made of discarded species that are not marketable, and whether we damage the environment by using fuel to bring them into port just to stick them into landfill. There are no simple answers, but we need to do more work on discards. In fact, everyone agrees that discards must be tackled in the round, but that that will not be straightforward. My colleague Peter Peacock made the only positive comment about discards when he said that we should discard Dave Thompson's speech—I think I will do that. In passing, I contrast his speech with Nigel Don's thoughtful speech, which we should all take notice of and reflect on. Members have agreed on the alarming state of the west coast fishery's white-fish stocks and the concern about what will happen to the prawn fishery. Many members talked about going back to Europe and discussing how we can use technical measures and new gear to protect the fishery. The measures that Europe offers do not fit our boats and are unworkable. We need to go back to the negotiating table and find a solution. Many members also talked about ways in which we can assist the west coast fishery by implementing measures that will allow the fishermen to pursue the area's prawn fishery while protecting the white-fish stocks, which we all agree are in a difficult position. Members agree about the technical measures that are in place. Elaine Murray pushed for assistance for fishermen in that regard. She also referred to Karen Gillon's request last year for assistance for fishermen to improve their gear and mesh sizes. Jamie McGrigor clearly asked that the industry be listened to on changes to technical measures. It is important that we bring the industry into the discussions, because it knows what works. There is also agreement on the science and on the lack of it. Ross Finnie was clear that we need to take scientists' work on board. I do not think that any member disagrees. The concern is that, for many of our fisheries—for example, the west coast megrim fishery—there is little science. We must look at ways to reduce that scientific shortfall. As Roseanna Cunningham said, if we are on our own in those fishing waters, we need to take the scientific aspect on board and pursue it on our own. I am interested to hear what the cabinet secretary says about that in his winding-up speech. Elaine Murray referred to sharks, which I do not think any other member did—sorry, I remember that John Scott did as well. She said clearly that a  reduction in the numbers of one species has a knock-on effect on the ecological balance, which we must take into account. Comments were made about the challenges in the cod recovery plan and, I suppose, how cod is as much trouble on the way down as it is on the way up, and vice versa. We need to deal with the issues and ascertain whether we can work with the industry to ensure that there are no rapid changes, so that it can rebalance itself to work in prevailing conditions. Jamie McGrigor and Ross Finnie mentioned the onshore industry. I am disappointed that I am running out of time, because it means that I cannot talk much about that. We need a way forward. We were happy to hear about the devolution of planning, but we want it to be devolved further, maybe through regional advisory councils. It is important that people who have a stake in fishing work with the industry. We wish team UK well in the negotiations and hope that it will work well for our fishing communities. We will support all the amendments to the motion.

I congratulate Stuart McMillan on securing the debate and highlighting an important issue. Other members have spoken about the important economic benefits that sailing and boating bring. Stuart McMillan said that they are fast catching up with golf on that, although when I spoke to a former colleague, Maureen Macmillan, who now chairs the Moray Firth Partnership, she assured me that they have already caught up. I am not sure where she got her figures from, but it is clear that sailing and boating are economically important. We were told about the Inverness marina development, the study into which shows that it could lead to more than £750,000 of tourist spend in the surrounding area. That is a huge amount of money for one development, so we must consider what we can do to encourage it. We need to ensure that it is open to all and not just to the elite. In one of our briefings, we read about the Chanonry sailing club, which has a huge and growing membership. My husband helps to run a scout group that specialises in sea scouting, and it has a waiting list of young people who want to get involved. Indeed, it has a huge and healthy membership and is always looking to expand. If there is anyone from British Waterways in the gallery, I make a plea to them now, while declaring an interest. We could use the active schools programme to promote education and training in sailing and boating, which Helen Eadie mentioned. It is important to encourage people to get out on the water and take part in boating, sailing and canoeing, but we must ensure that people have the education and training that they need to be safe in that environment. In its briefing, the Moray Firth Partnership told us that it will carry out a year-long study of the economic benefits of sailing and boating, particularly for tourism. It is also studying how tourism interacts with the bottle-nose dolphins in the Moray Firth. That raises an important point. We need to ensure that boating and sailing are environmentally sustainable and work with the  local wildlife. The bottle-nose dolphins are a huge draw for the Moray Firth and people on boats must be clear about how they interact with them, ensuring that they do not create problems. In 2007, a Moray Firth flotilla left from Wick and visited Lybster, Helmsdale, Cromarty, Invergordon and Buckie, ending up at the Portsoy boat festival. That renewed pride in many of those communities, which have a history of boating and fishing, and renewed interest in their heritage, as well as giving their economies a boost. Something similar is being considered for the Caledonian canal during Scotland's year of homecoming in 2009. A flotilla will go from Fort William to Inverness and that, too, will encourage people to become involved. As someone who was brought up in a remote and rural community, I know what it is like to be dependent on boats. We did not have a road when I was in my early youth, many years ago, and we had to depend on boats. That was quite the norm for children and young people. We jumped on and off boats just to get to where we needed to go and, indeed, to get our shopping. We need to provide education and ensure that people know about safety, and we should then build on the opportunities that are available through sport and other activities to boost our economy.

As Elaine Murray said, this is a strange time to have a debate on the issue. The Government's consultation has closed and the responses have not been published. Indeed, we do not know what the Government's thoughts are on those responses. The Parliament will have to scrutinise the Government's proposals when they are published, and that will be done either in the chamber or in a committee. Aquaculture is an important industry, because it provides jobs in remote rural areas where there are often few employment opportunities and where the jobs that are on offer tend to be part time or seasonal. The industry brings important economic benefits to all our coastal communities. That is why I was surprised that the consultation  document said simply that we need to ensure that there is a good career structure. Nobody could disagree with that sentiment, but it gave us nothing to work with. What is the Government's ambition in that area? What is there to comment on? I was, therefore, pleased that the industry appears to be progressing the issue by carrying out a study into identifying the skills that it requires. Lantra, the sector skills council, is supporting that initiative, which will consider the need to draw up a framework for development and career progression for the workforce. I hope that the initiative will consider how training can reach people who live and work in remote communities. It is not always possible for people to leave home to participate in training, which means that ways of pursuing training remotely must be pursued. The Government can support that by ensuring access to information technology in our remotest areas, which will help to break down geographical barriers. Ensuring that those communities can access high-quality broadband at reasonable cost would help, and I hope that the Government will support the initiative. I also hope that the Government will consider ways of maximising jobs in the industry through farming and by adding as much value as possible locally. It is strange that the Government seems to be increasing the bureaucracy surrounding fish farming. Holding the review now means that changes will take place if it is not simply to be a paper exercise. The review will be followed shortly by the marine bill; again, it is inconceivable that that bill will have no impact on fish farming. It seems to me that the already cumbersome bureaucracy that surrounds fish farming will increase. The industry is complaining about the legislative framework.

Needless to say, I do not agree with the minister. What he said in opposition and what I am saying is that the industry is complaining about a bureaucratic legislative framework. In his short time in office, he is already carrying out a review; on top of that, a marine bill will create more bureaucracy. I ask the minister to sweep up measures in the marine bill and streamline the bureaucracy that surrounds the fish farming industry. Perhaps we would get  somewhere if he stopped muttering and started to listen. We need to ensure that wherever we create bureaucracy, we protect our aquaculture industry's high standards. It is the best in the world, and we must make it as easy as possible for it to operate, especially in the current economic climate. We would benefit from further scrutiny of a number of issues that the industry is concerned about. It is concerned that a number of licences have been undeveloped, and it would like them to be freed up for future expansion. Several members have spoken about that. A great deal of anecdotal evidence seems to show that there are a number of reasons why that has happened. Rob Gibson mentioned anti-competitive reasons. Others allude to speculation, and some talk about creating disease barriers. The Government must take a better look at what is happening. We need jobs and investment in aquaculture; in that context, misuse of sites and speculation are criminal, although the aims of protecting the industry from disease and raising quality cannot be argued about. There is potential for expanding the industry, but we must properly consider disease control before we do so. Having only anecdotal evidence about licensing is not good enough. If evidence shows that we should have protection zones, they should become part of the planning and licensing process. Is the Government working on that with industry and scientists? Our products are recognised globally as high-quality products. We must consider developing jobs in the rural economy, but we must also protect our reputation for quality. The minister must get to grips with that, and leases need to be released if they are not required for disease protection. There are concerns about cost variations, which Peter Peacock mentioned. In Shetland, a planning application can be got for £3,000; it costs £11,000 in Dumfries and Galloway. There is a huge range of costs, which cannot be linked to reality. The range of costs also creates a disincentive for small projects that lend themselves to shellfish farming. We can expand the industry in that area in a way that does not impact on the environment. Our shellfish farming output falls way short of that of other countries. It has been said that we could up our output from 7,000 tonnes a year to 100,000 tonnes a year. Spain's output is 250,000 tonnes, and France produces a similar amount. Greece beats us by producing 35,000 tonnes of mussels a year. Shellfish farming lends itself to small operations, which we need to encourage. In some parts of the country, the cost of planning means that very few would be able to pursue such an option financially. What support is available to  individuals who want to start a small shellfish farming business? Water quality is of the utmost importance to fish farming. I assume that the marine bill will address that issue. SEPA and Scottish Water have a role in protecting the quality of our water. The Government must ensure that its agencies are working with the industry to improve water quality. This might not have been the right time to have the debate, but those issues have to be addressed by Government. We have a unique opportunity to grow our economy and provide jobs in areas that need them. The minister needs to stand back and think about how the Government can make a difference at this stage, by reducing bureaucracy and providing support where it is needed. The areas that I have touched on are some of the areas that have been highlighted by the people who have responded to the consultation. We need to streamline measures with the forthcoming marine bill; we need to make the planning process more relevant and consistent; and we need to get to grips with licensing problems. We need to find clear and practical ways to move forward and make aquaculture an attractive career for people who live in the areas concerned. We must provide training and personal development. We must protect our reputation for having a product of excellence. The minister needs to take away such issues and then bring back his ideas, either to the Parliament or to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee.

I welcome the fact that the minister recognised this week that the Scottish rural development programme is not fit for purpose, and I welcome his intention to review it. During that review, will he consider cutting the bureaucracy of the proposed scheme, ensure that the scheme is available to people who do not have internet access and ensure that the funding for the scheme reaches those who need it, rather than lining the pockets of accountants?

Will the member take an intervention?

This debate is extremely important. After all, we must remember that health cuts will affect every one of our constituents. We thought, for example, that we had seen the last of long waiting lists, but I fear that that is not the case. That is not scaremongering—it is fact. What good is it for someone to have a free car parking place if they cannot get a hip replacement? Their free prescription might cover the cost of their pain-killers, but they will not get their life back. What good is being able to vote in health board elections if a person cannot access health services? I am not criticising those initiatives; they have been popular and, if they were affordable, I would welcome them whole-heartedly. However, it is difficult to welcome the icing when there is no cake.

Although I have some confidence in NHS Highland's attempts to mitigate the effects of these budget cuts, I do not think that it will be able to mitigate them in full. Indeed, that is why it is talking about looking at "scary or untouchable" areas. The minister should consider those comments as well. Given that resources in this area are scarce—we have been told just how scarce they are—it seems ludicrous to spend valuable money on measures that deliver no health benefits. Since the implementation of the NRAC formula, rural health boards have lost out in the allocations that have been made. We are not criticising the need for a formula; however, when the Health and Sport Committee took evidence on the resource allocations, it became very clear that the formula being used was damaged, because the data on which it was based had no bearing in reality. For example, as Mary Scanlon pointed out, the cost of the out-of-hours GP contract shows that it is much more expensive to deliver rural health services, but the Government has ignored that information. Health service staff are happy to be efficient, want to make changes and want to work hard to find savings. However, they want the savings that they are being asked to identify to be put back into patient care. If working harder and making savings do not improve such care and instead have a huge impact on morale, where is the greater good? NHS Highland is looking at having to make £36.6 million in savings, and it has said that it is not able to do so.

No—I am running out of time and have a lot to cover. NHS Shetland has reported that it is reviewing the number of nurses, cancer care services and mental health funding to find savings. Patients in Shetland have to travel far enough to access specialist care and any cuts that their board has to make will only disadvantage them further. In its election manifesto, the SNP promised a major expansion of the health service, which was to be funded by efficiency savings in bureaucracy and backroom functions. The released resources were to be invested in front-line services. However, that has not happened. Indeed, the Scottish Government has written to NHS Shetland to ask it to deliver the financial outcomes that are included in its plan by holding a clinical review assessment as opposed to a backroom review  assessment. We are talking about clinical services and front-line patient care. No matter how the Government tries to dress things up, NHS Highland has had to revise its budgets because it has less money than it expected to receive from the previous Executive. NHS Shetland is considering the services that it delivers and the number of nurses that it employs. So much for investing in front-line services. The Government needs to act now and give patients access to health services that they deserve.

I welcome the debate. It is good to see that Governments are co-operating on how to deal with non-native species. Their co-operation is welcomed and encouraged by stakeholders. A number of non-native species have detrimental impacts on our environment, as other members have explained. Some of those impacts are quite unexpected, as was brought home to me when I watched on TV the efforts that were made to ensure that rats did not get on to St Kilda, when a boat was grounded there recently. We should congratulate SNH and others on their speedy response to avert that potential problem. I guess that it was the last thing that most of us thought about when we heard of a ship in difficulty. The strategy, with its aim of raising awareness, ensuring responsibility and putting in place a framework for dealing with such problems, means that if there is a similar occurrence, we might all be a wee bit more aware of the risks. We are all aware of the species that cause most of the problems. The problem of the grey squirrel has recently been debated in the Parliament, and there have been high-profile campaigns to trap mink and hedgehogs where they cause environmental damage. However, there are many more non-native species of which I am unaware and which I would be unable to identify. Like others, when I travel abroad I am acutely aware that other countries appear to take a much stricter line than us. Airports and harbours abroad tend to have more publicity discouraging the import of plants and animals. Not only does the strategy talk about working with stakeholders on education, but it emphasises the need for education to be broader so that we all exercise our responsibility to ensure that we do not import invasive species. Rigorous animal controls tend to come as a result of our reaction to diseases such as rabies. We often hear of exotic animals and reptiles being found in the wild, mainly due to the people who imported them being unable to look after  them. No one is saying that people should not own exotic pets, but we need to make it clear that if they plan to own such a pet they should research the animal's care needs over its lifespan before committing to such a purchase. They must ensure that they can cope with those needs, and only then should they make their purchase through a reputable dealer. Organisations such as the RSPCA are happy to help out when owners cannot cope with their pets for any reason, and they will usually try to rehouse those pets with people who have a history with and knowledge of the breed. Rather than releasing animals or reptiles into the wild, where they can cause damage to the environment or where they might perish because they are unable to survive alone, people should contact those organisations for help. The strategy's emphasis on individual responsibility and education is therefore welcome. Education has a part to play in helping us to identify species. Animals are often easier to identify than plants because they tend to be given more publicity. I would struggle to identify many of the non-native plants that have been mentioned, and I am not sure how education can be improved to ensure that all of us have a greater understanding. Although I welcome consideration of education and the potential for greater public awareness, it may be worth focusing education not on turning us all into botanists but on telling people about the potential risks of importing plants to prevent them from coming here in the first place. However, that would mean that we would still need people who can identify species and deal with the problems that they bring. The strategy highlights how much that work would cost—Elaine Murray outlined many of those costs earlier. Marine ballast creates another problem to which we need to find a solution. The more we trade, and the more our horizons increase, the more shipping movements take place. Ships can carry microscopic algae and sea life from very far afield. There are already concerns that much of the algae and fish disease that affects shellfish and fish farming has come from shipping movements. It is difficult to see how we can deal with those issues and protect our environment. I am glad that the strategy at least acknowledges the problem, which I hope signals that there will be an attempt to find a solution to it. The report rightly emphasises the impact of climate change, which other members have mentioned. Climate change means that exotic species survive here that would not previously have done so. It also means that our native species can struggle to survive, and an invasive species can often be the final straw for them. Climate change is well recognised, and measures to address it have a great deal of public support.  We should build on that public support and use it as a vehicle to spread knowledge and awareness of the problem of non-native species. Native species should always be encouraged. I have a bugbear, which is that, for many years, I have disliked the use of non-native species in forestry. It has been proven that the quality of timber from those species is not high because of our environment and climate. I have a plea: can more work be done to consider the use and management of our native forests? At this time of year, people appreciate the fact that our native species are not only more environmentally friendly, but beautiful. I welcome the debate, and I urge the Government to continue to work with other Administrations in the United Kingdom. Our request for a review of existing legislation will only strengthen current actions. I therefore urge the minister to accept the Labour amendment.

NHS Highland has had to cut £36 million from its budget to stay out of the red. Some of that is a direct result of the SNP Government's policies. On top of that, the health board has to find £600,000 for car parking charges and to fund elections, as the Government is not stepping in to do that. What can the First Minister say to first-class clinicians who are being asked to make cuts in areas that "were previously thought to be 'scary' or 'untouchable'"? In what areas does he recommend that they make cuts?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am grateful for the time. I thank members for their good wishes. Unlike others, I want to put on record our thanks to the staff involved for their hard work and dedication. We thank, too, the Scottish agricultural community for working with Government. I want to amplify comments made by Jim Hume. We have had a wholly technical debate, but the outbreak affected people and we cannot forget its effect on those who had to live through it. They did not know when their stock could be moved and were sometimes caught out with their stock in the wrong place. They had to worry about that and find solutions. We must always remember the human cost of an outbreak. I am glad that lessons have been learned from the 2001 outbreak; that is heartening. However, the report highlights the need to take into account changing circumstances and the need for robust planning. An issue that has come up a lot in the debate is the need for regionalisation. Elaine Murray said, and others agreed, that we need to be part of the UK epidemiological unit—I laughed at other people trying to say that, and now I have got my comeuppance. Our trading patterns are such that we cannot cut ourselves off from the rest of the UK. Light lambs go south to markets and slaughter for supermarkets is done outwith Scotland, so we must be careful about how we take regionalisation forward. My colleague Peter Peacock talked in depth about the complexity of the issue. Richard Lochhead rightly said that there must be consensus when considering regionalisation—I very much agree. Liam McArthur said that regionalisation had to be risk-based and proportionate so that our response was proportionate and that it was not just about drawing lines on a map. We do not want regionalisation to close down trading links, as the industry is struggling enough. However, we must consider that approach as a contingency. As the Scottish Government's report "Foot and Mouth Disease Review 2007: Economic Impact in Scotland" says, islands lend themselves to regionalisation. It states:  "Hence a plausible alternative approach might have been to treat Scottish islands as separate from the mainland". I would like something like that to happen. People on islands watched as restrictions were lifted in Northern Ireland, while they had much more biosecurity than in other areas. The issue must be considered in the round. If regionalisation is to work we must consider the location of abattoirs. The Government is considering using the less favoured area support scheme and the rural development programme to help provide abattoirs. However, as many members have said, including Sarah Boyack and Rob Gibson, we need a strategic approach. There is no point in leaving it up to local communities to establish abattoirs in their areas, because they must be strategically placed so that they fit in with the contingency plan that we draw up. Elaine Murray highlighted the issue as being important if we are to access local food. If we are serious about encouraging local markets and local food, we must have local abattoirs. There are issues to address, such as whether the abattoirs would be part time, how they would be funded and where they would be built. Michael McMahon talked about the wider issues of rendering plants and travel distances. All those issues must be considered seriously and in the round. Richard Lochhead talked about Government giving responsibility to the agricultural community, but the Government has a role to work with the community to identify the areas and the approach. There is consensus in the Parliament that local abattoirs would be a good thing, so I look forward to members supporting our amendment, which highlights the need for such abattoirs. The contingency plan would also affect the siting of abattoirs and rendering plants, and many members talked about the planning process for that. We must consider our response to outbreaks that occur at different times of the year, because that would change the way in which we deal with them. Richard Lochhead mentioned that the second outbreak was badly timed for the sheep sector in the Highlands. It was at a time of year when most sheep were being transported to market, so there was a big impact on the industry. Therefore, in drawing up a contingency plan, we need to consider the different sectors, the various times of year and market patterns. A contingency plan is not a document that is drawn up and put on the shelf; it has to be taken down and worked on as market conditions change, so that it is mindful of those conditions. As Sarah Boyack said, the contingency plan could include issues to do with working time directive derogations. When are derogations triggered? Do we have to push for them, or could  they happen automatically? Richard Lochhead mentioned applying for movement licences in advance. I would be grateful to hear more about that. He talked about low and high risks and risk assessment, but we need more information on how that would work. If proposals are being drawn up, it would be a good idea to consult the industry. John Scott mentioned scenario planning and ensuring that we keep up to date with scientific processes. All members seemed to agree that we must review the concordats and their effectiveness. It is disappointing that the concordats that were in place in 2001 and which appeared to work well when a Liberal Democrat rural affairs minister was dealing with them could not cope when we had a change of Government to the SNP. Many SNP members have used the debate to have a go at the devolution settlement. I am grateful to Dave Thompson for reminding me of the reasons for the concerns about leaks of confidential information. His leader, the First Minister, released confidential information at a press conference—he did not try to hide that. I am not sure that Scudamore says that there was no reason for the mistrust; that leak was blatantly a reason. My colleague Peter Peacock talked about that, and about the need to have a grown-up relationship with other Governments. The matter cannot be dealt with whimsically, or in the way in which it has been, and the present Government needs to examine it closely. We cannot play politics with people's lives—the issue is much too serious. The Liberal Democrats raised the funding issue, but—as my colleague Sarah Boyack said—we cannot support their amendment. It is not that we are not willing to discuss the matter, but we feel that the funding and the devolved settlement need to be considered in the round as part of the Calman commission. Alasdair Allan and John Scott attacked Labour ministers because of the Pirbright outbreak. I expect that from Alasdair Allan, but I gently remind John Scott about the Tory Government's handling of the BSE and salmonella outbreaks. In contrast to that, the Labour Government acted quickly, asked the correct agencies to examine what had happened and took decisive action.

Every outbreak and crisis is different. I was trying to make the point that the  Labour Government took decisive action. It is the action that a Government takes in a crisis that is important. A lot of members talked about the pig industry. It is crucial that we protect that industry, and I am concerned about the issues that members have raised. I am also concerned by the suggestion that European, or non-UK, pork is being marketed in the UK with a UK label. We rightly have high welfare standards that cost our pig farmers more. I am not arguing against those, but food must be labelled properly to ensure that people know what they are buying, how they are buying it and that they are supporting our industry. I would like to talk about a lot of other issues, but I am running out of time—I did not think that that would be possible. I am glad that we have learned lessons from the 2001 outbreak and that the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment is talking about the lessons that the Government can learn from the 2007 outbreak. Our amendment highlights practical action. Regionalisation is complex, but it needs to be explored as a possible vehicle to protect our industry, and that has to be done while protecting our markets. We need to explore all avenues to minimise future disruption of our livestock industry in the case of any future outbreaks, but we also need to safeguard the industries in the current climate. I urge the minister to act on our concerns.

Does the minister agree that crofting will not survive unless it is economically viable? As other members have said, the statement does not deal with Shucksmith's recommendation on financial support. The minister says in his response to the inquiry that he does not propose to introduce a loan element to the croft house grant scheme. Given that it was difficult to get mortgages prior to the credit crunch, how will he now ensure that crofting will survive?

I recently watched a young carer being told that they could go to the festival and saw the look of excitement on their face. However, I knew that the care worker who supported that young person was to be removed from post as a result of a lack of funding, and that another care worker had already lost their job. The Government's giving £200,000 to the festival seemed a bit hollow to that group. I ask the minister to consider core funding that would keep such groups working. I know of three really good groups in my constituency. Every young carer should have the support of such a group, which should be funded properly.

In my constituency, many schools such as Wick high school are in desperate need of replacement. When does the cabinet secretary expect the first school in the Highlands to be built through the Scottish Futures Trust?

Although I welcome much of the cabinet secretary's statement, I am disappointed that it did not address the shortage of volunteer drivers. How many appointments are missed because of the lack of volunteer drivers? When two appointments are missed, does the patient lose their waiting time guarantee? What is the cost to NHS boards of missed appointments and taxi services when the Scottish Ambulance Service fails?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will compensate national health service boards for the costs of running hospital car parks, following the recent announcement of the abolition of hospital car parking charges. (S3O-4091)

Concerns have been raised by NHS Highland that it will have to find an additional £600,000 to cover the cost of running its car park year on year. In addition, it will need to find ways of improving the car park facilities to deter people who have no business at the hospital from parking there. Will the cabinet secretary give a commitment that that money will not be taken out of front-line patient services?

I welcome the committee's report. To say that ferries provide a lifeline to the communities they serve is to state the obvious. Such communities face disadvantage due to their distance from markets and services. Ferries bridge that gap, so we must provide a responsive service that is grounded in the community it serves. We must deal differently with each community and its individual needs but seek to provide equity and parity to lessen the natural disadvantage. For that to happen, ferry users must be at the forefront of planning, and other service providers must be involved. It is unacceptable in this new millennium that children need to leave home to go to high school. I had to do it, and I know that it is far from  ideal to leave home and family when they might be needed most. The lengths to which people go to avoid it are striking: people with whom I went to school and who continue to live in the same area give up hours of their own time to get their children to and from school each day. They recognise the need for that, because of their own experience, and want better for their children. Families on Colonsay still face the prospect of leaving the island or waving goodbye to their children for a month at a time. Unfortunately, they are not the only ones. Ferry services need to address those issues. Listening to ferry service users and meeting their needs is vital when ferry services are being put in place. There could be no better illustration of that than that in the Uists, where the local community has been campaigning for a new direct service between Lochboisdale and Mallaig, which would result in far faster links to the mainland and the new road link from Mallaig to Fort William and beyond. The link to Mallaig would cut journey times dramatically for travellers to and from South Uist and could only be of benefit. It has overwhelming community support. The local community company, Stòras Uibhist, has managed to locate a vessel and an operator who, if necessary, would work with CalMac to deliver the service. In answer to parliamentary questions lodged by Peter Peacock, the minister said that he has the money to provide the route. I welcome that. The beauty of the proposal is that it would add a service and vessel that would run alongside the current service between Barra and Oban. As I love to visit Barra and therefore recognise the community's requirement for good transport links, I wish to ensure that its needs are fully accounted for and suggest that doing otherwise would cause division between communities and pit them against each another.

That is not my understanding and I will certainly communicate the answer to the minister so that he can look it up with his officials. The proposal would also offer more choice to people in Barra, who would have an alternative to use in bad weather. As I have visited the area and had holidays cut short—indeed, I have had to travel to Barra via Uig in Skye—I would really welcome the new service. I hope that the minister will work with the community to introduce it.  We need to find ways of developing routes outside the tendering framework. I welcome what the minister has said today, but many different arrangements need to be put in place, especially to cover bad weather, so that ferry services can be provided outwith the normal timetable. I hope that that will be dealt with both within and outwith the tendering process. I could not speak without mentioning the road equivalent tariff. The committee report states that there was little consultation on the pilot's implementation. If the RET pilot is a true pilot, what is it being gauged against? In his intervention on Liam McArthur, Alasdair Allan admitted that the scheme would be unworkable in the Shetland Isles, so why is it being piloted? In its inquiry into the future of Scotland's hills and islands, the Royal Society of Edinburgh stated that the Government should review the means of supporting ferry services from the mainland to islands other than the Western Isles so that they can have a scheme that is similarly advantageous to that for the Western Isles. No one is arguing that the Western Isles do not need a cheaper ferry service; we are arguing that all island communities need to be treated equally. There are many other issues that I want to discuss, but I will conclude by dealing with European policy. We need to examine the issue more closely. For example, the EU provides less favoured area support to farmers and crofters who operate on the periphery, which should be used to offset their natural disadvantage. Nowhere is more peripheral than our islands. Given that the public service obligation subsidy cannot be used for freight or animal transportation, surely we could use some of the LFA money to discount the freight services that farmers and crofters use for supplies and stock transportation. As the EU acknowledges and tries to alleviate the difficulties that farmers and crofters who work in our rural areas experience, surely it must recognise that business experiences the same disadvantage. Would the EU prevent a Government from attempting to mitigate such disadvantage? I think not. The debate has many facets, but it is clear that the ferries are a tool for keeping disadvantaged communities together. To lessen that disadvantage, ferries must be provided in a way that best suits those communities' needs. All islands must be dealt with equally, and ferries should be used to address their natural disadvantage. In seeking to do so, this Government has built resentment in island communities. The solution is in the Government's hands, and I hope that it will address the issues that I have raised.

I am grateful for the minister's comments about waiting times and for the steps that she is taking on the issue. Will the minister also consider the availability of services in areas such as the Highlands and Islands, where people routinely have to travel to access treatment, and whether  even part of the treatment could be delivered closer to home?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will ensure that no BT public telephone boxes are removed from areas of the Highlands and Islands where mobile reception is poor or non-existent, particularly when the removal may impact on public safety in the event of a road collision, mountain or maritime incident. (S3O-3921)

I had hoped that the minister would agree to use his good offices to speak to BT rather than turning the issue into a political football. The phone boxes often have a low level of usage, but when there is a lack of any other means of communication, they can be a lifeline. Will the minister use his good offices to speak to BT and discuss options such as local maintenance contracts, as suggested by the Gairloch Business Association, which would lower maintenance costs and make it more viable for BT to keep the phone boxes open?

There was nothing in the statement about tackling specific health inequalities in rural areas, where it costs five times as much to deliver the most basic health services. Will the minister give a commitment today that a remote rural area will be included as a test site, so that the unique challenges for service delivery in such areas can be focused on?

Will the First Minister ask the independent advisers to reconsider decisions, such as that which has been taken regarding the development at Aviemore, where I—along with other members—was used to cover prior ministerial activity? When members are concerned that they may have been used in that way, will they be able to ask the independent advisers to investigate and report to the First Minister, in order that they can be confident that the matter will be investigated properly?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is supporting the provision of affordable rural housing. (S3O-3734)

This Government has cut funding to Highlands and Islands housing associations by 26 per cent, which shows ignorance of the cost of providing affordable houses in rural areas. Small Highlands and Islands housing associations such as Lochalsh and Skye and Hebridean, which provide high-quality housing in some of the remotest areas of Scotland, are facing real cuts. In some cases, grants are being slashed by more than half. That will mean less affordable housing in areas that are crying out for more. Will the minister review that decision as a matter of urgency and ensure that people in my constituency are not further disadvantaged by funding cuts?

Surely the problems that Rob Gibson outlines would be solved by initiatives such as the Howard Doris centre. Such a centre would be an excellent facility for north-west Sutherland.

I am pleased to take part in this debate on remote and rural health care and I welcome the report. The cabinet secretary is pleased to endorse its recommendations and is committed to acting on them, but we have yet to hear a commitment on making extra funds available so that the proposals will be implemented. The report details what is happening in rural Scotland and outlines future aspirations. Those aspirations would lead to a standard of health care in remote and rural communities that approaches the same standard as that in urban Scotland. However, in describing rural general hospitals, it lists only the minimum services that are required. That greatly concerned a great number of people, because some rural general hospitals already provide a more comprehensive service. Let us consider, for example, the obstetrician-led maternity service at Caithness general hospital. The health board has given a commitment that that service will remain; I would be grateful if the minister did the same.

I am grateful to the minister for that reassurance. I am sure that the people of Caithness will be grateful for it, too. The report states that there has been a rise in hospital admissions because of the failure of out-of-hours care in remote and rural areas. We all know that it costs five times more to deliver out-of-hours care. The rise in hospital admissions when such care fails adds to the costs that rural health boards bear. When funding is cut in real terms, it does not reflect the real costs of delivering rural health care, and leaves little room for ambition. Delivering services as close to people as possible in remote and rural communities means higher costs. Consultants who travel to patients in rural areas cost more; they are travelling rather than  seeing more patients. We should acknowledge that they cost more, but we must also be clear that such an approach is right. It is difficult for people to travel long distances to access health services. They are often worried about receiving bad news, and being a long way from home makes a bad situation a lot worse. The report's emphasis on telemedicine and the use of other technologies is welcome. Such technologies will also have benefits in delivering health care in more urban settings. Where possible, such services should be delivered at home or as close to home as possible. The report also talks about team working, which should surely be happening already, but when health care staff are few and far between, that presents a challenge for team working, as people seldom work together. The report mentions multiskilling and the current review of community nursing, but the pilots have just begun and it would be sensible to await their outcome before proceeding. All staff groups, especially those that are most directly affected, should be involved in implementing the measures. The report makes a passing reference to what I would term one of the really good models of rural health delivery. The Howard Doris centre in Lochcarron provides care for all parts of the community, from nursing home care and sheltered housing to respite care and medical beds. That means that some people do not need to be admitted to hospital and ensures that those who do can move closer to home more quickly. The centre delivers health and local government services seamlessly, so why does it merit only a passing reference in the report? I fear that it is because it is a community-led initiative. In providing cross-service care and the level of service that local people require, it is a model that really delivers. If the Government is keen on matching rhetoric with action, it could do an awful lot worse than use that model in areas where there is little or no in-patient support.

Indeed. However, my point is that if the community had not brought forward that initiative, there would be no joint funding. It was the community that raised the money, pulled forward the initiative and then drew down the money from both the national health service and local government to make it work. Getting the two services to work together to provide similar services in other areas has proved difficult, and I  suggest that communities be given that amount of input to services that are delivered locally. Indeed, the services that are delivered in places such as the Howard Doris centre could be added to telemedicine and the like to ensure that local people could attend clinics remotely and would not have to travel to centres. The report talks about ambulance service technicians undertaking planned home visits to carry out risk assessments. Ambulance staff form part of the emergency service, so I imagine that it is difficult—if not impossible—for them to play a part in planned health care. Patient transport service staff could do the job more easily. Unfortunately, patient transport staff are thin on the ground in rural areas—indeed, the service depends on volunteers who are not properly compensated for their time and expenses. That is a false economy, as the patient transport service has been forced to use taxis, which is hardly a good use of public money. I welcome what the report says about education, and I pay tribute to union learning reps who identify training needs in remote and rural areas. I also pay tribute to the university of the Highlands and Islands, which offers education up to degree level in rural health care. I suggest that that is a suitable institution to develop remote and rural health care education and training. I recently became acutely aware of the challenges of providing health care in remote and rural areas when members of my family were unwell. What is a worrying time under normal conditions takes on a whole new dimension when one is struggling with distance. In providing services in remote and rural areas, we must ensure that the needs of the patient are central. In implementing the report, we must force out services on the ground—that must be our priority.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to encourage people to donate blood. (S3O-3543)

The minister will no doubt be aware that blood donors are not entitled to paid time off when they give blood. When giving blood, I have met people who have taken unpaid leave to meet the critical need for blood. Does the minister agree that, although people should not be paid for giving blood, employers should be encouraged to give people paid time off to enable them to donate?

To ask the Scottish Executive what services will be devolved to rural general hospitals. (S3O-3439)

Is not it the case that many of those services have already been devolved? Indeed, many rural general hospitals offer more services than are laid out in the report. Will the cabinet secretary assure us that those services will be protected? Does the cabinet secretary acknowledge that devolving services carries increased costs? Will she therefore ensure that rural health boards receive the funding that they require to advance their services and, indeed, to develop more services?

Like other members, I pay tribute to all who worked on the Shucksmith report. It is well evidenced and argued, and it is easy to read and understand. The issues that the Shucksmith committee flags up are not surprising—the problems have been well rehearsed for some time—but finding solutions has always been challenging. While it is heartening that the report has been widely welcomed, many of the proposed solutions are complex, and more time to study them prior to the debate would have been appreciated. The minister needs to be clear that when he has considered the full implications of the report he will come back to Parliament to give his thoughts in another subject debate, and allow members to do the same. Crofting is important. It has ensured the survival of many communities, and the future of many more is dependent on the action that we take. Some of the report's recommendations need legislation; others do not. Some elements of the report can be acted on quickly and are within the minister's gift. I will concentrate my comments on the parts of the report that deal with housing, starting with what can be easily implemented. The croft house grant scheme can easily be replaced by the scheme outlined in the report. That would not need legislation. The report is clear that the current scheme is pitched too low. Those who use the scheme have difficulty in securing top-up finance to make it workable, which means that house sites are decrofted to provide security for mortgages from commercial lenders. Those who can afford to get finance for a house are able to proceed, while those who cannot do not get a house because the grant is insufficient. The report states that the enhanced scheme would assist crofters to meet their housing needs without decrofting. The committee suggests a  means-tested grant scheme, topped up by a loan. Those who did not meet the requirement for the means-tested grant would still be able to access the loan element. That loan would be sufficient to meet the costs of building or renovating a property. The report suggest that under the scheme, 200 more houses could be built and renovated, which would have a huge impact on the housing shortages in the Highlands and Islands. No legislation is required to implement the recommendation—that could be done now. The report acknowledges the problems of croft houses becoming second and holiday homes, and makes an interesting suggestion that all croft houses should have occupancy burdens attached to them. It proposes two types of burden: first, an "enhanced burden", in which the house and the croft still form part of the same unit, which would ensure that the owner had to occupy the house and work the land; and a second burden, when the house is decrofted, termed a "real burden" of occupancy. I am keen to hear the minister's comments on those burdens. Do they fit with the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000 or would the act have to be amended? How would a real burden and an enhanced burden be transferred between properties where there is a second house on the croft? In section 3.8.3, the report touches on the circumstances in which a second house could be built. The approach is pragmatic, and would allow the croft to be passed down through generations. Allowing a second home to be built enables a crofter to pass on the croft to family or an assignee without having to leave their family home. However, more thought needs to go into the recommendation, taking into account the burdens placed on both homes. Would the burden to work the land pass to the new house? When would it transfer? What would happen to the original home when the occupant died or wished to move to suitable accommodation? Consideration should be given to situations in which a crofter wishes to retire and assign the croft but remain in their own home. The report recommends backdating those burdens to stop a rush to decroft. The minister has indicated that if he accepts the report and the burdens, he will also accept the recommendation to backdate. Will the minister put in place arrangements to protect people who cannot proceed with house sales because he has indicated that there may be backdated burdens? Backdating burdens would mean people being unable to give clear title. Until he legislates, they will be unable to pass on the true implications of the burdens. Some people will face losses. Will he underwrite those losses? Will there be a cut-off date that affects those who have not started the process in any form? It is often late in the process  of selling a croft house before it is discovered that the land has not been decrofted, because a lot of people confuse buying a feu with decrofting. What action will the minister take to assist those who are caught up in the change? People will be selling crofts and croft houses, and may be in the process of decrofting them now. What can be done to protect them? The change could lead to financial hardship or ruin, for instance for people who have bought another property or have already moved but who are prohibited from selling because of the burdens. That situation is affecting people as we speak, and the minister needs to take steps to deal with it now. I welcome the minister's indication that he will accept a register of crofts. That is a step in the right direction and will help people to get finance to grow their business and renovate or build houses. I also welcome his extending the crofting counties. I have raised genuine questions that are intended to be helpful, but we need to find solutions. I look forward to the opportunity to debate them in more detail, possibly when there is more clarity on some of the issues.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assistance is available for small farmers and crofters in the Highlands and Islands who wish to access funds from the Scottish rural development programme. (S3O-3187)

The minister will be aware that small crofters and farmers are the backbone of rural communities. This Government has cut funding to the crofters and farmers who take seriously their environmental obligations. It has prevented many of them from applying for alternative funding through the Scottish rural development programme by excluding those who cannot apply online. In the meantime, those who form themselves into groups can get assistance from the Crofters Commission and the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and those who can afford it can buy assistance in applying, but—again—the most needy will suffer. What is the minister going to do about that problem?

The member will be aware that without stock transfer and the £12.5 million injection of funding into his community, those people would be waiting an awful lot longer for such housing provision.

Will Dave Thompson give way?

If Dave Thompson now takes responsibility for duping and misleading the people in the Highlands, will he work with his Government to ensure that the debt is met and that the  inflation-busting rent increases for the people that he has duped are reversed?

I am grateful that we are debating housing again, and I speak in support of the motion in the name of Johann Lamont. Housing is essential for everyone. Too many people face a dismal future if this Government does not produce a housing strategy. Housing was  a high priority for the previous Government, and if the present Government does not build on the legacy that it inherited, it risks losing the good work that was done. The Labour motion is wide-ranging. The fact that it covers a great many housing issues shows the complexity of the problem. I will address one or two of those issues. I have the privilege of representing one of the most beautiful parts of the world, but its beauty has a knock-on effect on housing. Houses for sale on the open market are attractive to people from outside the area, either as a second home or as a base to move to in a prime area for a change of lifestyle. Those people tend to have finance from property or savings that allows them to outbid locals easily. On the other hand, locals tend to have several jobs, some of which are seasonal or temporary, which means that they do not have the security or amount of income to allow them to compete. That leads to many people living with their families in substandard accommodation or caravans. We need to tackle the market imbalance that is created by second home ownership by developing two different markets: one for second homes and one for those who live and work in an area. That has been done successfully in other areas. By creating two markets, we can ensure that the needs and aspirations of both communities are met. Locals will not be outpriced by people moving into the area and will be able to own or rent their own homes. However, we do not want to prevent communities benefiting from the economic boost that comes via second home and holiday home ownership. Building affordable houses for rent or purchase has its challenges in rural areas, because there are no economies of scale. Because of their size, villages need only one or two houses, which prove expensive to build due to the small size of the development. Additional costs are incurred when securing services in rural areas: telephone and electricity connection costs can be horrendous, and access to water and sewerage services can be non-existent. Many small villages have access only to private water supplies that cannot be easily upgraded to supply new properties, and the same applies to sewerage systems. Housing associations that are grounded in their communities are more likely to reach solutions and create developments that are sympathetic to their surroundings. For example, Albyn Housing Society has ensured that its house designs fit with local properties and take on the character of the local village. The association is aware of the additional costs and challenges of building in rural areas. Fuel poverty can be a big problem in rural areas. There are few alternatives to electricity, which can be expensive. The cost of electricity means that  people of all ages can be reluctant to heat their homes. Housing associations are thinking imaginatively about those problems, and some have developed community heating schemes. Others, such as Lochalsh and Skye Housing Association, are installing renewable heat sources—heat pumps—in new properties. They are also investigating heat capture schemes for existing housing. They are not cheap to install, but they help tenants and owners to access affordable power, and thus tackle fuel poverty. The Government's rhetoric does little to encourage housing associations—it devalues them. The Government lumps them together with the private sector and ignores their social remit and benefit. The Government boasts of investing £25 million in housing, but that amount is derisory when compared with the £160 million debt write-off that was available to Highland Council for its housing debt. That money could have come to the Highlands had it not been for the SNP-led campaign to reject the investment. Highland Council tenants now face an inflation-busting rent increase of 5.3 per cent, while the council freezes council tax for the laird. This is Robin Hood in reverse: taking from the poor and giving to the rich. On top of its £160 million debt, Highland Council must now find money to fund a £247 million investment to meet the Scottish housing quality standard. How small its share of the lauded £25 million appears in comparison. Highland tenants must rue the day that they were so badly misled.

I will come to that point. However, I must point out to the member that tenants in the Highlands look across the Minch to the Western Isles and see that a debt of £38 million has been written off there, that upgrading is not just a dream, and that there is the promise of new houses and a £12.5 million investment. The same is happening in Argyll and Bute. How Highland Council tenants must rue the day. Community ownership can never be privatisation. How can the SNP look both ways by supporting community ownership under land reform and opposing it under housing stock transfer? What is the difference? The previous speaker and the member who intervened have told us what the difference is: it is the manufactured fight with Westminster. Again, we  see the SNP's constitutional ambitions being put ahead of the needs of the poorest in our communities. That is shocking and wrong. The Government has a moral obligation to put the situation right for the people of the Highlands.

The bill gives the Government the power to make grants and to attach conditions to those grants. That power is crucial to the games' planning and success. It is important to set the right conditions to ensure that the games' positive impact reaches beyond Glasgow and that a legacy is available for future generations. In setting conditions for funding, the Government needs to keep those aims at the forefront. The  Government has said that it will discuss with the lottery how it can use lottery funding to encourage the achievement of those outcomes. That is welcome, but the Government needs to consider its own funding, too. If funding organisations do not work together towards joint goals, there is little hope of achieving the aims. When the Health and Sport Committee took evidence on the Commonwealth games' lasting legacy, it became apparent that previous hosts had not achieved a lasting legacy. We have no hope of achieving what others have not if we do not have a consistent goal. I represent the Highlands and Islands and I believe that the games can have a positive impact not only on Glasgow, but on the whole of Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom. We need to develop good sporting facilities throughout Scotland so that teams can base themselves outside Glasgow to prepare for the games, and we need good transport links to ensure that more remote parts of Scotland are not excluded. We need to work with the London Olympics organising committee to bring facilities and funding north, to capitalise on both events and to ensure the best use of public money. The Government fuelled jealousy of the funding for the London games, but we need to stop posturing and ensure that Scotland reaps the benefits of working with the London committee. Health and Sport Committee members met representatives of that committee today and had an excellent discussion in which we exchanged ideas about how to share and build on best practice. Rather than considering London only, that committee is reaching out to all the UK's nations and regions. We must learn from that. People who live in some parts of Glasgow suffer the poorest health in Scotland, and women in west central Scotland are the least likely to participate in physical exercise. Volunteers who helped with previous hosts' games normally came from sporting backgrounds. Many people from all walks of life offered to volunteer, but it has become clear that those from sporting backgrounds tended to be chosen. We need to change that for Glasgow. If we are to make that change, we must start to work on it now. When time is short, training a volunteer who knows something of sport is easier, as they have a head start, but we need to reach out to our communities now to tell them about the opportunities to volunteer and to begin to build confidence and train them. In that way, we can attract volunteers who will gain a lasting benefit from the games for themselves and their communities. We can learn another lesson about that from the London committee, which is targeting the long-term unemployed through its volunteering  programme—at least 10 per cent of volunteers are to be people who have never been employed. That will ensure that a lasting benefit is reaped from the Olympics. Glasgow has shown that it can host international events and has used those successes to provide a lasting legacy. Glaswegians are known for their hospitality—that alone gives us a head start. We must ensure that the communities in Glasgow and throughout Scotland that need to benefit most from the games achieve that benefit.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing last met the Scottish Ambulance Service and what issues were discussed. (S3O-2988)

The minister is aware that volunteer drivers are paid a mileage rate that is lower than that which is calculated by HM Revenue and Customs as the true cost of running a car. Does she agree that it is therefore no surprise that there is a shortage of such volunteers? That shortage means that the service no longer meets demands and patients are being forced to make alternative arrangements. Where that is impossible, the service uses taxis. That is a false economy. What will the minister do about that problem?

I, too, welcome the statement. What will be the role and involvement of the Scottish haemophilia forum in the inquiry? How will people who are affected by the issues that are covered by the inquiry be kept up to date with its progress? How will their views and experiences be heard and taken into account?

It is clear that the general principles of the bill have been accepted and supported by the Health and Sport Committee and consultees. Much of what is in the bill occurs in practice, but there was a need  to put practice on a clear statutory footing by bringing together and updating existing legislation to meet modern challenges. However, there are several issues of contention in the bill that need to be dealt with at stage 2, many of which are to do with the balance between the rights of individuals and the rights of the wider community. The public good must be paramount, but we must ensure that there are also sufficient safeguards to protect individuals whose liberty is at stake. That principle is acknowledged in human rights legislation. I am not exaggerating when I say that at its most draconian the bill will allow a person to be quarantined without receiving a reasonable explanation for the action. There might be cases when that has to happen to protect the public, for example if someone who does not speak English is suspected of carrying a virus or disease whose spread would have major health implications. We need to ensure that there are robust safeguards to protect individuals in such situations, and we need to ensure that such people receive an explanation at the first possible opportunity. Let us be clear: being quarantined in such a way could be a terrifying ordeal. The minister said that the powers will be used only when co-operation is not forthcoming, but it is difficult for a person to co-operate when he or she has had no explanation for what is happening. The bill will allow for health boards and local authorities to appoint a competent person to carry out their responsibilities. The definition of a health board's "competent person" is wide, and health boards that cover sparsely populated areas are concerned that, given the geographical challenges that they face, a tighter definition might mean that the competent person would be located some distance from the incident, which would delay action. The competent person would have delegated powers to obtain an order to submit an individual to an intrusive medical examination without the necessity of an explanation—indeed, the person would have no right of appeal. The committee argued that an explanation should be given immediately and that there should be a right of appeal, even if the appeal had to take place after action had been taken, because a delay would have public health implications. Even if the appeal took place after the event, it would enable the individual to examine the decision that had been made on their case and to consider the decision making of the competent person. The competent person would be held to account and would not take lightly a decision to force examination if they knew that their decision would be open to scrutiny by the court. It is unthinkable that we should give an individual the power to force a person to have a  medical examination without providing a means whereby the decision could be scrutinised. As members have said, the court processes for which the bill provides must be legally competent. I understand that the Government is addressing the issue and am grateful for that. The processes must also be workable. Someone who has been quarantined and needs access to justice must be able to obtain legal advice and to access the court process in a way that does not carry additional risk to the public. There is little information in part 8, on sunbeds, so committee scrutiny has been difficult. We will probably have to take additional evidence at stage 2, when we have more detail about how part 8 will be amended. The proposed approach appears to involve regulation without licensing. Some local authorities already operate licensing regimes, so for the bill to prevent them from doing so would represent a backwards step. We should explore the idea of a Scottish licensing scheme, under which the operation of sunbeds would be subject to the same regulation in all local authorities. Such an approach would not increase the workload for environmental health officers, who would have to police operators' compliance with regulations. Licensing would give EHOs greater powers to ensure compliance. I pay tribute to Kenneth Macintosh's work in relation to sunbeds, which has made it possible for legislation to be proposed. He has taken a pragmatic decision to accept the Government's stance, but the Health and Sport Committee should consider whether we should go further and introduce a licensing scheme. Other sections are of concern. For instance, the provisions on fixed penalties for those who create a nuisance need to be clarified and tightened, because they could be interpreted to mean that the payment of a fixed penalty discharges any liability to prosecution. That happens currently with fixed penalties and the bill suggests that the same will happen with fixed penalties for nuisance. How does that fit with prosecution for persistent nuisance? Given that the bill includes light nuisance, if someone had a faulty halogen light shining in their neighbour's window, would payment by the person of a fixed penalty mean that they need take no further action? Any confusion in the provisions would lead to less action to deal with nuisance, either by fixed penalty or prosecution. The bill will give authorities powers to medically examine people, restrict their movements and place them in quarantine. Those powers are required to protect the greater good, but we must ensure that checks and balances are in place so that the powers are used properly. Misuse of the powers could have a devastating effect on an  individual. The likelihood of its happening is slim, but one case would be one too many. I therefore urge the Government to take on board the Health and Sport Committee's views.

Many members have talked about consensus, but consensus does not make the debate any less important—we should debate such issues. The cabinet secretary mentioned the Western Isles hospital and I am pleased to have heard her announcement that it will form part of the screening pilot. The ethos at the Western Isles hospital is about infection control. When a person walks into the hospital, they hear a recorded message telling them to wash their hands if they have not already done so. They find hand-cleaning lotion for their use at the entrance to the ward and to the patient's room, and inside it at the foot of the bed, beside the patient notes, and by the wash-hand basin. The hospital strongly emphasises hand washing and informs patients, visitors and staff that they, too, should emphasise it. As I said, I am pleased that the Western Isles hospital is involved in the pilot. That demonstrates the effectiveness of the course of action that the hospital has taken. The pilot will also show any improvement that results from patients being screened before coming into hospital. In many cases, it is too late to wait until someone has walked into a hospital to educate them on infection control. Patients are worried about their condition and what lies in store for them. Relatives, too, worry about what is happening to family members. That said, notices advising people to wash their hands are important. The Western Isles hospital displays them prominently. Other hospitals could learn from its example. Hospitals have notices telling people not to sit on a patient's bed, but they do not tell people why they should not do that. We need a system that informs people about infection control long before they walk into a hospital, when they are feeling stressed because of what lies ahead for them, or their loved one.  Hand washing used to be taught in all schools. It then became part of community education, with notices posted in public places telling people to wash their hands. We need to return to those first principles on hand hygiene. We should mount a public information campaign to tell people why the rules have been put in place. People need to know about the importance of not sitting on a patient's bed, but on a chair, and of washing their hands before they visit the ward. Indeed, if someone is visiting more than one patient, they should be told about the importance of washing their hands between visits. Advertising campaigns should be used to do that, given that they have been successful in the past. We also need to use the popular media. I am thinking of television programmes that highlight the health services, such as "Casualty" and Holby City" that have been used to put across good and important messages. We need to be told that it is everybody's responsibility to cut down on infection—staff, patients and visitors. More public information is needed on the use of antibiotics, as many members have said. General practitioners are often pushed for time; they can come under a huge amount of pressure to prescribe antibiotics. Before patients go to their GP, it is important for them to be well informed about the ill effects of antibiotics on their health and that of others. We need to stop the over-prescribing of antibiotics, and responsibility for that lies not only with GPs but patients. Work also needs to be done on use of antibiotics in treating animals and, more generally, in farming. The impact of such use is not fully known, and it is an important source of antibiotic resistance. We need also to counteract some of the scare stories that appear in the press on hospital-acquired infection. As other members have said, people can be reluctant to go into hospital because of the fear of catching an infection. It is also important that people understand the nature of the infections and where they arise. Hospital-acquired infections are obviously acquired in hospitals, but they do not always arise there; they can be brought into hospital. We need to work with staff. I was interested to read the BMA briefing for the debate, which raised the importance of work clothing being designed with short sleeves and no ties. Perhaps it is time for us to look at the provision of uniforms for all staff. It is important for us to do so, given that the BMA has highlighted the issue. In the hospital pecking order, some staff wear uniforms and others do not.

Yes. I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for that information. The BMA position shows that doctors have the will and wish to see the proposal progressed. We can use patients to reinforce the message about hand washing. It is important that we empower patients by giving them a role in telling people to wash their hands. Hand washing is part of nurse training, but what about the staff who qualified before it was included in the programme? Is hand washing included in training for other NHS staff? It is important that such matters be considered and that hand washing training becomes part of continuous professional development. We must consider all other aspects of health care in the community. Members have mentioned nursing homes. Reducing infection is everyone's responsibility—staff, patients and visitors. We must all take our share of the fight against infection.

I was proud to be involved in the original scrutiny of the National Parks (Scotland) Bill and the subsequent setting up of national parks in Loch Lomond and the Trossachs and in the Cairngorms. That was some time ago and it is only right that after a time the parks should be reviewed, but to my mind they have been a great success. I remember the concerns of the community in the Cairngorms. People were worried about what the setting up of a national park in their area would mean. Those communities had worked the land and protected the environment for generations. Because of those concerns, the aims of the parks were set out with equal weight to give communities the reassurance that the appropriate balance between their needs and the needs of the environment would be protected. The aims of the parks are to conserve and enhance the natural and cultural heritage of the area; to promote sustainable use of the natural resources of the area; to promote the understanding and enjoyment, including enjoyment in the form of recreation, of the special qualities of the area by the public; and to promote sustainable economic and social development of the area's communities. A perception in the Highlands and Islands is that the environment is often given greater weight than the needs of local communities. That is why it was crucial to move SNH nearer to the people that it works with, so that it could build an understanding of their concerns and work more closely with the communities that it serves. People who live in beautiful rural areas have the same needs as their urban counterparts: jobs and public services. We need to protect our beautiful environment but we must also protect the people who live and work there and ensure that their needs are met. I am pleased that when the National Park (Scotland) Bill was drafted, sustainable economic and social development were built in. That has led to the success of our national parks. The bill also left enough flexibility to deal with local circumstances and needs. The concern in Loch Lomond and the Trossachs was that their area was overheating and risked being spoiled by too much development, while the Cairngorms required more sustainable development.  Planning powers were different for both parks, as local circumstances were taken into account. That was hugely contentious, but it has worked well. Some have called for the same planning arrangements to be put in place for all parks, but I believe that we need to be alive to local concerns when we create new parks and that there should be flexibility in how planning is carried out in the parks. One fear in the Cairngorms was that the park board would be run by faceless people who were not interested in or aware of the needs of the community. That fear has not been borne out and the park board works well with its communities. Professor Neil Kay seemed to suggest in his review of environmental governance last year that SNH should run national parks in Scotland. That would be a disaster. We need to bring governance to the people and the current set up does just that. I would be against asking SNH to run the parks, because that would have the opposite effect. It would jeopardise the future economic and social development of the areas and local democracy would be lost. Local people and local councillors would no longer be involved and planning powers would be centralised. Those were the fears that had to be allayed when we first set up the national parks. SNH works closely with park boards, as it should do, but its role is very different to that of the park board. SNH brings its own expertise to the table, as do other bodies who work with the park board. It is then for the park board to balance the requirements of those organisations with the requirements of the board as laid down in the 2000 act. It is crucial to involve local communities. The Cairngorms national park has started community needs assessments, which involve listening to the needs of each small community and including those in their planning. Ramblers Scotland points out that the park has limited finance to carry out the communities' wishes, but the exercise is also helpful to the other public bodies that work with the board. There is a duty on other public bodies to work with the park authority to implement the national park plan. The community consultation work enables the park authority to feed back local needs to those bodies, which allows them to work together to fulfil local ambitions. The park board sets up the park plan and all the public bodies need to implement it. The work with local communities informs the way forward for the board and the other agencies that work in the area. Another initiative that the Cairngorms National Park Authority is pursuing is the park brand. That was raised when we worked on the legislation. We discussed the economic benefit to producers in the park versus the restrictions and costs that are  involved in implementing stringent guidelines. Use of the park brand is conditional on meeting the standards that the board sets for quality and environmental impact. The branding has been successful with the tourism industry and local producers are beginning to use it. When a business meets the standards, use of the brand is free. That enables small businesses to use the park brand in marketing and promoting their products. Similar marketing has taken place with the creation of destination management organisations. Those small businesses are assisted by VisitScotland and the park board to market the area, to involve local people in working in tourism, and to highlight the importance of tourism to the local economy. I welcome the review, but I sound a note of caution. The parks have worked well, and they have certainly exceeded the expectations of many of the communities that they serve. It is important that the review builds on that and does not throw away good practice or the developments that have taken place. I hope that the review will also examine the boundaries. I note what the minister said about the southern boundary of the Cairngorms national park, but I sincerely hope that that does not mean that anyone who wants to talk about the other boundaries cannot feed their comments into the review. The boards must continue to be rooted in their local communities, working with local people to ensure the success of the national parks.

Vulnerable people in the Highlands have received support from Highland Community Care Forum and Age Concern Highland—voluntary organisations that Highland Council previously funded. Unfortunately, when the SNP took over that council, that funding was withdrawn. Rather than accuse me of scaremongering, what will the minister do to provide that service to vulnerable people in the Highlands and protect those organisations?

The minister is aware that there is a lack of affordable housing in the crofting counties and that the croft house grant scheme is a vehicle for providing affordable housing. Will he spend some time on considering the barriers to applying to that scheme and other financial assistance to back up  the grant? Crofters are often not well paid, and it is difficult for them to borrow commercially to make up the balance that is needed to build a house.

I am pleased to discuss health improvement. The debate is welcome as it allows us to highlight good practice as well as talk about the challenges that we face when trying to improve health. Labour has always prioritised health and health improvement. The smoking ban has had the highest profile, but there are many other initiatives. Poverty can lead to the greatest health inequalities. If we are serious about improving health, we need to deal with poverty. A recent study has shown that unemployment is as detrimental to health as smoking 200 cigarettes a day. Labour's policy of full employment has always been one of the main levers in attacking poverty and promoting equality. The study underlines the importance of that approach to promoting not only economic but health equality. Unemployment is still disproportionately high in many of our most deprived communities. It is therefore no surprise that those communities also suffer poor health. We need to grow the confidence of those communities and encourage employers to recruit there. In my Highlands and Islands constituency, poverty is difficult to identify due to the fact that the area is predominantly rural. Those living in poverty live in the same locality as their affluent neighbours. The indicators that Governments use to identify poverty are often based on urban communities and therefore hide rural poverty. Unemployment can be low, but that often masks the fact that people are working in more than one job to make ends meet. Those can be seasonal or part-time jobs, or indeed people can be self-employed. Promoting health improvement is challenging in rural areas because of the dispersed population. It is difficult to access fresh food at a reasonable cost. Providing sporting facilities is also difficult with a dispersed population, although many areas are an exception. In Shetland, for example, providing sporting facilities in small and sparsely populated communities has been made a priority. Despite the challenges, there are many good examples of projects in the Highlands and Islands that encourage participation in sport. Step it up Highland, which encourages people to take up walking, and the Highland cycling campaign, which promotes the health and economic benefits  of cycling to people in the Highlands, are just two. Another good initiative is run by GPs in Elgin, who prescribe membership of the Moray leisure centre to their patients whose health problems would benefit from more exercise. That cuts down on costly drugs and does not give rise to complex side effects. That must be used more widely to promote healthy lifestyles. That initiative is used in Moray to fight existing conditions, but we also need to look imaginatively at how it can be used to prevent such conditions. Again, those who live in affluent households can afford their own sport centre membership; those who live in poverty and who are in most need cannot. Like Margaret Curran, I am concerned that many projects that have led the way on health improvement will end unless the Government steps in. Many lottery-funded projects throughout Scotland that promote healthy lifestyles will not be mainstreamed despite their proven success. One such example is the janny's hoose healthy living centre in Inverness, which is one of three such centres in Highland that promote healthy living in some of the region's most excluded areas. The centre provides a drop-in facility that offers advice and support to the community. Unfortunately, despite a big local campaign that was backed by the Inverness Courier , the last hope for saving the centre is to go back to the Big Lottery Fund with a new plan to seek to build on the centre's existing success. Surely the beauty of lottery funding is that it allows local government and central Government to test ideas and gauge their success without making a financial commitment. However, we need to look at how projects that have been successful are mainstreamed.

The SNP is promoting a myth that Scotland will not benefit from the Olympics. That is wrong. If that is the Scottish Government's attitude, there is a lot to be worried about. We can benefit from spending on the Olympics, too. Another award-winning project in my area is the Islay healthy living centre, which has provided assistance on smoking cessation as well as other health-promoting initiatives involving exercise and welfare. Both those healthy living projects serve hugely diverse communities, but they come from the grass roots and meet the needs of local people. It is ironic that, at a time when public health is so high on the agenda, such services are being removed from local communities. Will the Government, in its lauded concordat, ensure that local government and health boards adopt best  practice in their approach to such projects and arrange funding for them? In conclusion, it is not right in a modern society that people's life chances and life expectancy still depend on where they were born. Many of the challenges are obvious—poor diet, poverty, unemployment, cigarettes and alcohol—but knowing the problems is not the same as putting them right. We need to build on good initiatives such as the healthy living centres, promote healthy diets and lifestyles and ensure that they are available not just to those that can afford them. The public purse rightly invests in acute health provision, but we need to be willing to give the same investment to health promotion to reap the financial and social rewards further down the line.

Will the member give way?

I, too, welcome the policy, but I want more. I will explain why. The policy is specific—a kinship care allowance is available only to a kinship carer who fulfils the criteria: that the local authority has placed the child or young person with the relative; or that a court order or a children's hearing requires the child or young person to live with that relative. Kinship carers often step in quickly, which means that children do not come into the local authority's care and are therefore not looked after or placed by the local authority. As a result, such carers do not meet the criteria that are set out in the policy, yet if they did not come forward, the state would have to look after the children. In many of the cases in which I have been involved, local authorities have asked family members or friends to step into the breach without instigating a formal process or taking children into care, so I urge the minister to change the criteria to include children who would be looked after were it not for kinship carers. I have been contacted by constituents who are kinship carers but who will not benefit from the  measures in the strategy. The children for whom they care were placed with them because of difficult and tragic circumstances. My constituents' local authority asked them to take on parental rights and responsibilities for the children and they agreed, after which the local authority put them in touch with a solicitor and paid their legal fees to enable them to seek guardianship through the courts. They did that willingly, having been told that the alternative was that the children would go into care. My constituents want to give the children a secure and loving home, but they are struggling hard to provide that. They struggle financially because of health problems, and that has an impact on the children. They cannot provide for the children in the way that they wish to. The stress of making ends meet is also taking its toll—so much so that their general practitioner has written to me to express concern. If the anomaly that I have described is not dealt with, it will discourage family members from stepping in immediately. Family members in similar situations would be better off allowing the children to become looked after before stepping in to become kinship carers. However, that would mean a period of uncertainty for the family and a feeling of rejection and instability for the children when they were least able to cope with that. Social work services would also experience an added burden, as each case would have to be assessed. When we take into account the fact that the vast number of kinship carers are grandparents who have no income other than pensions, the situation becomes almost unthinkable, as it means that the families who need the allowance most will be debarred from obtaining it. Grandparents are much less likely to risk allowing their grandchildren to become looked after, because they might fear being assessed as not physically fit to take on the caring role. The choice is stark: struggle alone or risk losing the children. I am not asking the minister to pay every relation who does a spot of baby-sitting or who steps in to cover a short-term illness. However, I ask for family members to be termed kinship carers and to be eligible for the allowance when a child would be taken into care if that family did not step in. A local council would need to oversee that process and it could look for alternatives. If it could not find alternatives, it could deem family members to be kinship carers. Grandparents who take on care in circumstances involving drug and alcohol abuse do not do so overnight—the process is gradual. At no time does a local authority step in and make them kinship carers; that just happens slowly as parents slide into a circle of abuse.  If the policy is centred on children, the anomaly needs to be addressed. If it is not addressed, the policy will be getting it right not for every child, but only for the chosen few.

Just because someone is being abused by a multimillionaire does not mean that they have access to the money—indeed, quite the opposite may be true.

When we are debating legal structures, it is important that we focus on the people who require access to the legal system. Their needs must inform our decision making. The legal system is here to protect and serve the public and must be fit for purpose. People must be able to access the system for their own protection and we need to take this opportunity to remove barriers for them. The previous Government recognised the need for fair access for all. It recognised that people in rural areas had difficulty finding a defence solicitor  funded by legal aid. To widen access, it set up the Public Defence Solicitors Office, to provide legal assistance and representation to those who faced criminal charges and who were eligible for legal aid. In rural areas it is much more difficult for people to access solicitors who will undertake legal aid court work. That is because travelling time can mean that solicitors are limited to undertaking one case a day. Therefore, it is not financially feasible for a solicitor in private practice to provide the service because the cost to their business is not covered. In contrast, a court solicitor in a city can undertake several court cases on the same day. For example, a solicitor working in Inverness would be reluctant to deal with a case that would be heard in Portree sheriff court because that would take them away from their office for the time taken to deal with the case and an additional five or six hours travelling time. Although payment is available for travel time, it does not truly reflect the cost to the practice. People in rural areas seeking civil legal aid face the same situation. The previous Government's decision to build on the good practice of the Public Defence Solicitors Office by initiating a public civil office to provide civil legal aid services in a similar manner was, therefore, a welcome development. The first such office will be set up in Inverness and will be hugely valuable to the surrounding rural areas. I am glad that this Government has continued to progress the development and is now appointing staff for the office. That will make it easier for people in rural areas to access civil legal aid services. The lack of access in rural areas causes a great deal of inconvenience and harm to people who cannot afford to pay for their own legal services and to people who need access to family courts or interdicts to protect them from abusers. I therefore urge the minister to roll out other such offices in rural areas to ensure that everyone has access to civil legal aid and to provide equality of access to legal services regardless of where people live.

I understand the minister's point, but we have to consider the consumer—the  person who needs the service. If they are saying that they are unable to access services, we need to listen to them. The profession may say, "Yes, we are able to provide services at that rural court, if enough cases come up"—but we still have to consider how people can access those services. If there is provision in a particular area, I am not suggesting that the Government should provide it. However, in Inverness and the surrounding areas there was no provision and people really struggled to get access. That was why services were set up. I therefore urge the Government to ensure that people in other rural areas also have access to services. If they do not have access to services, the Government should step in to provide them. We need to go further than public civil offices to ensure access to legal services. We need to look at the financial barriers. Civil legal aid is means tested. People who wish to get an interdict to protect them from abuse can apply for civil legal aid, but they are often prohibited by the means test. The Government acknowledges that abuse can take the form of financial abuse. It accepts that the abused person can often have no access to their own funds. If, on paper, a person appears to have an annual income exceeding the amount set down in the regulation, they cannot access civil legal aid. That means that one aspect of their abuse prevents them from getting assistance and then protection from the other aspects of their abuse. We need to allow anyone who is applying for an interdict with power of arrest against an abuser to qualify automatically for civil legal aid. Anything less would not work. How can a person prove that they have no access to funds when those funds are controlled by somebody else? How could the person access proof if their life has changed dramatically because they have had to flee abuse? In some cases, people have left their home, job and family. Their annual income may exceed the limit, but they no longer have any income because they have had to give up their job. Claiming civil legal aid has the added complication that the applicant's opponent can object to the application and to the granting of legal aid. In cases of abuse, that provides the abuser with another route to continue their abusive and controlling behaviour. The abuser can appeal against the victim receiving civil legal aid. We need to stop that happening. The counter argument to extending civil legal aid to all who need an interdict to protect them from abuse is that it would open the floodgates for other such cases. However, that would not happen, because this type of interdict is unique. It is the only civil action that, if breached, leads immediately to arrest and criminal proceedings,  meaning that the offender can access legal aid while the victim cannot. Another anomaly of the system is that some benefits are taken into account when calculating income. Benefits should never be counted as additional income. It is anomalous to take account of them in that way, regardless of the reason why legal aid is sought. Some benefits are available to everyone, regardless of their income. For example, child benefit is specifically for the child; it is not for seeking any legal representation. I ask the minister to address the following points. He should ensure that benefits are not calculated as part of income; he should roll out a series of public civil offices so that everyone in rural areas has equality of access to civil legal aid; he should remove the right of objection from opponents whose victims are fleeing abuse; and he should give an automatic right to civil legal aid to all those who require an interdict to protect them from abuse.

I draw members' attention to my declaration in the register of members' interests. As Mary Scanlon pointed out, the nationalists campaigned against stock transfer in the Highlands. That was not communities making informed decisions; it was party-political hoodwinking of Highlands communities. The cabinet secretary has a moral obligation to assist those communities. What help was offered to them in her statement? What comfort is there for tenants who are facing delays and repairs, coupled with rising rents? Given the scale of the Highland Council's housing debt, can it benefit from prudential borrowing? How many more houses will be built in the Highlands as a result of today's statement?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to provide Barra with a purpose-built airport runway. (S3O-920)

When the minister considers Barra airport's future, I urge him to ensure that air services continue. They are incredibly important to the people of Barra for social reasons. People who are going to hospital in Glasgow need to access those services, which are also important for the island's economic growth. I urge the minister to ensure that air services continue by providing a purpose-built runway with a cross-runway on which aircraft can land.

Will the minister assure me that he will fight for that important service in that small community?

Will the minister consider looking at the Children 1 st project on family group conferencing, which will help to identify people to look after children who are difficult to place or for whom there is no obvious family member willing to step in?

I, too, congratulate Christine Grahame on bringing this important subject to the chamber for debate. As other members have done, I will address the issue of kinship carers rather than foster carers, although I in no way discount the valuable work that foster carers do for children of whom they have no knowledge. It has been highlighted during the debate that the use of kinship carers is possibly the best way to look after children whose families are unable to look after them. Kinship carers have personal knowledge of young people and provide them with access to their normal support networks. Children thrive better within their wider family. Rather than repeat points that other members have made, I will raise a couple of points on other matters, the first of which is Children 1 st 's family group conferencing. Kinship carers are sometimes hard to identify—there is not always a person in the family who is obvious to social workers or the wider group and who can put their own life to one side and make room for a young person to come into their home. Children 1 st has piloted family group conferencing, which allows young people to identify the people who are important in their lives. That includes teachers, professionals, family members and, more widely, family friends. The young people are allowed to invite those people to a family group conference, at which the group is charged with considering ways of supporting the young person in the situation in which they find themselves. That is a really good way of identifying people who might not be obvious as kinship carers. Unfortunately, it is just a project and is not available throughout Scotland. I ask that consideration be given to funding and mainstreaming that valuable project. It would allow social workers and other professionals to exhaust the availability of kinship carers before looking at foster carers. Another anomaly that I want to raise is the status of legal guardians. Kinship carers who go through the courts to get legal guardianship of children—giving children security and the knowledge that they are in a long-term placement that is legally secure—are not eligible for kinship or foster care allowance. That can cause real problems to families that find themselves in  hardship and cannot access even the meagre kinship care allowance. It is also important to point out that local authorities have the discretion to pay kinship carers the foster carer allowance. Rather than just allow them that discretion, we need to consider whether it should be a duty. If kinship carers did not look after those children and young people, it would fall on social workers to have them placed with foster carers, who are often not available and who are—when they are available—hugely more expensive than kinship carers and do not provide family links. It is important that we do not see kinship care as an exercise in which to cut corners and save money. The onus is on authorities to pay for the service, and the money needs to support the children who suffer in really bad circumstances and who end up needing to be cared for outwith their immediate families.

I start by declaring an interest, as I recently carried out some work for a women's aid organisation. I am grateful that the cabinet secretary mentioned the effect of domestic abuse on young people. The previous Government funded an outreach project for young people, the funding for which runs out in March, and councils have indicated that they will not mainstream the project into their budgets. Will she consider funding that project at a national level, as it provides a valuable service to young people who are affected in their own right?

In her statement last week, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing said that she would improve patient choice by offering each patient two appointments, instead of the current one. At the moment, when allocating appointments, staff at out-patient clinics use their local knowledge of, for example, journey times to offer patients suitable appointments. Patients are then sent a letter with sufficient notice of a single appointment date and time. If the appointment is suitable, nothing more needs to be done; the patient simply turns up at the allocated time. Under the current system, all available appointments are allocated to begin with. If the time and date are unsuitable, the patient phones to reschedule the appointment,  and the original appointment is then offered to the next person on the list either by card or, in the case of a late cancellation, by telephone. Under the new system outlined by the cabinet secretary, each person will have the choice of two appointments, and they will need to phone up and select one. As a result, only half of the available appointments will be allocated in the initial trawl, because one choice will always remain unallocated. Moreover, every patient will need to phone in to select their preferred appointment. What happens to unselected appointments? Does the system have to start so far back from the appointment date to allow appointments to be allocated in twos again, or do staff have frantically to phone around those on the waiting list to fill the unselected appointments?

I will give way in a moment. I asked a question on this matter last week, and I want to set out my concerns very clearly so that the cabinet secretary can give me a clear response. Surely, although the new system will need the same number of staff as the current one to allocate the initial appointments, many more staff will be required to deal with the calls either to confirm or to reallocate appointments.

To be honest, I was going to suggest a system of the kind that the cabinet secretary is talking about. However, that is not the kind of system that she outlined in her statement. It is important that, if appointments are to be offered on that basis, the person is written to and told that they should phone to book an appointment. That is not giving someone a choice of two appointments; it is giving them a choice of the whole range of appointments that are available at that time. That would be an excellent system, but it would need more staff.  Under the proposed system, what will happen if someone does not phone? Staff will need to monitor the lists constantly to see who needs to be chased up. Will they then have to phone that person? Will they reallocate the two appointments that the person has been offered? What will happen if the original person turns up for an appointment that has been reallocated? Will two patients need to be seen at the same time? Moving on, what will happen if neither of the allocated appointments suits a patient? My reading of the cabinet secretary's statement is that, if the first appointment does not suit the patient and they are allocated a second appointment that still does not suit them, they will go back to the end of the queue.

No, I cannot concede that. The cabinet secretary misrepresents what happens just now. At the moment, if someone is offered an appointment that they cannot accept, they phone up to make another appointment. The health service is not so bureaucratic that it does not offer the person another appointment. The cabinet secretary says that the new system will offer a patient two separate appointments. However, if they are on holiday at the time of the first appointment and have a work commitment to fulfil at the time of the second appointment, under the new system they will lose their waiting time guarantee. The cabinet secretary needs to make the new system more flexible. She must also take into account the fact that the new system will need more staff. A system such as she described in her intervention, in which people phone up and choose an appointment time, would be much more preferable to the appointment system that she outlined in her statement. There are many other points that I would like to make, but I have taken interventions and I do not want to prevent other members from speaking by taking any more time. I would appreciate it if  cabinet secretary would address the points that I have raised. The system that she set out in her statement is not the system that she has talked about in interventions, which would certainly be much better.

I want to concentrate on Inverness prison, which was last inspected in October 2004. The inspection report clearly described the strengths and weaknesses of the conditions there. I should say first that my colleague Maureen Macmillan was one of the leading voices in the previous session in support of better facilities at Inverness prison and it would be wrong of me to speak without paying tribute to her work. The inspection report highlighted the problem of overcrowding in Inverness prison. A written answer from the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service made it clear that the prison was  designed to have a capacity of 104 people, but it is contracted to provide 150 prisoner places. Of course, that does not represent the full story. The other week, the Inverness Courier , which is to be congratulated on highlighting the problems that are caused by overcrowding, reported that the prison is operating at more than 50 per cent over capacity. It reported that three inmates were sharing a cell that was designed for one person and that, during one week in August, 170 prisoners were held at the prison. Will the minister say how many prisoners are being held there now? There is no doubt that such overcrowding puts serious pressure on prison officers, who are trying to manage prisoners in a building that is not fit for purpose. The follow-up report in 2005 showed that some progress had been made. Toilets in segregation cells and recreational facilities had been provided, and there was better support for people with drug addictions and better access to work and gym facilities for vulnerable prisoners. However, the issue of overcrowding still needs to be addressed. The previous Government sought to do several things. It planned to build new prisons and brought forward new systems of community justice for those who did not pose a risk to the public. What has the new Government done? One day, it announced the retendering of the new prison at Bishopbriggs; the next, it announced replacement prisons for Aberdeen and Peterhead. However, it ignored the problems at Inverness. I am disappointed that it has not included Inverness prison as a priority, particularly in the light of what the SNP said in opposition. After the initial inspection report back in 2004, the SNP's then justice spokesman, Stewart Stevenson, demanded that the previous Government "bring forward ... capital spending plans for the next round of prison upgrades as soon as possible." Do the Government's announcements on Bishopbriggs, Aberdeen and Peterhead represent its strategy on prisons, or does it propose to continue with its piecemeal approach? I urge it to bring forward a considered strategy for the whole prisons estate. I had hoped that the debate would have provided an opportunity for it to do that but, unfortunately, it has left us wondering how we will tackle the problems at Inverness and elsewhere. In the Inverness Courier article that I mentioned, the Minister for Community Safety, Fergus Ewing, highlighted what he described as a "conveyor belt"—he spoke of spending vast sums of taxpayers' money on offenders while reoffending rates for those who had been released from prison are getting worse. I am all for improving rehabilitation and community sentences, but sentencing is not in the gift of politicians, nor should it be. The judiciary has to be convinced of  the benefit of community sentences; it is the Government's duty to ensure that robust community sentences are available. I urge the Government to take seriously some of the points that Pauline McNeill made and to meet her to discuss how we roll those out. Instead, the Government proposes an across-the-board solution that means that anyone with a six-month sentence will not go to prison. There is no mention of rehabilitation or a robust community sentence to follow. The Government will have no credibility if its only response is to blame the previous Government for the problems at Inverness prison. The SNP made statements when it was in opposition—

No, I will not. The SNP led voters to believe that it would take action when action was required, but nothing is forthcoming from that party in government. It has missed the opportunity to publish its strategies on Inverness and nothing is being done to address the problem. I suggest that the Government looks at the situation as a matter of urgency. We need a new prison in Inverness; we also need a new courthouse. A new build for both the prison and courthouse could ensure that they were situated close together, which would cut down problems of prisoner transportation. It would also free up the Inverness courthouse, which is in the castle, to become a visitor attraction. I ask the minister to make a clear statement about how he will address those concerns in an overall review of the prisons estate. Will the Government fund improvements at Inverness prison on the existing site, or will it build a new facility incorporating a court? When will the Government put its proposals out to consultation to allow the local community in Inverness to play its part in influencing those decisions? How will the Government improve community sentencing to ensure that it is robust and provide rehabilitation? I look forward to the minister's response.

What improvements have taken place as a result of the extra measures to tackle cancer waiting times in the NHS Highland area that were announced in August? What impact have waiting  times had on patient outcomes in the area? Is the cabinet secretary aware of concerns that staff training and development can interrupt a patient's treatment, because NHS Highland has a small specialist team? Will she consider placing a duty on other health boards to provide back-up and assistance in such circumstances? I ask for clarification on answers that the cabinet secretary gave to members who asked about bureaucracy. Under the new appointments system, every patient who is offered an appointment in the health service—not just patients who want to change their appointments—must phone the hospital. Those phone calls need to be answered, so more administrators are needed. Can the cabinet secretary assure us that resources will not come out of front-line patient care?

There are groups who seek to support young people who care for parents and family members who have drug and alcohol problems, as well as those who care for family members with ill health and disabilities. One such group is Skye and Lochalsh young carers project, which was successful this week in obtaining Big Lottery funding to develop services that were identified as needs by the children themselves—but the core funding for the group is not guaranteed, and neither is it guaranteed for similar groups throughout Scotland. Will the minister ensure that all young people in such a terrible situation have access to support from a local group in their area? Will he also ensure that they are provided with a statutory obligation for provision and dedicated funding?

I am glad that we are debating housing, but I echo Johann Lamont's disappointment at the length of the debate, which has prevented many of my colleagues who wished to participate from doing so. We need to look at that issue in the future. I represent the Highlands and Islands, where there are a range of housing issues. We have urban problems in Inverness, Thurso, parts of Argyll and some of the smaller towns, where houses were built to cope with incoming workers during the oil boom. That estate needs to be updated and cared for. In more remote areas, we have problems with the availability of land for rented and affordable housing. Throughout the area we have a problem with housing prices, which is most extreme on the west coast and in the Cairngorms national park. Many houses are sold as second homes, and local people cannot afford to compete with people coming from cities, who can outbid them on each occasion. We need to protect the affordable and social rented housing sector in rural areas. The previous Executive instigated pressured area status, and the current Executive must work with local authorities to ensure that they use that power to protect housing stock, where necessary. We need to consider solutions from other areas. In the Yorkshire Dales national park and on Guernsey, the housing market is restricted to those who have family ties with, have lived in or require to work in the area. Guernsey has another market for those who want to buy second and holiday homes. It recognises that that brings benefits, but ensures that such buyers do not compete with local people and price essential workers out of the market. In the Highlands, people need to do several jobs, some of them seasonal, to make a living. Those diverse incomes are not recognised by banks and building societies as a stable basis for a mortgage. If we restricted the markets in such areas, local house prices would reflect the income of those who live and work there, which would mean that there was a level playing field. The homestake scheme has been particularly successful in giving people on low incomes the opportunity to own their homes. By using shared equity schemes, people can get on to the property  ladder and build up equity in their property. The scheme that operates in Edinburgh and the Lothians, which allows homestake to be used to buy houses on the open market, should be extended to other areas. It would be particularly useful in rural areas, where it is difficult for social landlords and developers to build. I ask the Scottish Executive to commit itself to continuing and extending the scheme. The cost of land in both rural and urban areas also prohibits house buying and building, which adds to difficulties with the availability of housing stock. We need to consider ways of providing services that are both affordable and sustainable in those areas. Johann Lamont made the point that the council housing estate in areas such as Highland needs modernisation. The nationalist Executive has a moral duty to provide the funding for that, given that it campaigned against stock transfer, misleading people into believing that it meant privatisation. The Executive has a duty to ensure that money is available for investment in Highland housing stock. I urge the nationalists to look again at their policy of giving £2,000 grants to first-time buyers. That will lead to an increase of £2,000 in house prices for those who can already afford to buy and will do nothing for those who are in genuine need. The money needs to be more targeted, to allow those who need to buy a first home to do so. It must also be targeted at families who own a small home, have had children and need, but cannot afford to move to, a bigger house. A successful housing policy must be multifaceted and geared to meeting the needs of the whole population. It should not be just a populist gimmick.

Because people who foster their grandchildren, often in difficult circumstances, are classed as kinship carers, rather than foster carers, many of them receive little or no support, which leads to hardship. What steps will the Executive take to ensure that local authorities provide grandparents with the same level of support that they provide to other foster carers?

Will the minister give way?

I congratulate Richard Lochhead and welcome him to his new post. I will concentrate on how we support communities in remote and rural areas. Crofting and small-scale farming are essential in underpinning many rural communities in the Highlands and Islands. I cannot speak about crofting without first paying tribute to the work that was done by Maureen Macmillan and Alasdair Morrison. They both worked hard for their crofting constituents. They ensured that their views were heard in the Parliament and acted on under the Crofting Reform etc Act 2007. They were both committed to land reform and were instrumental in pushing forward that progressive agenda.  The reason why those two members were passionate about crofting is that it has helped to sustain communities in the Highlands and Islands. Before discussing how we can continue to support crofting and farming at the edge, I will highlight the benefits of doing so. Crofting assures a supply of affordable housing for the crofters. In remote and rural areas, providing affordable housing is a challenge. In more urban areas, the system of planning consents can ensure that developers provide 25 per cent of developments as affordable housing. That is not an option in rural areas. The crofters building grants and loans scheme gives crofters access to affordable homes. It is instrumental in getting people to stay in their communities. We need to consider new and imaginative ways to continue to tackle the lack of affordable housing, but we cannot ignore the contribution that crofting makes in rural areas. We must also consider new planning guidelines to make it easier for farming families to build homes on their farmland. That enables farmers' children to take over farms so that their parents can retire, but remain in the family home. By keeping people in farming communities, we sustain local services. Children attend the local schools and provide the critical mass necessary to keep those schools open. The same applies to other public services, so general practices, libraries and bin collections will all be available as close as possible to communities. By keeping people in those communities, we support local shops and businesses, and that leads to more sustainable employment. We all gain from vibrant rural communities. We assume that rural areas are natural wildernesses, but that is not the case, because such areas have been managed by farmers and crofters for generations. The roads and services that are provided for those communities ensure that the area is open for those of us who dwell in towns and cities to visit and appreciate. As I travel around the Highlands and Islands, I am frequently awestruck by the beauty of the area; it is a huge privilege to represent the most beautiful area in the country. That scenery attracts tourism, which also sustains the communities.

Indeed we should. I am sure that Jamie Stone is aware that the Labour Party took a stand and was the only party that was united in  fighting the closures that Highland Council proposed. The areas that I represent are the lungs of our country and are important to the global climate. Farming and forestry in particular have a role to play. We need to consider how we use agricultural subsidies. I have always found it obscene that owners of large farms with good land and access to markets receive the same support as farmers and crofters working in difficult conditions who are remote from markets. The less favoured area support scheme has proportionately benefited larger producers. Although I welcome the fact that that has been rectified to an extent, we have a long way to go. I am hugely disappointed that, although Richard Lochhead said that 85 per cent of Scotland is classified as a less favoured area, he did not say how he will use the funding available to look after small communities in remote and rural areas. Large farming businesses should receive the same business support as businesses in other industries unless they are providing community good. Those producing at the edge should receive recognition for the social and environmental benefits that they provide. The rural development plan needs to use modulation to address the following points. It needs to provide an incentive to promote environmental benefits. We need a new environmentally sensitive area scheme. That scheme was hugely popular, especially in Shetland, and led to better practice and headage reduction. We need to fund expertise to help small producers find local markets. A good example of that is the good for Ewe project in Wester Loch Ewe. Such projects, which bring together small producers, have environmental, health and economic benefits. We need to consider how services are delivered in these communities. I mentioned housing, but we have to identify ways to ensure that all services are provided. We need to consider ways to encourage the production of biomass and biofuels, which offer huge untapped benefits in areas where farming is less productive. For example, it is easier to get a hazel harvest from less productive land. We need to explore all the possibilities. We must encourage diversification in farming, but in doing so must acknowledge the contribution made by crofting and farming in remote and rural communities to our wider environment. We must ensure that the support that we provide brings  wider benefits and that it ensures the survival of our remote and rural communities.

Will the First Minister acknowledge that tourism has gone through a period of sustained growth,  due in part to the reorganisation and rebranding of VisitScotland? Tourism is vital to the Highlands and Islands. Given that tourism is no longer represented in the Cabinet—indeed, the First Minister made no mention of it in his statement today—can he give assurances that he values its contribution to the Scottish economy and that he will not make changes to that successful brand just for the sake of it?

I congratulate Dennis Canavan on securing the debate and take the opportunity to wish Falkirk well in its campaign to have its ground-sharing agreement accepted by the SPL. The debate is important for all football teams that aspire to promotion. The SPL insists on teams having a covered 10,000-seat stadium for entry to the Premier League. That has no connection to teams' playing ability, only to the size of their bank balance. For clubs to improve their standing, they need to invest in their teams. However, such investment is useless if they are then required to build a new stadium to reap the rewards of that success. The investment is not needed to seat larger crowds. Seven out of 10 SPL clubs have an average attendance of 7,500. The 10,000-seat requirement therefore looks like restrictive practice to me. It also appears to discriminate against teams from rural and remote areas, which already face the high costs of increased travel times. Those rural areas are also unable to support their teams in the numbers that the SPL advances. There is a requirement that teams must invest money to improve their stadium with no practical purpose other than to gain access to the SPL. That investment means that clubs are no longer able to invest in their teams and their time in the SPL is therefore short. The requirement appears to be designed to protect those already in the SPL from demotion. If teams that could be promoted are not promoted because of the restrictions, those facing demotion are safe. The requirement not only discriminates against rural areas but has a knock-on effect on our home-grown talent. We spend a lot of time complaining about our national team and its lack of success. However, such restrictive practice leads to lack of success. The larger teams in the SPL buy players from abroad to ensure their own success, leaving the smaller teams to bring forward our home-grown talent. If such talent is barred from the SPL, what chance do we have of developing our national team? We also need to bear it in mind that fans do not travel to support their teams in the same way that they used to. My home teams are Caley Thistle and Ross County, both of which are situated a long distance from the central belt. They are unlikely to require a capacity of 10,000. There is another anomaly. The capacity restriction is not required in the Scottish cup. Celtic came to Inverness to play Caley Thistle at the weekend and there was no restriction. I will not  dwell on the fact that Caley Thistle beat Celtic—I do not want to intrude on private grief—but it shows that our remote teams can succeed in making an impact if restrictive practices are not in place. Therefore, I urge the minister to do everything that she can to persuade the SPL to change its restrictive practices.

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Executive is doing to support mountain rescue.  (S1F-2580)

I welcome the funding that the First Minister has announced. It is worth noting that the request for that funding was made to my colleague Peter Peacock when he was in Inverness as part of the public consultation on the Scottish Executive budget. That shows that the public can influence Scottish Executive funding. I am also pleased that the First Minister will look at revenue funding for the mountain rescue and—

I would very much ask him—[ Laughter. ] Will he look sympathetically at the mountain rescue teams' plea? The issue is about safety. If members of mountain rescue teams do not have the equipment that they require when they go into the hills, their lives could be put at risk.

Like others, I thank everybody who worked so hard on the bill, especially the clerks to the Rural Development Committee. A special mention has to go to Mark Brough, who did so much work and who showed incredible patience throughout the process. The Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Bill brings about huge changes for tenants and gives them a lot more protection and security than they had at the start of this process. It gives them easy access to the Scottish Land Court, which avoids the costly arbitration that we heard about in committee. That involved farmers having to spend huge amounts of money to reach the stage of arbitration, sometimes on spurious grounds. The bill will save them money and will give them more security. Write-down agreements will also come to an end. Those agreements have been made by landowners to avoid liabilities under the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 1991, and we came across cases of people investing huge amounts of money in their farms but not getting the benefit when leaving them. The committee noted the benefits that people derived from handing their land on to their successors before their death, and from being able to see their farms passed to future generations and to retire comfortably and play a part in that. One of the new sections introduced earlier today allows the Scottish Land Court to withhold rent. That is highly important for tenants of absentee landlords, who will perhaps not carry out Land  Court directives. The Land Court may take the rent and use it to put right things right that the landowner has not put right. I am pleased that the bill has laid down the principle of the value of a secure tenancy. Most of the bill was uncontentious, which is why we have settled on some of the more contentious issues. We need to allow the bill to bed down and see how it works and the extent to which it opens up the tenanted sector. There is a particular group of people to whom I wish to pay tribute: the Scottish Tenant Farmers Action Group. The group was set up in light of the bill's introduction in order to push forward the needs and wishes of tenants. The group had a steep learning curve, but it took on the challenge and worked well with committee members, ministers and all those involved. Its involvement shows how people who are not members of existing organisations can influence the Parliament. They can either join together or influence the Parliament as individuals, and they can play a huge part in shaping legislation. Much of the shape of the bill can be attributed to that group, which put forward evidence that has gone towards some of the changes that have been made. I hope that the group will remain and will be among the stakeholders in the agriculture industry—people who will be consulted as changes take place in the industry. I look forward to representatives of the group becoming part of the Rural Development Committee's usual suspects, as we call them. I hope that the bill will open up the tenanted sector and that the protections that it affords will make farming an awful lot more secure for those who work in it. We all know that farmers have had rough times in the past, and I hope that the bill will go some way towards mitigating what has happened in the sector. We must continue to monitor the situation and give it time to bed in before we take further steps.

The minister will be aware of bids from Inverness for SNH and Forest Enterprise relocations. Will he take into account the operational benefits to those organisations that could be delivered through relocation to Inverness?

Will the member give way?

That was somewhat reluctant. Does Fergus Ewing think that skippers, as employers, should have no responsibility for the people whom they employ? Does he think that that should extend to other industries? He should make that perfectly clear.

Will the member give way?

On behalf of the Labour party, I, too, welcome Winnie Ewing back to the chamber—it is good to see her here. It goes without saying that we did not choose the position that we find ourselves in. However, we are where we are and we must protect our fishing industry. I support decommissioning because we must take steps to protect the days at sea that we have secured. The minister stated that he hopes that the £40 million will cover the decommissioning of 15 per cent of our fishing effort on cod. No one is happy with the situation, but we in the Labour party know that we must work to protect the fishing industry and to provide a viable and secure fishery for future generations. I am disappointed that the decommissioning scheme does not include moneys to be paid directly to crews, but, as the minister explained, such a measure would make the scheme extremely complex and might lead to delays. Yesterday, the minister made it clear to the Rural Development Committee that the only feasible way in which to make payments is through vessel owners, who can then make payments to crews. That system is wholly dependent on the good will of the owners, whom I urge to take the point on board and ensure that crews receive money in lieu of redundancy pay. The money will cushion the blow and, I hope, provide crews with a breathing space in which to find alternative employment or to reskill. As the future of the work force is dependent on those payments, I plead with the vessel owners to make them. The same situation arises with fishing-dependent onshore businesses. After the previous decommissioning scheme, some businesses were left with unpaid debts, which can lead to businesses becoming unviable and create problems for the communities in which they work because of the loss of jobs and skills. The present decommissioning scheme is different from the previous one—hence the larger amount of money that has been put aside—but I plead with the minister to ensure that, if funding remains from the decommissioning scheme when the desired level is reached, that money is made available in transitional aid, not only for the fishing sector, but  for the crews and dependent onshore industries. The Labour party welcomes the transitional support scheme, which will ensure that fishing vessels that are dependent on cod will receive assistance to tide them over the difficult times. The money is essential for ensuring a viable fishing industry—it will ensure that vessels that do not decommission will have access to Government support. The scheme shows the Executive's commitment to the industry. However, the money will again go to vessels and crews and onshore businesses will be dependent on the good will of the owners for their share of it. I welcome Elliot Morley's commitment to consider benefits for self-employed crew members. Because of the days-at-sea restrictions, such people's income will fall dramatically, so it is important to find ways of supporting them through the hard times. The same is true of the onshore industries.

As I made clear, the Rural Development Committee questioned the minister on that yesterday. He argued that to include payments for onshore businesses and crews would make the schemes extremely complex, but that does not prevent the boat owners from giving money to crews and onshore businesses. Indeed, they have an obligation to do so; they should formulate their bids for funding in a way that ensures that they receive money to enable them to do that. I plead with them to take that point on board. The Rural Development Committee asked for a rates relief scheme for these businesses. We also need to ensure that the enterprise network is geared to support the businesses, to ensure that they remain viable. They need assistance to diversify and use the skills that they have to attract new types of business; however, they cannot do that alone. The enterprise network has a crucial part to play in all this. We believe in adding value. The communities into which fish are landed should process the catches, adding value locally and keeping the benefit of those catches in the local community. If we lose those businesses, we lose the chance of adding value when stocks recover. We need to help those businesses. Displacement must also be dealt with. I am pleased that the minister has taken that on board and intends to make transitional aid dependent on there being no displacement. If displacement is allowed, other fisheries will come under stress. The long-term effects could be devastating and lead to every fishery being in the position that the  cod fishery is now. Even if stocks could withstand displacement, oversupply would affect the profitability of the other fisheries and lead to a financial crisis for all our fishing communities. I welcome the minister's announcement and I hope that he will take further steps to ensure that displacement does not happen. Another issue of concern to me is the attitude of the Commission. It was put to the members of the Rural Development Committee that one of the reasons for the North sea's being targeted with such stringent measures is the fact that we supply data on bycatches, whereas that is not the case in other countries. I am concerned that those who avoid providing the data that are required to make scientific decisions are being rewarded. If the data are not available, the fisheries do not face the same restrictions that we do. I asked John Farnell, the director of conservation policy in the European Commission's Fisheries Directorate-General, about this and he said: "On bycatches and the question of fishermen being penalised, there is a great deal of knowledge about what happens in the UK fishery and less about what happens in other areas. I can say only that we share the concern that has been expressed about that." It appears that, by not providing the required data, fisheries can avoid the restrictions. That has huge implications for other fisheries that do provide the data. If we do not have the information, we cannot look scientifically at what is happening in other fisheries. I urge the minister to take that matter up with the Commission. Finally, I press the case for crews and onshore businesses. In asking that crews be supported, we are not speaking just about individuals; the support is crucial to the communities in which they live. Their income is spent locally and supports shops and other businesses. If they have to leave those communities to seek work, that has a knock-on effect on schools, shops and post offices; it can affect the survival of small communities. I make a plea to the vessel owners not to forget their obligations when they receive decommissioning and transitional aid money. We must also protect the onshore businesses that are partially or wholly dependent on the fishing industry. Those businesses that supply gear, men and boats or that process catches are easily identifiable as they are wholly dependent on fishing. However, many other dependent businesses, such as shops that provide supplies for boats, and accountants who balance the books, are much more difficult to identify. I urge the Executive to ensure that the enterprise network works hard to identify all those businesses and offer them support. Today, like yesterday, we find the SNP posturing, not saying what it would do and  criticising the Executive for the sake of it. Its amendments, if they were agreed to, would not change anything. In the Rural Development Committee yesterday, Richard Lochhead appeared to urge the minister to put additional days at sea at risk by not introducing this decommissioning package. He then moved a motion against the days-at-sea instrument—a motion that even he could not support. With no decommissioning, the industry would downsize, but the hard way, through bankruptcy. That is not something that I want to see. The SNP's action is irresponsible. If it succeeds, it will destroy our fishing industry. Again, we see political posturing that puts the livelihoods of our constituents at risk. The SNP does not care about the fishing industry; all that it is interested in is tomorrow's headlines. I will not support the SNP's amendments.

The minister is aware of my concern about dentists who provide NHS services in remote rural areas. Will she examine the mechanisms that trigger support for dentists who provide NHS services in remote rural areas? We must ensure that those mechanisms do not in fact act against such dentists. Will she examine the remote and rural areas support package for those dentists to ensure that we can offer them further help?

I have a point of information for Stewart Stevenson. Highlands and Islands Enterprise provides funding to allow businesses to access broadband on satellite. That has been a successful programme in the Highlands.

To ask the First Minister what measures are being introduced to support communities affected by the cuts in the fishing industry. (S1F-2462)

Does the First Minister agree that we must protect conservation-led fisheries, such as those in Alasdair Morrison's constituency in the Western Isles, and in many more areas throughout the west coast of Scotland? Will he ensure that the west coast fisheries will be protected from ruinous displacement from other areas in the UK?

I, too, congratulate Duncan Hamilton on securing the debate and I also congratulate Alasdair Morrison, who was heavily involved in drawing up the motion. The debate is extremely timely, given that the community of Barra and Vatersay has come to the Parliament to petition it on the subject. I was glad to meet members of that community at lunch time to hear again about their concerns. The Parliament is about providing access for Scotland's communities, so that they can bring their concerns to the Parliament and have a platform for airing them. I am concerned that the review has given the community the impression that the Executive wants to diminish services. Anyone who knows the area knows that the review could not possibly conclude that that is the case—the lifeline service to the island is essential. It is essential for existing businesses on the island, as they need fast links to the mainland, and it is even more important for attracting new business to the island. We must attract new business, because the community in Barra is very young. We must give young people the choice of staying on the island when they leave school. To give them that choice, we must create jobs for them. The need to take people to hospital and back, which Alasdair Morrison referred to, is more important to the community. Asking people who are seriously ill, and who require to make many visits to hospital, to take a ferry to Eriskay and then travel to Benbecula would be inhumane and would put treatments at risks if the weather did not permit the ferry to sail. I am talking about people who need to receive chemotherapy and mothers with new babies, who could be stranded in Eriskay. The review will not affect the lifeline service; if anything, it will underline its importance. Nevertheless, it is important that the community is proactive in putting forward its case for protecting the service. That is what it is doing here today. I must say that I am disappointed in the behaviour of the nationalists, who have sought to  whip up concerns and mislead people. They have put party-political point scoring above the needs of the community that they purport to serve. Today's motion has been changed so often that I am left thinking that Duncan Hamilton's only aim was to lodge a motion—any motion—for debate. Had he investigated the situation properly and come to Barra, he would have lodged a competent motion in the first place. I am disappointed that the posturing has continued today. The community has been misled by being told that lodging its petition this afternoon would put tonight's debate at risk. That is rubbish.

Duncan Hamilton should sit down. I urge him to stop abusing the people of the Barra community. He should stand beside them if he wants to support them. If party-political point scoring is his only interest, he should leave them to fight their own battles. They are well able to do that, as they have shown today. I fully support the people of Barra's campaign. I ask the minister to address their concerns by giving them the reassurances that they need, so that they can leave here happy today.

Will the minister ensure that he speaks to other businesses in fishing communities that supply goods and services to the fishing industry? That might not be the whole of their business, but fishing certainly has a large impact on their business and if anything happened to that part of their business the rest of the business would become unsustainable. Will the minister outline some of the measures that he will take to prevent displacement into the nephrops fishery, which is very important to large areas of my constituency?

Perhaps you could tell me how long I have, Presiding Officer.

Thank you. I am pleased that the vast majority of the bill is not controversial and that many organisations are signing up to the new form of tenancies that will be created and to the added opportunities for diversification that the bill will provide. The general principles of the bill are to be welcomed. However, amendments will be required at stage 2 to ensure that the bill's aims can be fulfilled. The most contentious issue, which has not been included in the bill, is the absolute right to buy. The bill provides for a pre-emptive right to buy, but in truth the pre-emptive right to buy will not make a huge difference to current land-ownership patterns in Scotland. Needless to say, tenant farmers look with envy at their crofting neighbours. However, the plea for an absolute right to buy is not based only on envy; it is sought for practical reasons.

I honestly do not have time, because I have a lot to say.  Some landowners, many of whom are now rushing into dialogue with tenant farmers, have used every trick in the book to ensure that the rights of tenants are flouted. Secure tenancies place obligations on landlords to maintain farms and farmhouses, but many landlords have refused to do that. They either end up in arbitration or leave the tenant to carry out the work. If the tenant does not get permission for an investment, the tenant forgoes any compensation for that investment on leaving the farm. If the tenant asks for permission, landowners insist that the value of the investment be written down over a number of years in a write-down agreement, which ensures that the tenant again forgoes the right to compensation. I welcome the minister's assurance that that loophole will be closed to ensure that landowners cannot have write-down agreements. However, will landowners be prevented from withholding permission for investment? How can we ensure that landowners will compensate tenants if they say that they are cash poor at the time when the tenant gives up the farm? If we had an absolute right to buy, tenants who face difficulties could buy their farms. Compensation could be paid to the landowner at that time for loss of ownership and the tenant could raise money for investment to improve the farm, which would make farming more viable. However, we are told that the absolute right to buy would be against the European convention on human rights because it would mean the straight transfer of land from one owner to another without any greater community benefit. I want to argue against that assertion. If secure tenants could buy their farms, they would be able to invest and have collateral against which they could raise money for investment. That would lead not only to more vibrant farming and more vibrant communities, but to the creation of jobs through diversification. Creating stable communities leads to support for local schools, services and businesses. That would be public gain. If tenants could buy their farms, they would also have assets that they could sell on their retirement. At present, because of write-down agreements, farmers who give up their tenancies have no access to the investment that they made and which would allow them to give up the tenancy, which is also their home. That means that tenants remain on farms long after they should have retired, which causes a shortage of tenancies, prevents young people from taking on new tenancies and blocks rural development. That happens through no fault of the tenants, who are unable to release the investment in the farms. For that reason, it would be in the public interest to  resolve the problem; the argument that such a policy would be in breach of the ECHR does not hold water. I could give many examples to illustrate those points, but I want to ask the minister to consider the issue seriously and to seek a resolution that leads to a vibrant farming industry.

I welcome today's debate, as it is our last chance to debate the issue before the crucial negotiations in the Council of Ministers. It is right that the Parliament should clearly express its views on this issue. I do not believe that the claims that the fishing industry has made in recent weeks have been overstated. Fishermen are fighting for their very survival—for the survival of the fishing industry, for their livelihoods and for the survival of their communities. It is right that fishermen should take every opportunity to state their case and to register their fears for the future should the proposals go ahead. The debate has moved on since October, when we last discussed this in the chamber. Then there was disbelief that the Commission was proposing a total closure of fishing grounds. Now we have the prospect of major quota cuts. The Commission probably believed that by presenting the worst-case scenario first, it would make quota cuts more acceptable. Unfortunately for the industry, there is no worst-case scenario, as both total closure of grounds and massive quota cuts mean one thing  only—a major change in the industry and the communities that depend on it. As the Prime Minister made clear recently in the Daily Record , an 80 per cut is too much for the Scottish fisherman to bear and is unfair because it ignores the steps that have been taken in Scotland in the past two years to tackle overcapacity in the fishing industry. I want first to talk about nephrops. It is very important that we protect the nephrop fishery. During the previous debate, Ross Finnie made it clear that nephrops do not affect cod stocks, as the way in which they are fished does not result in material bycatches. The argument that cuts in the nephrops quota are necessary to protect cod stocks does not apply. We must be careful about displacement if other quotas are cut drastically. The nephrops fishery is very important to small communities on the west coast and must be protected.

I agree with that. We must be careful of displacement. At this point, our attention must be on ensuring that quotas are not slashed, but in the long term we must be sure that there is not displacement that could leave other fisheries in the same situation. Therefore it is important that, after the negotiations, the Executive takes decisions that lead to a sustainable industry. The industry has implemented technical measures that are making a difference to stocks, but we need to go further. When we last debated the subject, I talked about the role of separation panels, which can cut cod mortality by 90 per cent. The industry is leading and needs to continue to lead the debate on conservation methods, because it is in its interests first and foremost to ensure that alternatives to quota cuts and closures are put forward. There is still, however, a problem with black fish landings by a small minority in the industry. Such activities add nothing to the industry's case. It is important that those landings are stamped out and the industry must take the lead in that. People who flout the law to line their own pockets are taking the food out of the mouths of their colleagues and their colleagues' families and make the Government's case more difficult to advance. The industry must be at the forefront of policing those activities in order to protect their future. All fishermen should guard against black fish landings and should report them where necessary. A  commitment to do that would be welcome. It is also important that there is consistency throughout the European Union for technical measures. I can understand the frustration of fishermen who have introduced larger mesh sizes only to find out that fishermen from other European countries are continuing to use nets with smaller mesh sizes. It is essential that the minister continues to work with the industry to achieve the best possible solution that avoids the draconian proposals put forward. It is likely that a major change will be difficult to avoid. However, the minister must do everything that he can to achieve the best outcome for the Scottish fishing fleet. Finally, I have a word of caution. It is important that all politicians act in a way that maximises cross-party support for the industry and that presents a fair and reasonable case to the Commission. I was surprised to hear Alex Salmond describe Commissioner Fischler as a thug and an ignoramus. Such comments are not helpful and could do damage. There is a lot at stake, but making such a personal attack serves only to harm our cause rather than to support the fishing industry. In a way, that gives us an understanding of the SNP motion and why it would prefer Ross Finnie to lead the talks. The SNP cannot trust its Westminster colleagues to build a reasonable case. I reassure SNP members that we can trust ours to do so. The minister deserves credit for the position that he has taken. On behalf of the Labour party, I wish him well as he works towards a sustainable solution to the fishing industry's problems.

That's what I call a "chancer". What action is being taken to help the remote and sparsely populated areas of the Highlands and Islands where broadband technology is not available through normal sources? Is assistance available for businesses that wish to access broadband technology by satellite?

I would like Alex Fergusson to clarify that he refers to the majority of the Rural Development Committee.

I too welcome the statement. The minister will be aware of continuing concerns in the Highlands about whether the council has sufficient funds to cover key priorities. Will he confirm whether he believes that the settlement will allow the council to make progress on implementing those priorities, such as the McCrone agreement?

I welcome the consultation that was announced today. If the outcome of the consultation were that councils would have powers to levy full council tax on second homes, would the Executive consider allowing such councils to retain that money to deal with housing in their areas?

Will the member accept an intervention?

I congratulate John Swinney on securing the debate. I am sure that he had a huge amount of difficulty persuading his business manager to accept his motion for debate tonight. I agree with much of the motion. The number of accidents on the A9 is unacceptable, but that is the case on many of our other roads. The design of the A9 contributes to the number of accidents, because frustration builds up, which leads drivers to take unacceptable risks, putting themselves and others in danger. For me, that is the crucial point. When we debate the A9 it is important that we do not absolve drivers of responsibility. A lot can be done to improve the road, but drivers have to take responsibility for ensuring their safety and the safety of others using it. We need to educate drivers to pull in when they are travelling slowly and we need to impress that responsibility on all who use the road. The motion calls for the dualling of the A9 between Inverness and Perth. I am sure that everyone agrees that that would make a considerable difference, but it would not necessarily affect dangerous driving. The Government could consider other measures, such as the use of crawler lanes, more lay-bys, better signage, realignment of bends and the simple option of cutting back trees. That would not cost the vast amount of money that dualling would require, but it could make a substantial difference to safety.

I am sorry, but I do not have a lot of time and I have a lot to say. Any Government would have to identify vast amounts of money to make the decision to dual the A9. Indeed, it would have to make decisions about which other transport projects or policy areas it would have to shelve to ensure that that finance was available. I welcome the announcements that the minister has already made about the A9. We heard about the Ballinluig junction, which although not in my constituency affects a lot of my constituents. I also welcome the consultation that was launched today on the A9 north. That is really important, because the road up there is very much worse than the A9 between Inverness and Perth. In fact it makes that stretch of road look like a runway rather than a trunk road. I want to flag up the issue of the A82, which I see as more of a priority than the A9. Councils in the Highlands have said that that road must be their top priority. I know that I am taking licence by  mentioning it here, but when I travel on that road I see the evidence of cars being pulled out of ditches. When I spoke to members of the Lochaber chamber of commerce, they told me that large vehicles had difficulty passing each other when they were on certain parts of the road and that some carried spare wing mirrors because of the problem of having their wing mirrors knocked out. I ask the minister to give some priority to the A82 when he is considering the motion. It is an important road that serves the west of the Highlands.

I congratulate John Farquhar Munro on securing a debate that is of huge importance to the people of the Highlands and Islands. I would like to put on record the fact that the Executive has listened to a lot of the concerns that have been raised in the past. During the passage of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001, the Executive extended the date by which housing associations could register for charitable status, which exempted them from the right to buy. It also set up the rural partnership for change, which led to housing in pressured areas also being exempt. That is a good starting point, but we must bear in mind the fact great issues remain to be addressed. The motion mentions second-home ownership, and John Farquhar Munro also talked about council tax discounts. In answer to a question a couple of weeks ago, Margaret Curran told me that she was considering those discounts. I would be grateful if Hugh Henry would do what he can to ensure that that issue is addressed. I understand that the Westminster Parliament has considered giving powers to councils so that they could remove the exemption of second homes from council tax.  Areas such as Grantown-on-Spey have huge housing problems. That is one of the issues that members of the Rural Development Committee talked about when they discussed the draft designation order for the Cairngorm national park. There is a huge shortage of housing because of second homes and holiday homes. One of the problems that the committee considered was that, if the park were given full planning powers, there could be a drop in affordable and rented housing in the area, but it must be our priority to ensure that all areas have affordable housing to buy and to rent. We must look at new ways of achieving that. Shelter Scotland had argued that an inquiry should be conducted into ways of ensuring that housing is retained for permanent use rather than for second-home use. It would be a good idea if we could consider the possibility of planning restrictions on new housing developments to ensure that they are excluded from the second home market. I would be grateful if the minister would consider that point. It is often thought that homelessness does not affect the Highlands and Islands, but we have a huge homelessness problem in places such as Lochaber and Ross and Cromarty. It is hidden homelessness. People are living in overcrowded accommodation, sleeping on floors and sofas or living in caravans. Lack of housing has a huge effect on the local economy. Businesses have vacancies, but they are unable to recruit staff because the lack of housing means that they cannot get people to relocate to the area. To be honest, we are possibly victims of our own success. The Highlands economy is improving and its population is increasing. As a result, we need to address the housing shortage.

The fact that foot-and-mouth disease had a devastating effect on Scotland is not in doubt. It had a disastrous effect on farming communities, many of whom were struggling already from the effects of BSE. The effect of foot-and-mouth disease on the farming industry cannot be measured only in financial terms; the emotional and psychological strain on farmers and their families certainly cannot be measured in that way. The effect of the outbreak also went much wider than the farming industry. Tourism was hit badly and the impact of that underlined tourism's major contribution to the Scottish economy. Potential visitors to Scotland watched news reports of mass pyres burning around the country. Those reports gave the impression that that situation was commonplace throughout Scotland and visitors were also told that they would be unable to access the countryside, which discouraged those who wanted to come on walking holidays. Much work was done and investment put in place to encourage foreign tourists back to the UK, which appears to have had an impact in some areas. The effects of foot-and-mouth disease on tourism shows how it touched the whole of Scotland, not only the rural areas. Today, we are debating the Executive's response to the foot-and-mouth inquiries. I remember that when the inquiries were first announced a number of people discounted them and said that they were an attempt by the Government to cover up its mistakes. Anyone who has read the reports will know that that is not the case. The reports provide a coherent and well thought-through analysis of the way in which the Government handled the crisis. I want to comment in particular on Dr Ian Anderson's report, because it presents the information very readably and in an easily accessible manner. Anyone who picks up that report will be able to make sense of what it describes and what it recommends.  The reports focus on a national strategy for disease control to keep disease out and, if that fails, to reduce stock vulnerability and to minimise the impact of any further outbreak. First, reducing the chance of disease entering the country is a UK-wide issue and work has already been carried out on that. For example, UK pressure on the European Commission has resulted in the banning of personal allowances of meat from outwith the European Union from next year on. Secondly, we must examine the matter of stock vulnerability. As the minister said, we have already banned pig swill; however, we must also underline the importance of animal health and welfare. The outbreak would not have had such an impact if it had been identified and dealt with immediately. Although most farmers and crofters take animal welfare extremely seriously, we need to take steps to ensure that those who do not are removed from the industry. We must consider empowering SEERAD vets to enable them to remove and dispose of animals that are being neglected or ill-treated before those cases come to court. As members know, that process can take a long time, so such powers must be given to improve animal welfare throughout Scotland. Thirdly, we must be ready for future outbreaks. Although there are tighter controls on imports, we must not be complacent in that area. We need robust tracing systems, and measures such as the use of passports and tagging are helping to put those in place. Information technology will make it much easier to interrogate systems and to trace movements in case of an outbreak. Furthermore, in the event of an outbreak, we must have the power to impose immediate movement restrictions and to seal off affected areas and areas that will potentially be affected. We must also issue clear guidelines to hauliers on the action that they should take in relation to animals in transit during any future outbreak. For example, during the previous outbreak, we heard about hauliers who stopped at Longtown as they were returning animals to their original owners. There was a huge risk of spreading the disease to otherwise unaffected areas such as the Highlands, where a few cases were still reported. We must explore the use of vaccination to manage and control outbreaks and we must find out whether such an approach would help to isolate the disease. Although I do not want use of vaccines to be widespread, we need to know whether they would give us valuable breathing space in a crisis. The lessons to be learned report highlights the fact that in Scotland there was better working between the Government and agencies and that  the disease was tackled more effectively. In the light of that, we need to work with all stakeholders. I hope that, in any future consultation about a change in legislation, the Executive will throw the net as wide as possible to ensure that everyone is involved. If more people are involved in drawing up solutions, the solutions will attract more popular support. Finally, our strategy must integrate with strategies in the rest of the UK. As we discovered during the previous outbreak, the disease does not recognise administrative borders. I know that I have run out of time, but I could say an awful lot more on the subject. I am glad that the Executive is committed to improving systems and to introducing plans to ensure that a future outbreak does not have the same devastating effects as the last one had.

I welcome the opportunity to debate forestry. The  nature of forestry is such that action that we take today will have long-term effects that will sometimes last for many generations. Therefore, we need to get our policies right for the future. If we agree a long-term vision for forestry, outcomes will be delivered many years hence. Species such as Sitka spruce provide a fast economic return, but we need to get the balance right in respect of native woodland. If such woodland is properly managed, it can create returns, albeit that those will not be in the short term. There are many side-benefits of forestry—for example, visitor attractions and forest walks—and forest management must have regard to those benefits. It is important that such activities are encouraged and that everyone is allowed to benefit from forestry, not only economically, but socially. Knowledge of the environment can be increased and recreation and exercise provided. One problem that I have come across in that respect is the lack of joined-up government. That does not necessarily create barriers for large forestry organisations that have the resources to build relationships with all the agencies, but it can for small owners or community forests. Forestry planting and management are supported through rural development grants, while local enterprise companies' responsibilities cover the creation of facilities for visitors, walkers, cyclists and educational trips. I am not criticising how the different agencies work to fulfil their obligations, but I am criticising the lack of a one-stop shop, which, if people are not used to working with many agencies, can be off-putting and can create barriers. Our policy must cover all aspects of forestry and make assistance and advice more accessible to smaller developers. I want to discuss community ownership of forestry. Everyone is aware of the benefits that were brought about by community ownership at Abriachan and I am sure that we would want that model to be copied. I have been in touch with the North Sutherland Community Forest Trust. It is keen to see local ownership of forests such as Borgie forest, but Forest Enterprise does not seem to be encouraging that aspiration. Forest Enterprise is working towards a management agreement with the community, but that falls short of the goal of community ownership, which would allow the community to plan for the future and create jobs. One obstacle appears to be that the forest has a mature crop that is ready to harvest, but that obstacle could be overcome if Forest Enterprise handed over the forest to the community in stages following harvesting. There are many ways in which communities can benefit from the ownership of forests. As has been said, they can look for uses for waste products and for new and innovative uses of native species.  Communities are more likely to take an holistic approach to managing forests and creating jobs. Large timber operators tend to be interested in harvesting timber, but they tend not to be as concerned with side-benefits, such as tourism or community business. One side-benefit of forestry is the use of waste products for energy creation—that subject has been discussed this morning. I was interested in the fact that a project is being considered in Kinlochleven that will provide heating and hot water for 600 homes. The price of that scheme should equate to about half of what it costs to heat an average home in Scotland. The scheme would bring huge benefits to the community. We know that in rural areas there is not the same choice in energy. Most people are forced to use electricity for heating, which can often be expensive. We must encourage such projects. George Lyon mentioned the project in Argyll, which was supported by Communities Scotland. We need to find more uses for native woodlands. A lot of work is being done to investigate how we can use low-grade timber. I pay tribute to Highland Birchwoods, which has examined the feasibility of using that type of timber for flooring and windows, for example. We must learn lessons from the past about how we manage native woodlands. If they were managed properly, the timber would be of higher quality and would obviously have better uses. I know that many members have talked about transportation, but I want to add that we must consider transportation at the planning stage for forestry, not when the forest is ready to harvest and we find it necessary to have a knee-jerk reaction. In planning forestry and allowing forests to be created, we must feed into the local plan our views on how the forest will be harvested and how the timber will be accessed.

That is not necessarily true. Given that we are trying to extend forestry cover in Scotland, an awful lot of new forests will be planted. I am not saying that the road that will take the timber out should be built before the forest is planted, but that consideration should be fed into the local plan—it has to be accepted as an issue that is up and coming. If we leave it to the last moment, we will have timber rotting on the ground with no way of extracting it. It is important that we address the matter.  I urge the minister to meet members of the North Sutherland Community Forest Trust to see whether we can take forward their aspirations. I would be pleased if he also took on board my comments on other issues.

I welcome the minister's statement and the investment in private housing stock, but I want to push the minister a wee bit further on what she said in her answer to Johann Lamont about how the investment will work. I welcome the fact that the investment will be means tested and will go to those who are most in need, but as those most in need are often elderly, will the minister work with organisations such as Age Concern to ensure that the elderly are aware that the money is available? Also, will she confirm that the money will be ring fenced so that it cannot be used for other purposes, such as servicing housing debt?

On that point, will the minister consider a review of the accountability of Historic Scotland? As an example, I mention the case of Castle Tioram in my constituency, where plans were submitted for its development and Historic Scotland was called in as a statutory consultee. That led to a public inquiry to which Historic Scotland appointed a reporter to give evidence. Then, a ministerial decision on the inquiry was issued. Historic Scotland was judge, jury and executioner.

Is the minister aware of the problems that are faced by local people who have to compete with people who are buying second homes? Will the minister consider a review of the council tax relief  scheme for second homes as one of the tools by which the problem might be addressed?

It appears that every year about this time we debate another crisis in the fishing industry. Last year, we took drastic action—a ban on cod fishing for a period of time and a decommissioning scheme—to reduce permanently our fishing effort. Those actions were unpopular and met resistance from Opposition parties, who said that a tie-up programme would have been better. The money invested in decommissioning would have had no long-term effects, and any benefits would have now passed. The reduction in effort would not have been a bargaining tool that we can now use in negotiations.

No. It is surprising, therefore, that those parties cry that the Commission has not taken into account the effects of the decommissioning scheme. I agree that the Commission must take that scheme into account, but it is a bit rich for the nationalists to push that line when, if they had had their way, there would have been no decommissioning scheme. The crucial point is that the Commission is basing its argument on the wrong starting point. Scotland has already accepted that there is a problem with cod stocks and put measures in place to ensure that the industry has a future. Those measures include a reduction in effort by 10 per cent due to decommissioning and a short-term ban to allow stocks to regenerate. The fact that those measures have not even been taken into account will undoubtedly lead many people to believe that Franz Fischler's proposals are not based on reality. That causes frustration for those people who took and implemented some tough decisions. I was particularly struck by what Franz Fischler said in a press statement. He said: "it was particularly galling after repeatedly warning of the dire consequences of inaction, to see our worst fears realised."  Then he said: "in the absence of effective conservation and control measures these stocks are being persistently over fished." I hope that he was not speaking about Scotland because cod stocks increased in 2001 and 2002. I recognise that overall trends are alarming, but I hope that that increase is an indication that our action is working. It shows that if there had been a time when the closure proposal should have been introduced and would have made sense, it would have been last year and not this year. If the proposals are based on science, why were they not proposed last year? There can be no doubt that if those proposals go ahead and the closure of the Scottish trawl fishery takes place, it will leave fishermen, their families and their communities in an impossible economic situation. If the closure had an effect on cod stocks and the ban was lifted, does anyone think that the Scottish fishing industry would be there to take up the challenge? Closure would have forced the fishermen out of the industry. As the Scottish Fishermen's Federation has warned, the infrastructure simply would not be there. However, we cannot afford to be complacent. As a result of the negotiations, it is expected that different sides will take up different bargaining positions. It is important that the fishing industry and the minister work together closely to identify additional measures to avoid the wholesale closure of fishing in the North sea. Yesterday, I mentioned the importance of technical measures that have been put in place, including increased mesh sizes. I hope that the minister will impress on his European colleagues the need for the rest of Europe to come up to Scotland's high standards on mesh sizes. We must consider further technical measures, such as separation panels, that can cut cod mortality by 90 per cent. We must examine the local management of fisheries, involving people in all sectors of the industry and also in communities. No one wants the destruction of the industry, either through total closure or through the collapse of cod stocks. People who make their living from fisheries have most to lose from the collapse of those stocks. Therefore, it follows that they should be at the forefront of conservation. They have led the way and I hope that they continue to do so. However, the European Union must follow—fish do not respect boundaries. We must all sign up to the technical measures that our industry has put in place. Another aspect of the debacle is how the Commission takes decisions on such important issues. Every year, the cry for major cuts comes out of the blue and every country takes up  negotiating positions. The tight time scale allows for little meaningful discussion to take place. That must change. We need continuing dialogue, the exchange of best practice, an evolving policy and not just a knee-jerk reaction followed by a lot of horse-trading. I welcome the debate, but I am disappointed that the SNP is more interested in who leads the negotiations in Europe than the outcome of those negotiations. Carrying on as normal is not an option. As the minister said yesterday: the day of reckoning will simply come later. I hope that the minister will do all that he can to ensure that alternatives are found.

I welcome the minister's statement. Is it true that scientific evidence shows that the cod biomass  has increased in 2002 in comparison with 2001? If that is the case, it may show that some of the measures that we have taken are working. Will he ensure in his negotiations in the European Union that other countries adopt those technical measures, and will he push for further exploration of other measures such as separation panels?

It is a great pleasure for me to open this debate, which is of great importance to Inverness, the Highlands and—I hope—the rest of Scotland. I want to take this opportunity to thank all the members who signed my motion. The debate is as much about the future as it is about the past. The bid for European capital of culture status in 2008 is a sign of growing confidence in the Highlands about who we are and what we have to offer the world. Anyone who visits the Highlands today will find a growing population—it has risen by 2.4 per cent since the previous census—and more job opportunities. A number of key figures have supported the bid's development. As the bid co-ordinator, Bryan Beattie has played a key role in ensuring that a coherent, well-thought-out plan has been put together. Sir Cameron Mackintosh, the bid's patron, David Green, the convener of Highland Council, and local and national agencies have also supported and encouraged it. Many other people have been involved in it, but there are too many to mention this evening. I pay tribute to them all, whatever their role and regardless of how large or small their involvement has been. The bid is about the people of the Highlands working together and taking ownership. I should add that Bryan Beattie left this month. We all wish him well for the future. Bill Sylvester, who replaces him, has our support and I am sure that he will continue the great work that has already been carried out. His enthusiasm was apparent to the members who met him today. Indeed, I think that  Fergus Ewing wanted to put a few names to him because of that great enthusiasm. It is good to see someone who is so behind the bid. Inverness Highland 2008 is the sole Scottish bid for the title of European capital of culture. For the first time, city regions can bid. As the Inverness Highland bid is the only one of this kind, it deserves unanimous support from all parties, the Government, public bodies and agencies and ordinary individuals. I know that the bid team is pleased with the support it has received from the First Minister and the Scottish Executive, which is one of the 23 concordat partners. What does the Inverness Highland bid have to offer? I cannot do it justice in the short time that I have available, but under the broad theme of "Fàilte—Welcome All", the bid seeks to put in place programmes and events that celebrate and challenge the icons and stereotypes that have become associated with the city region. The bid recognises the environment of the area and looks at things that have inspired artists, writers, musicians and other creative people through the years. In order to generate ideas, the bid team launched an initiative to find 2008 ideas for 2008. Within only three months, 2008 ideas had been submitted, which is a clear sign that ordinary people have seen the potential of what a successful bid could bring to the area. The ideas included: a new piece of musical theatre that would be produced and performed by young people; having a year of fèis, with a fèis held every week during 2008; the world's largest clan gathering, to encourage descendants from all over the world to return to the Highlands during the culture year; a Gaelic teaching programme to raise awareness of Gaelic culture; the creation of a Highland science centre; and a proposal to bring north one leg of the Tour de France in 2008. Importantly, the bid has young people and volunteers at its heart, thus recognising that young people have as much right to have their say in culture decisions as everybody else. As part of the bid, two members of Highland Youth Voice have been working on a young persons' guide to the Highlands. To assess the likely benefits that would come from a successful bid, the bid team commissioned two studies, one of which examined the economic benefits while the other focused on the social ones. The economic benefits are believed to be achievable by the bid team and are likely to make anybody sit up and take notice. Up to 8,600 jobs would be created throughout the north in the year of culture. That figure does not take into account the additional jobs that would be created from infrastructure development and from the programmes that have already been started.  The benefits cannot be judged simply in terms of finance, as the enormous social benefits that would be generated are just as important. For example, the cultural pledge would be a lasting legacy to the children and young people of the Highlands. The pledge would mean that every pupil would receive access to all forms of culture, including access to drama tuition, music tuition and tuition in six sports. They would also visit the Highland folk park and Highland museums. That is to name but a few of the benefits that the young people would receive. The pledge would make a substantial difference to the value that those young people place on culture. For those young people, this is an opportunity of a lifetime, the benefits of which would hopefully flow through to future generations. The Highlands have something unique to offer. With their history and culture, the Highlands are best placed to showcase cultural activity to the rest of Europe. I hope that the minister will continue to do everything she can to ensure that the Inverness Highland bid is strongly represented to ministers and to the Department for Culture, Media and Sport. The bid is full of exciting and challenging aims. It offers the Highlands the opportunity to unleash the talents and creativity of all its people, young and old. The Highlands could show that it is not simply a place of history but one with a vision for the future. This is the opportunity of a lifetime and one that we must fight hard to win.

I am pleased to be able to contribute to the debate, but I do not recognise the area that I represent in the description in the Conservative party motion. Yes, the Highlands has problems, but they are more about housing our expanding work force than about finding jobs. The Highlands is bucking the Scottish trend because our population has increased by 20 per cent over the past 30 years. In line with other parts of Scotland, our unemployment rates are low and are lower than the average. Unemployment in the Highlands has dropped by 13 per cent in the past year alone. Everyone in the Highlands knows that Lochaber was an unemployment black spot, but it now enjoys some of the lowest unemployment rates in the whole of Scotland. That is due not only to an increase in the number of jobs but to the work that agencies have carried out. They have ensured not only that people have the skills to take the jobs on offer but that they have the skills to access them, providing driving lessons, for example, as part of the new deal. As Alasdair Morrison mentioned, the business start-up rate in the Highlands and Islands is higher than the Scottish average. There are still challenges. Some communities are dependent on tourism, which may provide only seasonal employment. We need to attract year-round tourism. That already happens in places where people undertake winter sports. We must create more indoor activities for those who would come to the Highlands in the winter for our scenery but not for our weather. I welcome the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's inquiry into tourism. I am sure that the committee will receive a great welcome when it visits the city of Inverness on Monday. The Tory motion talks about the lack of investment in IT. In Argyll and Bute, the three islands partnership is using IT to deliver services to remote communities. For the first time, those communities can access services without having to travel to the mainland. Almost all the public agencies are involved and the Executive has  helped with finance. The north Argyll islands also benefited from digital communities initiative funding. By giving each home a computer, the initiative has not only encouraged the use of IT but has provided the tools to do it with. That is a clear example of the benefits of IT to rural communities. Last week, the Highland Council advised MSPs how the council, the Executive and other public bodies hope to take things further by connecting schools and general practices to broadband. I believe that a similar project is going on in the south of Scotland. Such projects will bring IT to the heart of rural areas and will provide a quality of service that would be unavailable commercially. Rural areas also face transport problems, because they lack the critical mass of people for the commercial provision of public transport services. Again, the Executive has stepped in by investing £18 million in the rural transport fund between 2001 and 2004. By 2004, local authority money for rural public transport services will increase to £25 million. Different communities are using that money in different ways to suit their needs. In Sutherland, a bus service has been built round the peak times for use of the successful dial-a-bus scheme. That means that the existing resources can be expanded into other areas. In Aviemore, the money has been used for a community car scheme for those who do not have access to a car. IT has also been used to provide a reception service for the scheme. People who wanted to volunteer but were not able to do so outside can now provide the service from home. Those are not high-profile schemes, but they make a huge difference to the lives of the people who benefit from them. As I said in my introduction, we face challenges. More people are moving to rural Scotland to benefit from the quality of life and experience, and high-quality work is now available in rural areas. We need further investment in housing to ensure that that continues. Many businesses tell me that expansion is held back by the difficulty of finding a work force because of the lack of housing. We need to take an inter-agency approach to deal with the problem and to ensure that the barriers are broken down. I ask the minister to ensure that he takes that forward.

I, too, welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and I congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing it. The minister will be aware that in the Highlands and Islands the provision of health care services faces significant challenges. In particular, the desire to move away from single GP practices has led to concern about the future delivery of services. GPs rightly want to work in shared practices so that they can share on-call time, but that creates a concern because larger practices need larger geographical areas to get the number of patients required. That results in people facing transport problems. In remote communities, it is not always easy to get to the GP by public transport. I pay tribute to schemes such as the community car scheme in Aviemore, which provides a service to people who do not have access to a car. The car can take a person to their GP, if that is needed, and is available if the person wants to take part in social activities. That ensures that  people are not isolated and it results in health benefits. When people become isolated in remote rural areas, they can suffer from depression and similar illnesses. There is another example of good practice in Nairn, where I have seen the benefits of joined-up working between local GPs and social services. GPs provide medical cover for the local hospital, which improves patient service. If the GP thinks that more care is needed at a patient's home, they can bring in social services at an early stage, which keeps people out of hospital. Most people want to stay at home if they can. We need to expand such joined-up working. The GPs are involved in the local hospital and, if someone needs round-the-clock medical observation, that person can be taken into the local hospital and still be kept in the primary care sector. The high costs of acute care are therefore avoided. The GPs and other primary care practitioners also spend much time dealing with preventive medicine and considering ways of preventing illness. Money that is spent in the primary care sector therefore leads in the long term to huge savings in the acute care sector, as people do not end up needing acute care. Moray leisure centre is another example of how primary care can take the lead in providing preventive medicine. GPs work with the centre to devise and prescribe exercise programmes that help not only patients who need such programmes to recover from major traumas, but people who may be at risk of illness. That prevents trauma in the first place. On dental services, the minister will be aware of the problems in recruiting and retaining dentists in the NHS in rural areas. There is a real fear that people will be put off having necessary dental treatment and that serious conditions will not be diagnosed because people cannot afford to go private. At question time last Thursday, the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care made positive comments about the possibility of Highland NHS Board employing more salaried dentists and obtaining funding for that. I urge the minister to work closely with the trust in the Highlands to ensure that problems are tackled and people do not end up with conditions that could have been caught early and dealt with.

I congratulate Tavish Scott on securing the debate. I also thank the Presiding Officer for calling me early in the debate. I apologise to members because I will not remain for the full debate, but I will certainly read with interest their comments and speeches in the Official Report.  There is little doubt of the importance of crofting to the Highlands and Islands. Crofting benefits rural communities by helping them to retain their population. Schools, shops and medical practices remain viable because of crofting and that enables rural communities to survive. That has been proved by past comparisons between communities in the crofting counties and communities outwith those counties. The benefits of crofting should be extended throughout Scotland to safeguard other rural communities. Crofting also benefits the environment. Many areas covered by crofting are seen as environmentally sensitive. Those areas have been protected by crofting and it is right that that should be recognised and supported. That can be done by ensuring that crofters are given access to the rural stewardship scheme, as Tavish Scott outlined. The intention of the proposed crofting bill will be to de-couple crofting support from agriculture in order to promote diversification. That will be welcome, but there should also be a recognition of the importance of agriculture in crofting areas and of the fact that crofting practices protect the environment. Discouraging agriculture in crofting areas would cause environmental damage because the land needs to be managed and protected. The less favoured areas support scheme has the potential to protect this form of agriculture. The scheme should have been targeted at the remote crofting areas. Although I appreciate the work that has been carried out and acknowledge that the scheme has been improved, there are still anomalies, such as the fact that prescribed stocking levels bear no relationship to the croft souming. If a crofter is obliged to stock at a certain density because the land will not sustain a higher density, it is surely wrong that they be penalised for that. Capping could have been used to ensure that there was no over-compensation. More work  has to be carried out on the marketing of produce from crofts, as we have not met the full potential that is offered. Crofting provides housing in areas where it would not be viable to do so in any other way. However, the crofting counties building grants and loans scheme needs to keep pace with the cost of building a house in rural areas. We are all aware of the cost of connecting services such as electricity, water and sewerage, but crofters face other costs if they want to build houses near trunk roads as they are often required to build a road that links to an existing access. To retain the social and environmental benefits, we need to support crofting. Although I welcome the moves in the white paper to make crofting more accessible, I believe that it must help to ensure that crofting continues and grows or we will all be poorer.

Why is Historic Scotland intent on forcing people to preserve buildings as ruins when local people would prefer to see them restored and of some use to the community, such as is the case with Castle Tioram?

I echo John Farquhar Munro's plea for the First Minister to look favourably at any funding request from Highland Council. The First Minister will be aware that flooding is becoming an increasing problem in the area. As well as the recent problems, railway services from Inverness have been disrupted over the past few months because of flooding. Will he ensure that legislation contains sufficient provision to deal with those problems in an holistic manner?

Today our thoughts are with those who lost loved ones a year ago. We can all remember where we were when events unfolded last year. I remember leaving the Rural Development Committee and seeing staff, security guards and MSPs crowded round, watching news broadcasts on the television. However, it was not until I returned to my office that I realised what was happening. Like many people in Scotland, my first thoughts were for my friends in the New York area. Many were also worried about family. I am sure that that happened throughout the world. The events of 11 September mean that all nationalities mourn loved ones today. Out of the horror of those events have come accounts of heroism and humanity, of people who risked and gave their lives to save others. Communities, office workers, fire officers and many others who were faced with the devastation have pulled together to ensure that good comes from the atrocities. We have seen the effects of tragedies in our country. In Dunblane, communities pulled together to bring good out of what happened there. Therefore, it is right that we should spend time today looking at our past, present and future links with America. My constituency, the Highlands and Islands, has many ties with the United States, not the least of which are family ties that were formed from the Highland clearances, when many people were forced off their land and sought refuge in the United States, among other places. When last I visited my friends in New York, I took the opportunity to visit Ellis Island, the immigration point through which most highlanders fleeing to America passed. I was impressed at the way in which the museum there is constructed and shows the experience of the immigrants. Many of the exhibits were provided by those who made their way through Ellis Island or by their families, and their stories were often told by themselves or by someone close to them. The main hall where people congregated has been left empty, to allow each visitor to imagine the scene at different times in its history. Despite the large number of visitors, it was possible to feel alone there, imagining the experience of the  people who had passed through. It was a bit like being in an old cathedral, feeling the history and the past generations. An exhibition has also taken place at Ellis Island that shows the extent of immigration from the Highlands and Islands. We should never forget that when Scottish landowners displaced our people, America accepted them. It would be romanticising events to say that they were accepted with open arms. That was not always the case, and from my time visiting Ellis Island I became aware of the tragedy that some of them faced, with families being split up or not being able to make the journey. That is detailed by the people who were affected. We in Scotland have close links to America through our shared heritage. Those who went to America became Americans but have always retained their links to Scotland and their Scottish heritage. Millions of Americans claim to have Scottish roots. The growth of the internet allows those people to have direct access to documents relating to their family history. That enables them to forge links with the places that their families came from. They are able to visit places that their ancestors left and make contact with family members who are still in Scotland. In Scotland, there are plans to construct a hilltop memorial to victims of the clearances in Helmsdale and to develop a research centre. I hope that VisitScotland will be mindful of that project in its marketing campaigns. They should also be mindful of directing visitors to Croick church, where those cleared off the land etched their messages on the church windows as they sheltered outside. However, not only the Highlands have links to America. Such links are found across Scotland and I am sure that members will take the opportunity today to outline their local links. As Annabel Goldie said, there are many places in America that are named after Scottish cities. Time after time, the names Aberdeen, Edinburgh and Glasgow appear. Our cities were built around trade and much of that was with America, resulting in the forging of historical links. The focus on genealogy is significant and will hopefully encourage Scots Americans to come over and investigate their family history and see Scotland as it is today: a modern, dynamic country. Much of the tourism industry in Scotland is dependent on American visitors, who contribute $200 million to the Scottish economy. The industry suffered difficulties last year because people stayed away following the events of 11 September and the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease. It is important that we encourage them back. We have  a lot to offer American tourists. Apart from our heritage and beautiful scenery, we have world-class golf courses, such as St Andrews—indeed, the Americans say that the hole number 1 at Machrihanish is the best hole number 1 in the world. We also have the Edinburgh festival, which draws visitors from all over the world. In other sectors too, the ties with America are important. Oil companies that are based in the States have provided and continue to provide jobs in the North sea. Those jobs are important to people throughout Scotland and are especially important to the city of Aberdeen, where many companies have set up UK headquarters. In Inverness, an American-owned company, Inverness Medical, provides more than 1,000 jobs—one of the largest private companies in the area. It works with local health agencies to provide much-needed research and development in diabetes. That is not the only health-related link that we have with the USA; there are many more, such as the £100,000 fellowship to study cancer services in both countries. That joint working will identify new ideas and methods of care which will benefit both countries. We must do all that we can to strengthen such economic ties, encourage more companies to set up bases in Scotland and also learn from their experience. The American people are proud of their Scottish roots and have established tartan day to celebrate them. In this Parliament, we have supported those events by having debates and sending delegations. It is a wonderful sight to see thousands of pipers marching and playing in the streets of New York. Tartan day provides an important focus on Scotland, giving us a stage not only for our culture, but for our industry. The USA is one of our biggest export markets and we need to ensure that it grows. We can learn much from the people of New York about how we can live side by side with people of different cultures and religions. The city's population is so diverse that visitors from any country feel at home. We can learn much from their acceptance of immigrants and our football supporters could learn a lot from the Rangers supporter and the Celtic supporter whom I saw in a Brooklyn bar, dressed in their team colours but sitting together enjoying a drink. Some members have used the debate to express concerns about the situation regarding Iraq. I wish that they had taken the same action as the Trades Union Congress and used another debate on another day to raise those concerns. They might want to reflect on whether their position today has been appropriate.

I am just closing. However, I am sure that those members will agree that their concerns about Iraq in no way reflect a lack of feeling for those whose lives were torn apart by the events last year. Today, our thoughts are with them.

The minister has gone some way towards answering the main points of my question about the provision of information to the Parliament on the performance of our prisons. However, I would like him to expand on that a little. Will that information be of the quality that is required to enable the Parliament to provide the scrutiny that he seeks? Will it be made public, so that we can get feedback from the public sector and from members of the public? Will he also confirm that the information will include details of the rehabilitation programmes that are taking place and the impact that they are making?

Will the minister ensure that the social and economic factors that are experienced by people in remote, rural and island communities will be taken into account during the implementation of the new scheme? Those people experience much less favoured farming conditions than those in the rest of Scotland.

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this debate at a time when the number of air passengers in Scotland continues to rise and when the population of the Highlands and Islands continues to rise. Duncan Hamilton would know that if he spent more time in the area.

I want to get on, as I have much to say. It is important to improve air services in my constituency. That was clearly shown when the Rural Development Committee visited Colonsay last week. There is an airstrip in Colonsay but there are no landing facilities in Oban, so there cannot be an Oban to Colonsay service. We must reconsider such issues to ensure that people on  remote islands have access to air services. We must also consider lowering the cost of flying. I welcome Jack McConnell's recent comments and I am pleased that BA is examining its cost structures. I welcome today's investment by BAA of £60 million, which Kenny MacAskill completely ignored in his opening remarks. The Scottish Executive has whole-heartedly supported the case for a PSO in Inverness. When we speak about PSOs, we have to be clear that the issue is not about adding more subsidy; it is about securing routes. The issue has to be examined closely and I welcome the consultation that Lewis Macdonald spoke about. Many ordinary businesses in the Highlands are anxious to see the London route maintained and to have a PSO on it. They were pleased that Scotland Office ministers took time to meet representatives of the community to hear their concerns directly. It is important that we work with our Westminster colleagues on air travel. We must assess what we have already achieved and what we must now achieve. The SNP motion talks about flights from Scotland, so it is strange that SNP members talk about devolving to the Scottish Parliament responsibility for all air travel. Their policies are insular; they do not look outwards. Most recent media coverage has centred on HIAL and Ryanair, which have been mentioned a lot today. I am uneasy about the way in which those important negotiations have been conducted. The nationalists have turned the issue into a political football. They have not taken the time to assist HIAL in the negotiations. In fact, when proposals were first mooted, the SNP was in the press talking down HIAL and talking down the Highlands and Islands. In recent weeks, many people have contacted my constituency office, anxious for a deal to be struck. The benefits that could come to Inverness if Ryanair were to fly into it are obvious. However, we have to remember that public money is involved and it is important that it is spent properly. Our constituents expect nothing less. However, the SNP seems to disagree; it seems to think that the board of HIAL should throw taxpayers' money around without any investigation. It continues to talk down our public sector.

I am in my last minute. SNP members continue to talk down our public sector airports. One would almost think that they favoured privatisation. Kenny MacAskill said that Inverness does not need subsidy. Was he talking about the privatisation of Inverness? I do not agree with that. My advice to HIAL and Ryanair is  to get back round the table and produce robust proposals to provide what would be good value to taxpayers. However, there are some good-news stories and I would like to touch on them before I finish. They include Transun Flights Ltd flying into Inverness, holidays abroad from Inverness and holiday breaks from the south-east of England straight into Inverness—all those are wonderful for the local economy.

Will the member outline the Scottish National Party's position on recycling aggregates? Will he confirm whether the party's stance is the same as Alex Neil's, which is that the money should be used to improve the environment, or is it the same as Alex Salmond's, who said that the aggregates tax is a poll tax on chuckies?

Given that pressures on remote and rural general practitioners led to the break in the accident and emergency service at Dunbar hospital, what steps is the Executive taking to address those problems, not only in Thurso, but throughout the Highlands and Islands?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has identified any benefits from awards made by the special educational needs innovation grants programme and how it intends to recognise and promote good practice in the education of children and young people with special educational needs. (S1O-5158)

The minister will be aware of my concerns about the education of children and young people with autism. Will she undertake to ensure that SEN training for teachers in mainstream education is available and accessible so that they can better understand the needs of children with autism? Can she indicate how readily available to staff such training provision will be so that education is geared towards the needs of the child?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate. I want first to deal with fishery management. When the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill was passed, many welcomed the legislation because everyone could see the need to conserve salmon stocks. In my speech for the stage 3 debate on that bill, I said that we needed to look at the make-up of the district salmon fishery boards. That issue is as important now as it was then. Although many fishery boards are forward thinking and are moving with the times, others are stuck in the dark ages and will not change voluntarily. The progress of the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill has provided insights into the mindset of some of the landowners who run many of the fishery boards. They said that crofters could not be trusted to run a salmon fishery because crofters do not have the relevant expertise and would end up damaging the salmon stocks. Such views are complete nonsense and show the ignorance of that minority.

I am struggling for time—that is why I am speaking so quickly. One thing that came out loud and clear during the passage of the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill was the need for land managers to work with the salmon fishery boards to ensure that farming practices are not detrimental to fisheries.  Crofters must have a place on the salmon fishery boards because many of the land managers are crofters. I suggest that we now have the perfect opportunity for reforming the membership of the salmon fishery boards so that they contain representation from the crofters, farmers and the communities in which they operate. Such membership would also enhance the relationship between fishery owners and crofters, which has been so badly damaged by ill-informed statements. Land reform provides opportunities for conservation. We are all well aware of unmanaged rivers where more could be done to enhance the fishery. Crofting communities will now have the opportunity to purchase their local fisheries, manage them and use them to provide jobs and tourism in the area. That is one of the main benefits of the fisheries right to buy under the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill, which will allow communities to invest in and capitalise on their natural resources. I welcome the analysis that is to be carried out into the contribution of angling to the Scottish economy.

I am sorry—I am struggling with the short time that is available to me. We all know from anecdotal evidence that angling contributes greatly to the economy; building up a more precise picture of angling activity will be of great assistance. I welcome the continuing discussions with VisitScotland to ensure that angling is given the prominence that it deserves in marketing. We must ensure that everything possible is done to promote every aspect of Scotland. I appreciate that the Minister for Rural Development is not directly responsible for the matter, but I ask him to work closely with his colleagues to ensure that angling is actively marketed by VisitScotland. I hope that the debate and the responses to the consultation will allow the Executive to introduce proposals that will ensure the long-term growth of freshwater fisheries. I urge members to support the Executive motion.

Will the minister consider evaluating— [Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Will the minister consider evaluating the benefits that could be gained from advertising through local and community radio stations? Those broadcasters attract an awful lot of people and could provide good value for money. The funds that they would receive from that advertising would go a long way towards securing their future.

To ask the Scottish Executive what economic assessment has been undertaken in order to evaluate the impact of section 9(2)(a) of the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill. (S1O-4971)

I thank the minister for that response— [Laughter.] It was very much as I suspected it might be. The minister will be well aware of the concerns about section 9(2)(a) that were expressed during stage 1 of the bill by parties on all sides of the chamber. I ask the minister to consider the issue again and to consider the wording of the paragraph, taking into account the damage that it will cause to the economy of the Highlands and Islands, given the changes in land ownership patterns, given the diversity of businesses that use the land to earn their income, and given the difficulties that new businesses will have in setting up.

Will the minister consider my suggestion of giving crofters ring-fenced places on the community body? Doing so might allay crofters' fears about losing control of the community body once it is introduced.

It is an honour to speak in support of the bill, which will lead to a fundamental change in the way in which land is owned. No longer will land ownership be the preserve of the rich, many of whom treated a large number of communities in the Highlands and Islands with contempt. It is also an honour to be part of the process that sees a Labour party policy that has been held since the days of Keir Hardie start its progress to statute. I want to concentrate on two aspects of the bill—access and the crofting community right to buy. Much has been said about access and the issue has been covered adequately. However, we need to consider it again and I am glad that the minister has agreed to do so, because a restriction on commercial access could devastate the economy of the Highlands and Islands. A constituent who wrote to me told me that he owns the land that he uses to access water for his water-sports business. The land is also used by competitors in the same industry to access water. He will not use the bill to restrict his competitors' access, but should his business change hands, the other businesses could be adversely affected or could even cease to exist. I ask the minister to consider again removing section 9 from the bill. When giving evidence to the Rural Development Committee, the Scottish Crofting Foundation expressed a desire that a majority of 75 per cent of crofters should be required to agree to a buy-out before it can proceed. I do not agree with that, because it means that 25 per cent of crofters, some of whom might be inactive crofters, could block the majority. However, the plea for such a majority masks a genuine concern. Although the bill ensures that 50 per cent of crofters have to be in favour of a buy-out for it to proceed, it gives them no additional rights in the community body.  I ask the minister to consider that 50 per cent of the directors of the community company should be crofters or their appointees. That would ensure that crofters' interests were represented fully at all times. That proposal is similar to the process for appointment to a national park authority, whereby Scottish ministers and local authorities appoint a proportionate number of representatives of different groups. The bill makes provision for the right to buy fisheries within a year of the crofting community buy-out. I ask the minister to consider allowing a right of pre-emption of fisheries thereafter. That would allow communities to buy fishing rights if they came on the market at any time after the crofting community buy-out. I welcome the bill and the difference that it will make to communities. It is especially significant that we are debating it the week after the residents of Gigha bought their island. I hope that the bill will allow many other communities to follow in their footsteps.

I welcome the opportunity to debate this issue and congratulate Elaine Thomson on securing the debate. It is fitting that the debate should take place during the international year of mountains. It is also fitting that the third European Mountain Convention is being held in Inverness later this year. It is a European association that promotes co-operation between mountain regions. The Cairngorms are a place of outstanding natural beauty and have attracted visitors from all over the world for many years—people who are interested in mountaineering, wildlife and nature conservation. The question is, what would world  heritage status add to the Cairngorms and what benefits would it bring? The most obvious benefit would be recognition. The list of sites with world heritage status is impressive and includes the great wall of China, the cathedral of Notre Dame, the giant's causeway in Northern Ireland and, more recently, New Lanark. Those sites are all well known and stand out as visitor attractions. There are four world heritage sites in Scotland: the Neolithic monuments of Orkney, Edinburgh's old and new towns, St Kilda and New Lanark. They are regarded as the gold standard of Scotland's heritage and are recognised throughout the world because of the historic value they add to it. It cannot be doubted that tourism would be boosted through the granting of such status to the Cairngorms. I am sure that some tourists who come to Scotland would be swayed to visit the Cairngorms if the area attracted world heritage status. That would be a welcome boost to the communities in the Cairngorms. Tourism would not be the only industry that would be helped; there would be a knock-on effect on local industries and the local economy. The part of the Cairngorms that lies in my constituency is dominated by the ski resort of Aviemore. With the award of world heritage status, the attraction of the area would be further enhanced. The opening of the funicular railway has also provided an incentive for tourists to come to the Cairngorms. The creation of the national park will affect the area, too. With that development, there is potential to promote the area. Furthermore, the national park development and world heritage status will not confine economic activity and development. Throughout the passage of the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000, serious issues were raised about the balance between economic and environmental concerns. I believe that those issues have been resolved. If granted, world heritage status would recognise the natural beauty of the Cairngorms and would have the potential to bring economic benefit not only to the tourism industry, but to the wider local economy. I hope that the Scottish Executive will back the proposal and that the minister will seek to persuade Westminster colleagues that it is worth supporting.

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent action it has taken to promote sport in schools. (S1O-4695)

What action can the minister take to promote sport in small rural primary schools? Because of the small number of teachers in those schools, sport is often overlooked or taught by teachers with no specialist sports knowledge. To encourage talent, it is important that young people are allowed to take part in sports from an early age. At present, that is extremely difficult and it is impossible to give children in rural areas the same opportunities as others.

This has been a long and tortuous process. Many people who are against the bill say that we have already spent too much time on it and should be discussing other issues. It is interesting to note, however, that the same people have delayed the bill by insisting on extra evidence. Their action has, in fact, lengthened the time that we have spent on it. I was concerned about the way in which the bill was first drafted and I voiced my concerns. Rather than shout that the bill was fatally flawed before it was debated in Parliament, I resolved to raise those issues with the promoters of the bill. I was concerned that the bill would not allow the use of terriers underground, which practice is required to allow fox control in barren, rocky areas, of which there are many in my constituency. Foxes live in dens below the ground or in rocky cairns and take refuge when anyone comes close. There is no ground cover for them to hide in, so it is natural that they return below ground and stay there until the threat has passed. It is therefore extremely difficult to dispatch a fox without the use of terriers below ground to flush it out before guns can be used. I am well aware that gamekeepers, farmers and crofters who use terriers in that way have no truck with fox baiting, but they need to be able to control fox numbers. I am happy that the bill has been amended to take into account their concerns. The bill has been amended in a way that does not leave loopholes for those who take part in the cruel sport of fox baiting. When I first spoke to Mike Watson about that issue he was a bit  sceptical but he, and the promoters of the bill, listened. The amendments that have been made testify to that. I pay tribute to that pragmatism. I pay tribute also to the Scottish Gamekeepers Association. We received many submissions on the bill and the gamekeepers' submission was straightforward and factual. The amendments that have been made today will not affect the ability of gamekeepers to do their job, but they will prevent those who want to take part in cruel sports from finding loopholes in the bill. Mike Rumbles said that the bill is a mess. I am a member of the Rural Development Committee and I can say that Mike Rumbles worked hard to ensure that the bill became a mess. I am pleased to say that he did not succeed. We all know that fox numbers must be controlled, but most of us want that to be done as humanely as possible. The bill will ensure that that happens. I urge members to support it.

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate. Although I would have been happy for the matter to be dealt with by a Sewel motion, it is still important and should be given time in the Parliament. The bill should not be contentious because, as we have heard, there are no fur farms in Scotland, but we need the bill and we need to debate it, because it will close a loophole. England and Wales are banning fur farming. Fur farms exist there and the bill will prevent them from relocating to Scotland. As a member of the Labour party, I support the bill also because it deals with a problem that may arise, not something that we are already in the middle of. I congratulate the Executive on taking steps to ensure that a problem is dealt with before it happens. The Rural Development Committee examined the bill during our deliberations on the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill. In retrospect, that was quite an achievement, because the committee's work load was extremely heavy. In spite of that, the report that we produced on the Fur Farming (Prohibition) (Scotland) Bill examined all the issues. I pay tribute to the clerks for the work that they carried out on the report while they had another heavy work load. I will comment on a number of issues. First, I will comment on the moral justification for the bill. There was considerable debate about the Executive's objection to the principle of breeding animals for their subsequent slaughter for the value of their fur, which is essentially a fashion accessory. I and other members do not believe that those who support fur farming provided sufficient evidence for it achieving any public benefit. The Executive is right to make a moral differentiation between rearing animals for food and rearing them for fashion. Leather and sheepskin are by-products of the farming industry.

We have heard comments from around the chamber that dogs, too, are eaten in  China, but I will not ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body to ensure that dogs are on the Parliament restaurant's menu. Leather and sheepskin are by-products of the farming industry. Once the animals have been slaughtered for their meat, it is right to use those by-products. The Rural Development Committee's report makes it clear that there is more than a moral argument for banning fur farming. That argument should not be the sole justification for the bill, but should go hand in hand with other concerns, such as welfare. The committee, again, received conflicting evidence on the welfare issue. The report makes it clear that those who are involved in the activity are subject to a regulatory framework, but that does not address concerns about the nature of the activity and the methods of slaughter. Committee members received submissions on commonly used slaughter methods and those appeared to be cruel and difficult to justify for the sake of fashion. In its written submission, the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals said about mink: "In the wild they are solitary, tend to travel long distances and use several den sites, and swim and dive regularly. Farm mink, on the other hand, are kept in small cages, cannot cover territory and cannot have access to water." The European Council directive 98/58/EC concerning the protection of animals kept for farming purposes points out that animals kept for farming should have the freedom to express normal behaviour, adequate space and facilities and company of the animals' own kind. For that reason the welfare issues are extremely important. Thirdly, I want to touch on the environmental issues. We are all aware of the damage that escaped mink can cause in the local environment to such creatures as ground-nesting birds and other creatures that live side by side with them. A lot of money has been invested in mink eradication programmes, which cost the taxpayer. We must ensure that, by outlawing fur farming in Scotland, those problems do not occur. Scotland does not currently have fur farms, but I believe that the Executive is right to introduce the bill. If we do not pass the bill, we will create a loophole.

We had few representations from fur farmers who stated that they wished to use the loophole to move their businesses north, but it would be difficult for them to say that they planned  to move their businesses north when a ban was implemented in England and Wales, because they would accept compensation from the taxpayer, which they would then use to move their businesses to another part of the UK. It would be out of order for taxpayers in Scotland to pay compensation to people so that they could then move their businesses to Scotland. We must close the loophole and ensure that the harmful practice of fur farming does not come to Scotland. Scotland can be proud of its commitment to welfare in farming—which the Rural Development Committee is aware of. The welfare commitment of farmers in our country is above and beyond that in other countries. To allow fur farming would damage that image. I am pleased that the Fur Farming (Prohibition) (Scotland) Bill is going through Parliament.

I know that I have extra time, Presiding Officer, but I do not think that I can copy Irene Oldfather's feat and make a three-minute speech stretch to 10 minutes. I will do the best that I can.

I am glad to have the chance to discuss structural funding, which is extremely important to Scotland and especially to the Highlands and Islands. The Highlands and Islands have enjoyed structural funds through objective 1 funding and through the special programme funding, negotiated by Tony Blair, which brings more funding to the Highlands and Islands than would have been attracted had the area been chopped into parts to attract objective 1 status. Those parts are sparsely populated and funding is allocated per head, so it is important that we attracted the special funding, so that it can have the impact that it has had and is having in the Highlands and Islands. In the Highlands and Islands, and throughout Scotland, it is important to allow communities to  have an input into how money is spent. The LEADER II project helped to enable communities to consider issues that create barriers to economic development and allowed them to look with fresh eyes at the opportunities that exist. The project went a long way towards enabling communities to gain confidence, which the Executive has made a priority. We need only consider the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill to see that that is happening. The minister mentioned that the LEADER II project has now been replaced by LEADER +. That project builds on the work carried out by the LEADER II project and comprises three strands: support for integrated and innovative development strategies for rural areas, which is based on partnership and giving priority to initiatives proposed by local people; support for inter-regional and transnational co-operation; and networking among all EU rural areas, whether or not they receive LEADER + funding, and those who are involved in rural development. Through work on previous projects, the Highlands and Islands have shown that they are ideally placed to make the best use of funds; the area has worked hard to identify issues and to put together solutions. Such information has been used by partners in the Highlands and Islands and elsewhere in the EU. Indeed, I was privileged to take part in two of the many dissemination conferences that were held in the Highlands. Those who took part in LEADER II are well placed to seek support from LEADER + for the projects that they have identified. As a result, I very much welcome the minister's announcement. The money will have an impact on many areas and I am pleased that a lot of it will go to areas on the periphery of my constituency. Such projects will give communities a real opportunity to build on the work that they have carried out and will put the creation of solutions into their hands. The priority given to the views of communities has been carried into other aspects of structural funds. The Highlands and Islands Partnership has spent time consulting local authorities and community bodies on how best to use the money, and the effect of that is evident throughout the area. For example, on infrastructure, causeways, piers and harbours have been built. There have been social changes, thanks to the provision of support to women who are returning to work after having children and to disabled people. The last time we debated structural funds, I mentioned the jobs for all project, which goes a long way towards enabling disabled people to enter the employment market and has significantly changed their lives. Contrary to concerns that have been raised, structural funding has not been spent in the centres of population but has been put to good use. Most of the money has been allocated to  peripheral areas, with the benefit of the additional per capita payments obtained through the special funding. It has been said that enlargement makes it unlikely that we will attract structural funding in the future, but we should not aspire to attract it. To secure such funding, we need a lower gross domestic product than the rest of Europe. We must use the money to ensure that we never again need to claim it. The money must be spent on projects that will continue to benefit the area once the funding has run out. I urge the Executive to ensure that that theme runs through all structural funding commitments in future.

The minister will be aware that the rural development regulation states that "allowances should be fixed at a level which: - is sufficient in making an effective contribution to compensation for existing handicaps", and should take into account "the severity of any permanent natural handicap affecting farming activities". Crofters and farmers are extremely concerned that those principles are being ignored in the existing less favoured area scheme. Will the minister ensure that they are enshrined in the new scheme?

It is with some envy that I congratulate Alasdair Morrison on securing the debate. It has taken him a few short weeks to secure a members' business debate, whereas I have been waiting considerably longer to secure my first members' business debate. Perhaps he can give me some tips. [Laughter.]  It is only right that the Western Isles should lead the way in renewable energy generation. As Alasdair Morrison said, the Highlands and Islands have a long history of using hydro power. As Tavish Scott mentioned, the northern isles are also very much involved. The marine energy testing centre on Orkney is a fine example of how rural island communities can take their place in renewable energy generation. Huge environmental benefits are to be gained. Many people might ask why places such as the islands should look for environmental benefits, as they have clean air. People in many of our cities and towns aspire to having clean air. The debate shows that there is no division between town and country or between urban and rural areas on the issue. We all need to work together to provide benefits, which include jobs in rural areas and cleaner air in urban areas. Investing in renewable energy is not a waste of money. The energy is renewable—it goes on and on. The investment is well placed. Many renewable energy sources can also be tourist attractions. That is a knock-on benefit that many people do not see or that they find strange. Other countries have gained increased tourist numbers by marketing the facilities and encouraging people to visit them. Infrastructure is also important. I am pleased that the Westminster Government is addressing that. There is no point in generating electricity if we cannot transport it to the areas that need it. We also need to invest in jobs. The Scottish Executive has shown that it is willing to do that by its investment in the Vesta plant at Machrihanish. We also need to look at scientific jobs and perhaps involve the university of the Highlands and Islands in the development of that area. I would like to see a review of the national  planning policy guidelines. It is important that they are reviewed and updated to facilitate renewable energy generation. I do not want to reduce consultation with local communities, as that is important, but we need to find a way to facilitate consultation to ensure that all the people are involved. Renewable energy will benefit not only the people of the Western Isles; it will benefit the whole of Scotland.

Does Alasdair Morrison agree that this project shows that community-owned estates and companies are at the forefront of providing renewable energy generation? For example, the Assynt Crofters Trust, which has been vilified lately, is involved in creating a hydro dam.

To ask the Scottish Executive what role partnership with Her Majesty's Government will play in delivering its priorities for the year ahead. (S1O-4401)

Can the Deputy First Minister reassure me that tackling poverty will remain a key feature of the discussions between the Executive and Her Majesty's Government? In particular, can he assure me that indicators that are used to identify rural poverty will take fair account of life in rural areas? For example, dependence on cars is high but that high level of car dependence and ownership masks rural poverty.

What steps are being taken to tackle the problem of looked-after children going to different schools?  That is a particular problem in rural areas, where emergency arrangements may involve moving children from one community to another. When more permanent arrangements are made, the children may be moved again. There is a lack of continuity in education and in teachers. Will the minister address that?

I very much welcome this debate before the negotiations on catch limits and quotas for 2002. I agree with what Jamie Stone said about members from all parties supporting the minister in the negotiations and I add my support to theirs. Although this debate is about fisheries quotas, some members have mentioned the scallop fishery. I support the arguments that they have made. The scallop fishery is not a matter for this debate, but it is very important. If we fail to include the industry in our considerations, it will suffer severe damage. I agree with many of the points that have been made today. I do not want to repeat all of them, but I emphasise the point that Elaine Thomson made about the importance of the processing industry. I know that she has a strong constituency interest in that industry and in the communities that it supports in Aberdeen. I am also extremely concerned that the work that has been done to bring fishermen and scientists together appears to be being undermined by the European Commission. In the past we have been told that quotas and catch limits are based on scientific evidence, but this year that evidence appears to carry no weight. Such an approach can only breed distrust within our fishing industry. The proposed cut in the prawn quota is also extremely concerning. I welcome the minister's comments on that. The scientific evidence would appear to suggest an increased quota, but the Commission has proposed a drastic reduction. The prawn fishery is extremely valuable both to Scotland as a whole and to small, remote communities. Inshore fisheries are very much involved in the prawn fishery, which sustains many of the rural and remote communities in my constituency. The proposed cut in quota would threaten their viability. I support the Executive's fight to ensure that those cuts do not go ahead. That will help to safeguard the future of those communities. The Scottish Executive's decommissioning scheme allows fishermen to leave the industry, making the industry more profitable for those who remain in it. Last year we had too many boats chasing too few fish. I hope that the decommissioning scheme will redress the balance. Last year there were also concerns about crewing numbers. Rumours abounded of boats going to sea undercrewed—that has grave safety implications. However, it is difficult to attract crews into an industry in which profit margins are low.  Decommissioning would allow boats to crew to acceptable standards and would enable fishing crews to have a decent standard of living. The decisions that we make now will have long-term implications for the future of the industry. Everyone must be signed up to a sustainable fishing industry. I am glad that Rhona Brankin underlined that point. The existing quota limits do nothing to address sustainability—in fact, I would argue that they harm sustainability. To my mind, the waste involved in throwing back over the side dead, over-quota catch in a mixed fishery is obscene. There must be a better way. We must look forward to the reform of the common fisheries policy. Local management of fisheries is the only measure that will work. There will be a new impetus to conservation when those who carry out the conservation strategies reap direct benefits. We must have an overall EU policy of sustainable fisheries, but that policy must be managed locally. That would provide sustainability for the communities that we serve and that we have mentioned this afternoon. I am disappointed that the SNP made this a debate on the constitution rather than one on fishing, as fishing is far too important for that. However, I am pleased that the SNP backed the minister's stance in the negotiations. I hope that the minister can make progress with the support of the entire chamber.

Given the large amount of traffic on the A830 from Mallaig harbour, safety is often compromised, not only for travellers but for the communities that are cut off when the road is closed due to accidents. That also prohibits further economic development of the harbour. For those reasons, will the minister explore all funding options, including funds available for road safety and economic development?

To ask the Scottish Executive what incentives Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd can offer to encourage provision of new services at Inverness airport. (S1O-4076)

Will the minister tell me what those discounts are and whether they are available to current operators? Furthermore, are they available to new low-cost operators? Finally, how do those discounts fit into the Executive's strategy to encourage air travel to and from the Highlands and Islands?

It is extremely important that we safeguard our natural heritage, not only because, once lost, it can never be replaced, but because of the benefit that we can gain from environmental tourism. To promote environmental tourism in Scotland, we must provide a landscape and wildlife that will attract tourists, but we also need to provide the facilities to enable them to come back. To protect our natural heritage, we need to take with us the people who live and work on the land. There is always tension between those who have cared for our natural heritage through the generations and the public bodies that give the impression that that work has no value. Decision makers sometimes appear remote from the areas that they look after. That is why I and my colleague, Maureen Macmillan, have written to Angus MacKay asking him to review the base of Scottish Natural Heritage. It is my belief that, if that agency were based in the Highlands, decision makers would gain a more in-depth knowledge of the areas that they cover. Large parts of the Highlands are covered by SSSIs and some people who work the land are frustrated by regulation.  Easy access to SNH would alleviate some of those communication problems and encourage partnership working. We must also examine ways of encouraging a proactive role by those who work the land. At present, people are paid large amounts of money to do nothing. I am glad that the minister has addressed that point. We all know of practices that can enhance our natural heritage and we should contract with those who work on the land to carry out those practices and should provide financial help to enable them to do so. That would make a lot more sense than paying someone to do nothing. People who work on the land must also be involved in drawing up the contract, and must have their expertise put to full use. The minister mentioned marine conservation, and I commend to her the work of the Moray Firth Partnership. It has worked with local communities throughout the Moray firth area and is doing much to conserve the local area and the dolphins that live there and which are a huge tourist attraction. To protect our natural heritage, we need to involve local people, who must be at the heart of our policies. We know the value of natural heritage to our people, and local people are the natural protectors of that heritage. We must be able to support them. If we all work together, we will achieve the protection and promotion of our natural heritage.

It is important to remember that no one predicted—no one could have predicted—the outbreak of the disease. With the benefit of hindsight, we can point to things that were not done properly or that could have been thought through better, but that does not alter the fact that the Governments in Westminster and Scotland were faced with a disease that spread more quickly than anyone could imagine it would. The Conservative motion does not mention the fact that the UK Government has announced three inquiries into the impact of the outbreak. Anyone who considers the issue seriously must at least acknowledge the announcement by the UK Government, whether or not they agree with it. I do not believe that a public inquiry would be appropriate, particularly if it began before the inquiries that are in place have reported. However, there is no room for complacency; we must ensure that lessons are learned quickly. The inquiries that the Government has set up mean that we will have conclusions speedily and that we will be able to put in place alternative procedures if the disease should recur. A public inquiry would take much longer. The impact of foot-and-mouth disease and the consequential ban on exports hit farmers and crofters in my constituency severely. A drawn-out public inquiry would not be in their interests—lessons need to be learned now, not only by Government, but by the agriculture industry. We have had reports of farmers breaking movement restrictions and possibly contributing to the spread of the disease. Farmers must ensure that in the future they work collectively for the good of the industry. Although the Executive compensated farmers who were directly affected by foot-and-mouth, those who are suffering as a consequence of the disease require more assistance. The announcement that lamb exports are to resume is a welcome relief, but it is too late for this year for many farmers and crofters in my area. The lamb cull scheme helped and I urged the Executive to extend the scheme to cover cast ewes. The over-supply of lamb in the home market as a result of foot-and-mouth means that it is difficult to see a potential market for cast ewes. I believe that the lamb cull scheme has a surplus, and I ask the Executive to consider an extension and to pass that surplus on to farmers and crofters. Although crofters and farmers on the periphery are suffering badly from the effects of foot-and-mouth, I am sure that they will welcome the Scottish Executive's intention to devise a completely new less favoured areas support scheme. I have urged the Executive to consider  such a scheme for a long time, so I welcome the move. I ask for the scheme to be devised in conjunction with those who are worst affected by the current scheme and for lessons to be learned from other countries. A new scheme that creates a level playing field for Scotland's farmers and crofters will benefit not only them, but the communities that depend on them. The situation is an example of the Government learning from past experience. I am confident that the inquiries that are under way will help the Government to do that.

I would be interested to know how much subsidy would be required for those low-cost airways and how Duncan Hamilton would speak to people in his region and in Tavish Scott's constituency to sell them the idea that money would be used to subsidise those airways while people such as Tavish would still have to pay £400 for a lifeline route.

I congratulate Margaret Ewing on securing the debate and I welcome the context in which we debate the motion. The Scottish Executive is backing the campaign in the Highlands to introduce a PSO for the Inverness to Gatwick route. It is only right that all Highland MSPs should add their support. The Executive's decision to support a PSO for the route has boosted the campaign significantly. Maintaining a direct link to the UK's capital city is a crucial need, as it provides access to the many links that are provided from Gatwick. When the Executive announced its support, Peter Peacock, Maureen Macmillan and I recognised the need to involve local businesses throughout the Highlands in the decision. With our colleague David Stewart MP, we launched a survey of the views of those businesses. The response to our survey was extremely positive. Businesses overwhelmingly support a PSO. Many businesses consider the Gatwick link to be extremely important for the future of their businesses and of tourism. Several respondents wanted the Heathrow link to be restored. I am sympathetic to that view, but I am concerned that if we widen the debate, we will weaken our case. We should concentrate on a PSO for the Gatwick route. If we obtain that, we can look forward to other developments. The link is important not only to people who live around the Moray firth. The fact that the debate was led by the MSP for Moray makes that point clearly. The link is in the interests of the entire Highlands and Islands area. Remote communities have air links to Inverness, which allow people to fly on to Gatwick and beyond. A PSO will give those remote communities benefits. The route is a lifeline for all communities in the  Highlands and Islands. Without it, businesses and tourism will suffer and we will lose the potential for inward investment into those communities. Therefore, I welcome the debate. It is important that we all join together to give the PSO cross-party support. I hope that the minister will give details on how the Executive is pursuing the issue with Westminster and with European colleagues to achieve a successful outcome. I hope that he will also tell us what support back-bench MSPs of all parties can give to ensure that that happens.

To ask the Scottish Executive, in light of the new safety measures at the Ballinluig junction on the A9, what progress is being made to improve safety on other parts of the road. (S1O-3956)

I welcome the work that is being done at North Kessock junction, which is another accident black spot on the A9. What progress has the minister made on addressing the problems on the A9 between Helmsdale and the Ord of Caithness?

Today's debate is extremely important, not only for farmers and crofters but for the whole of rural Scotland. If crofting did not exist, many of the villages and townships in the crofting counties would not survive. Such is the interdependence of agriculture and rural Scotland. We need to create a vision of what we want from farming and crofting and follow it through with policies. It is obvious that EU enlargement and pressure from the World Trade Organisation will mean less investment by way of subsidies, which will have to be decoupled from production. We need to work towards that now, not just at the last minute. When we react at the last minute, we get schemes such as the less favoured areas scheme, which was the wrong policy and which was adopted because of lack of time. We are now left trying to lobby Brussels for changes to a scheme that should not have been introduced in the way that it was.  Farming and crofting cannot be divorced from the greater rural economy. Crofting provides social benefits, such as low-cost housing that would be unachievable without the crofting counties building grants and loans scheme. The environmental benefits of crofting agriculture can be seen in the way that it maintains habitats in the countryside, which can then be sold to tourists. Consumers want more information on the food that they eat and on how it is reared, but crofting has never exploited that market to the full. We need to tap that market to gain the full resources that that can deliver. For those who farm on the periphery, it is difficult to access information on new processes and on what is required to diversify into other sectors of agriculture. It is extremely important that that is addressed and that advice is provided locally to crofters and small farmers.

I have listened to the union's concerns and understand that it is working with others on a strategy for crofting. We need to learn much about crofting through co-operative working. Crofting has always worked co-operatively. In townships, people who have crofts in those areas work together. They need the advice that those townships can use, which they can access and build on. The strategy talks about the environment but does not deal directly with organic farming, which is a growing sector. Much of our organic food is imported—Scotland has a large market that we are not supplying. Our farmers need a strategy to give the correct advice on organic farming in order for them to meet the home market's demands. I would welcome assistance from the Executive for small farmers and crofters in my area who have difficulty accessing that market because of the quality of their ground. Animals are normally sold on to farms for finishing. As a result, small farmers are greatly disadvantaged unless organic farmers purchase those animals directly from them. We require more research into organic techniques that will allow people at the periphery to finish animals and attain that market in their own right. The strategy also talks about land management contracts, through which we will be able to decouple financial support from production. However, before we can enter into those  contracts, we need to know what we want from agriculture in the future. Drawing up an overarching policy will be difficult, because agreement is difficult to reach in a diverse farming industry. Small and large farmers seem to want conflicting results. Our policy needs to recognise the social and economic benefits of farming. Unless our policy addresses that, it will not work in a rural development framework.

Before addressing the substance of the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill, I would like to consider the procedure that was followed for stage 1 of the bill. Members of the Rural Affairs Committee made statements about the bill before it was even published and before the committee had completed its deliberations. That meant that the committee was unable fully to take on board the evidence that it heard. Describing the bill as fundamentally flawed before trying to amend it was at best misguided. Other committees dealing with controversial legislation need to learn lessons from the procedure that was followed at stage 1 of this bill. During that process members should remain open-minded. Because of members' public statements, it was impossible for that Rural Development Committee to reach a consensus on the bill. The way in which decisions were taken on the conclusions of the committee's report left an awful lot to be desired. I quote from the committee minute of 1 May 2001, as it appears in the committee report:  "The Committee agreed to consider the options for the conclusion to the report before resuming consideration of the detailed report." I have never sat on a committee that voted on the conclusion of a report before concluding the writing of that report. At best, that was ineptitude; at worst, it was political opportunism. As with all the legislation that has come before the Parliament, I am concerned about some of the issues that the bill covers. As the bill stands, it will outlaw the practice of using terriers underground to flush out foxes. However, as Mike Watson said, he has spoken to me about that and has accepted that an amendment should be lodged at stage 2 to allow the use of terriers underground to flush out foxes to waiting guns. It is obvious that conditions must be attached to such a measure. For example, an individual who flushes out a fox to a waiting gun would require the relevant licence for that gun. We must ensure that fox baiting is banned.  Members whose only problem with the bill is that it bans terrier work underground have received assurances. I urge those members to support the bill today. We must control fox populations, but that must be done humanely and in a way that causes the least possible suffering. I support the bill's aim of ending cruelty, but the bill must also be practical and enforceable. If it cannot be amended to make it workable, we will have an opportunity to vote against it at stage 3. I will vote for the bill at stage 1 in the knowledge that I can still vote against it at stage 3 if it cannot be amended properly. I urge other members to do the same.

Will the minister consider extending the 90 per cent safety net for another year? That would allow a more considered response to the review of the scheme to ensure that it is workable.

I  congratulate Donald Gorrie on securing the debate. In national carers week, it is right that the Parliament recognises a group of carers who give their time and energy and often receive very little support in return. When I became an MSP, I received a briefing from Sutherland Young Carers Project, which believed that there were more than 70 young carers in Sutherland alone. That is a significant number given the population of the area. I was also amazed at how that group had been able to identify those carers in a remote, rural community. I agree with Donald Gorrie that, as a priority, we must consider ways of identifying young people who are performing the role of carer. The Sutherland, Skye and Lochalsh young carers organisation, for example, has worked closely with schools to identify those involved in caring for a close relative. That includes going to the school and speaking to the pupils. We need to involve other agencies and general practitioners to ensure that the young carers are all identified. In the study that was carried out in Sutherland, one of the young carers was five years old. It is difficult to envisage how children so young could be identified as carers without all the agencies working together. Once carers have been identified, it is essential to give them the support that they need. There are a number of groups in the Highlands and Islands that are trying to doing that. I am impressed with the vision that such groups have shown in bringing support to young people. The distance that many young carers live from one another can hamper efforts to provide support and can reduce their social contact with people who are in a similar situation. One of the ideas that is being put into practice is to encourage more access to e-mail and the internet, which allow young people to contact fellow young carers on a regular basis. That opportunity has been taken up by many young people in the area. Schools have allowed young carers time off to meet carers in other areas, which is a very good thing, because it is not always possible for them to meet people who are in a similar situation. That social contact is very important. I am pleased that in its consultation proposals on new laws to help carers the Government has highlighted proposals for young carers. The report of the Scottish carers legislation working group addressed whether young carers should have statutory rights to assessment. The Executive has pointed out that a statutory right could cause difficulties if parents did not believe that an assessment was warranted. However, I have discussed the issue with carers groups, which generally favour the right to an assessment. They acknowledge that cases must be handled  sensitively and that an assessment of the whole family's needs may be required. If the whole family were assessed and additional care were put in place, that would take the pressure off the young carer and remove the care burden from them. It is essential that young people should be able to reach out for help without the threat of a family break-up. They need to know that their family can be supported and can remain as a unit. There are also less obvious ways in which young carers can be supported. Ensuring that carers in remote rural communities have proper access to services and transport is a key issue. I encourage the Scottish Executive to address that issue across departments and other interests. I am sure that the Executive will act on the views that it receives in the consultation and will ensure that all carers groups feel that they have an input. It is important that in the consultation the Executive targets young carers, who often do not realise that they are carers. They have no preparation, no training and no example to follow. Their lives are turned upside down. In rural areas social isolation is compounded by physical isolation. The least that we can do is listen to their views about what they need and endeavour to produce a real change for them. I hope that the Parliament and the Executive will keep this issue high on the agenda and work together to help an important sector of our community.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made with its review of strategic planning. (S1O-3576)

The minister may be aware of the concerns that have been expressed by communities about their role in strategic planning. For example, constituents in Laid in Sutherland have concerns about a proposed superquarry in their area, but feel that their concerns are being ignored. Can the minister offer them any reassurance about their input into the decision-making process?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will ensure that all health professionals play a full role in NHSScotland. (S1O-3481)

Does the minister agree that nurses and doctors who work on the frontline of health care are more than equipped to help with any decisions on the future priorities of NHSScotland? Furthermore, will she ensure that those health care professionals are involved in decision making, so that patients' needs are adequately addressed?

I, too, congratulate Tavish Scott on securing the debate. There is no doubt that GP provision is extremely important to people in rural and remote communities. For them, it is the front line of access to health care, and it is vital that the service meets their needs. I agree with a lot of the sentiment behind Tavish Scott's motion and I pay tribute to the work of the remote and rural resource centre at Raigmore hospital. More work needs to be undertaken to consider the particular challenges of recruitment and retention of GPs in rural and remote areas. We need to highlight the benefits of rural practices to GPs and other health professionals. Such practices provide a better quality of life and work experience that is not available anywhere else. GPs in remote areas are at the front line of medical and emergency services, which gives them a range of skills that they could not attain anywhere else. If we are to give people access to GPs, high on-call commitments will always be part of working patterns in remote areas, but we should explore ways of compensating for that, such as using salaried GPs and allowing more time off by expanding the provision of locums. I will concentrate on one local issue, which is the on-going dispute between Highland Primary Care NHS Trust and local residents in Helmsdale, about proposals to merge their GP services with the Brora practice. There is considerable frustration and anger among local residents about the way in which the proposals have been handled. There has been a series of public meetings, but far from rectifying the situation, they have added to the sense of frustration. Against the wishes of the community, the trust has now decided to extend the Brora practice so that it will also cover the Helmsdale area. The issue that is at the heart of the dispute is that Helmsdale residents want access to a local GP, but do not feel that the current proposals address that wish properly. They also believe that the trust has forced changes through without taking on board the views of the community. I find it difficult to understand how trusts are influenced by Government policy. The thrust of the Government policy, as shown by the Arbuthnott recommendations, is to decentralise and in so doing to recognise the needs of rural and remote communities. The perception among residents in Helmsdale and elsewhere is precisely the opposite. The trust's decisions seem to run against the thrust of Executive policy. The lack of meaningful consultation and of implementation of Government policy on the ground need to be addressed. The issues need to be resolved to hold the confidence of communities.

To ask the First Minister what benefits the first two years of devolution have delivered for the people of Scotland. (S1F-1071)

Does the First Minister agree that the principle of devolving power cannot stop at this Parliament? Does he accept that we need to continue bringing government closer to the people? Will he ensure that civil service job dispersal does not slip off the Executive's agenda?

I congratulate Margaret Ewing on securing this debate. Her motion has attracted much cross-party support, which is an indication—if any were needed—of the strength of feeling on this issue. I welcome representatives of the McDermott pension plan action group and the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union to the gallery. They have put much time and effort into ensuring that justice is done for themselves and other members of the pension plan. Like other members, I have contacted McDermott International to find out the reasoning behind its decision to wind up the plan and to give part of the surplus to its shareholders. McDermott International has benefited from a reduction in national insurance and has not contributed to the pension plan since the mid-1980s; it has benefited from the plan in the past and sadly its wish to continue to benefit is very evident. McDermott International's response has been wholly inadequate. In its first letter to me, the company stated that if there is a winding-up of the plan and a surplus is in existence, it has "sole discretion to direct the destination of that 'surplus'." McDermott International has exercised that discretion. It has made a choice. It has decided to benefit its shareholders instead of making a significant difference to the future of many workers and ex-workers who have loyally served the company in the past. The company has also failed to engage properly with the campaign by workers. I was astonished by its constant refusal to meet with unions; however, a meeting finally took place on 3 April. Why has the company been so unwilling to engage properly with the very people who worked for it? It says that it has fulfilled all its obligations to plan members, but if it is so sure of its case, why has it been so reluctant to defend its actions? I hope that members recall that we are not talking about a few hundred—or indeed a few thousand—pounds that McDermott International wishes to keep, but about 65 per cent of the £31 million left in the pension plan. That is an enormous sum of money in anyone's books. The  company claims that it has been more than generous, but when the disabled workers who contributed to the pension do not receive any disability pension, how can such a claim stand up? The issue can be summed up in the two words fairness and justice. For many years, McDermott International has been able to count on the support and loyalty of a dedicated work force and the company has made an important contribution to Ardersier, where it was held in high esteem. By seeking to keep money that morally belongs to workers, it has damaged its reputation. That damage has been compounded by the way it has high-handedly brushed aside the views and concerns of its workers. I hope that all parties can send a clear message to McDermott International that its decision must be reversed. It must fully take on board the concerns of its employees and ex-employees and ensure that those people receive the money they are morally entitled to.

The point needs to be stressed that the committee's report was drawn up as an academic assessment of the needs of rural communities and of the barriers that they face. The report's aim was to provide information for decision makers at every level—the Executive, local councils, enterprise companies, businesses and the committee. At no point was the report meant to be seen as a criticism of the Executive's work, as the motion makes clear. The Executive's response shows that the issues that concern the Rural Development Committee also cause the Executive concern and the Executive is working to address them. Creating employment in rural areas and thereby defeating poverty is difficult. There is no one solution; rural Scotland is diverse. An example of the difficulty can be found in my constituency. The community in the Kintyre peninsula, which George Lyon also spoke about, suffered an economic downturn when the Royal Air Force base was closed. The people also lost their links with Northern Ireland and now face the closure of the Jaeger factory. Some years ago, a working group was set up to address the downturn in the local economy. The Kintyre initiative working group brings together agencies involved in development as well as organisations from the voluntary sector. I and my colleague, Maureen Macmillan, have made it a priority to attend the working group's meetings.  The closure of the Jaeger factory will lead to huge job losses in an area where there are few alternatives. The working group has never given up. This morning, it met Alasdair Morrison to seek his assistance to find solutions. I am really pleased that Alasdair Morrison responded so quickly to the request that he meet the group, which came from me, Maureen Macmillan and Peter Peacock. I am glad that the meeting has now taken place. We all know that there are options in the pipeline, which need to be progressed quickly. This morning, we heard on the news that a major investment is to go ahead. I understand that some fine details are to be tied up, but I hope that that can be done in the next few days and that 150 new jobs will be created in the area. A huge amount of work has gone into attracting such investment to the area, which underlines the fact that solutions are hard to find. If anywhere should be a magnet for inward investment, Campbeltown should. Although its geographical location gives it the same disadvantage as the islands, its air and sea links are good. Its work force is stable and multiskilled. There is a strong sense of community and people work together for the greater good. Financial support from the Government is not an issue. The local enterprise company has said that its current projects have the support that they require and that it foresees no problem in obtaining more support, should suitable projects be identified. We need to show companies the benefits of locating in rural areas. We also need diverse industries in rural areas so that a downturn in one industry does not affect large sections of the community. As Cathy Peattie said, the Rural Development Committee's report recognises the advantages of bottom-up initiatives, which allow communities to look for local solutions. That is what happens in Kintyre. We need to support such participation in rural areas and ensure that communities themselves can find solutions. Many of the solutions that are proposed by the people and agencies in Kintyre are not small projects. They are not afraid to think big and to use the assets around them to provide jobs and investment in the area. We need to convince all rural communities to follow that example and to support them when they do.

I ask for clarification on foot-and-mouth disease and the island of Skye. Under the licensed movement regulations, Skye is considered an island and no one can get a licence to move animals on to it. I understand that, under the relaxation of movements on islands that was outlined today, Skye is considered to be part of the mainland and will not have movements relaxed. Will the Deputy First Minister confirm whether Skye will be given island status under foot-and-mouth regulations and whether that status will be applied consistently for all those regulations?

I also welcome the statement; I seek clarification on a couple of points. The minister said that movements to and from common grazings would be relaxed. Does that relaxation apply to common grazings only on islands, or does it include crofting communities, which would help welfare problems? Furthermore, will the minister confirm whether Skye is being considered as an island or as part of the mainland? Will he join me in asking east coast farmers to be patient with crofters and farmers with overwintered stock on their property, as that stock will now be moved on 16 April?

Many of the issues already raised in this debate have been technical. Rather than concentrate on the big picture, I want to examine the lasting effects that the funds are having on the ground. We should bear in mind the fact that the funds are given to provide sustainable development and to promote equal opportunities. Last year, I visited North Highland College. Its staff showed me their jobs-for-all project, which preceded European funding. The project was set up to help people with disabilities and learning difficulties get back to work. The college brings in work from local companies to its on-site factory. The clients then become workers. They are paid a wage and work in a very sheltered environment. When they have built up their skills and confidence, they move to the employer's premises. They have a buddy with them, who ensures that they are not overwhelmed by the experience. When their confidence builds and they are happy with their working environment, their buddy leaves, and, employed by the company, they are left to get on with the job. Bearing in mind the fact that many of those people have never had jobs before, the difference that is made is enormous. Not only do they gain employment; they gain confidence and new skills, and make friendships. The challenges that are set to the people in that situation mean that their self-development is enhanced. Some people have said that they are hardly recognisable as the folk who joined the project initially. Structural funds also encourage equal opportunities in other ways, particularly with regard to the contribution of women in the workplace. In rural areas, it is important to consider that, given the male domination of traditional industries. Structural funds are being used to get women back to work after career breaks, when they are looking after young children or elderly relatives. The funding is used to give women choices, to introduce them to new skills, to give them assertiveness training and to make them aware of the fields that they can enter, showing them that they do not necessarily have to follow careers that are traditional for women, as most such jobs are low paid in the Highlands. Work is also undertaken to make employers consider their working practices, not just in making them aware of the equal opportunities legislation, but in making them aware that they can change practices in order to allow women to continue  working when they have dependants. That can lead to employers examining the question of working hours. Are the present working patterns necessary? Employers are also encouraged to consider crèche provision for their employees, and ways in which they can allow women to progress their careers and meet their caring commitments. Child care training is given a priority. It is all very well to provide jobs for women, but if there are no facilities for child care, the women are pushed out of the working environment. Society has moved far enough to understand that women want to be able to look after children and relatives, but also want a satisfying career. We know that their contribution is not only necessary, but desirable. This debate has given us a chance to highlight such issues: to show how the money makes a real difference to individuals in the Highlands and Islands. The funding there would be greatly reduced if we followed the SNP's calls for Inverness to be excluded. I am very happy that the Government fought for the additional funding, which has made a huge difference to people in the Highlands and Islands.

I thank the minister for arranging to hold the debate and for his regular statements to the Parliament at this very difficult time. There are many issues that we need to consider when all this is over, but there are a few that we need to consider now. First, I ask that the Scottish Crofters Union be involved in talks and decision making about foot-and-mouth disease. I know that the crofting counties are not directly affected by foot-and-mouth, but we cannot be complacent. Should they become affected, we would have to deal with the outbreak differently. Crofts are not contained, and sheep from different crofts mix together in the township and on the hill. One case of foot-and-mouth could wipe out at least a whole township and possibly an awful lot more. At the Rural Development Committee this week, I asked the minister whether there was a risk of spreading the disease from the Moray firth when wintering sheep are taken home from the Moray firth to crofts in the Highlands. There will be pressure to return those sheep, as the farms where they are placed at the moment will want to begin their planting in the spring. The response that I received was that the serological testing  would take place on a pro-rata basis to demonstrate to the EU that the UK was disease-free, but it was not clear when that testing would take place. I ask that that testing take place once the culls in low-risk areas are completed. That would allow the movement of animals to be carried out with less risk. My second question for the minister concerns abattoirs. When he made his first statement on the disease, I asked him whether he would consider funding small abattoirs to enable meat to be processed locally. Animals travelling long distances have been shown to be a major contributor to the spread of the outbreak and the minister admitted that the lack of abattoirs is holding back the disposal of culled animals. In the House of Commons yesterday, Charles Kennedy said that "one of the things that needs serious searching attention is the absence, all too often, of abattoirs in various parts of the country and the knock-on effect that that is having, not least in the present crisis, with the moving of animals and the traceability of the problem itself".—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 21 March 2001; Vol 365, c 340.] I ask the minister to reconsider that option. Although I understand that it cannot be undertaken as a quick fix and will take time to put in place, I think that it is important that we begin to address that problem. Not only would it control the spread of disease, but it would allow farmers to add value to their product locally. It is important to give information to the public. I know that the Scottish Executive rural affairs department is working hard to provide up-to-date information on its website. I very much appreciate that work, but many people do not watch television or read the newspapers daily, and they are left with the impression that mixed messages are being sent out. All of us who are involved in dealing with the outbreak know that advice needs to change with time to suit the current situation. We need to get that message over to the public, who also need to know where they can access the most up-to-date information, albeit that that information may change from time to time depending on the situation in which we find ourselves. The public also need to be made more aware of why we are taking the decisions that we are taking. Many people question the decisions that are made. If they had the information behind those decisions, they would understand and adhere to the advice that is being issued. Information is an important tool for encouraging people to work together to beat the disease. In the long term, we need to look at how we farm and what our markets are. For too long, we have encouraged commodity production and I feel that we have to move away from that. However, that is for future discussion. I would also like the minister to speak to the Scottish Agricultural College.  Jamie Stone mentioned at question time that the Thurso veterinarian centre is due to close in the very near future. I ask the minister whether he could meet with people from the lab, or at least speak with the college to ask it to defer the decision until the outbreak is over and we can assess whether we need the lab. It is important that we all work together. I pay tribute to the other parties in the Parliament, which have supported the Executive. It is important and makes the work of the Executive much easier at this difficult time.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made towards the establishment of a Highlands and Islands transport authority. (S1O-3163)

Does the minister agree that the transport problems of the Highlands and Islands can be addressed fully only through a transport authority, a policy that the Labour party has promoted for many years? I recently visited Shetland, where there are real concerns about whether there will be an authority. Will the minister take on board those concerns and ensure that the momentum for an authority is not lost? Will she bring an update report to the Parliament before the end of the year?

I welcome action to ensure that fares are kept under review, and I ask the minister what steps are being taken to ensure that community groups, especially on the islands, are fully involved in the consultation process.

I thank the minister for his statement and express my support for the measures that he has taken. Our overriding concern must be for the farmers and their families in rural areas, who are going through a period of great anxiety at the moment. Would it be useful to consider setting up temporary abattoirs in rural areas to allow animals to enter the food chain without having to travel great distances? That could help those farmers who are not directly affected by foot-and-mouth disease. It could also help the supply of Scottish and British products in the food chain. Will the minister give advice on what action should be taken by members of the public? For example, people who use airports and railway stations may come into contact with people from other areas. Are there any steps that they should be taking?

I welcome the Health and Community Care Committee's report. In my speech, I will concentrate on rural areas. Everyone knows that the provision of institutional care is expensive—it costs a lot of money to build a building and thus it is not possible to build care homes in many of the sparsely populated areas in the Highlands and Islands. Many couples who have been married for 40 or 50 years have to be parted so that one of them can go into care because the other cannot look after them any more. Friends are moved out their communities and are no longer able to keep in touch. The people of Ullapool may have thought themselves quite lucky when Westminster Health Care decided to build a nursing home there. The home was beautiful and many elderly people thought, "That's where I'll go when I need care. It will keep me close to my family and friends." Unfortunately, the nursing home that people in Ullapool quite rightly perceive as their own is now under threat. They have tried to get help from different agencies, such as the health service and local councils, to get funding or to examine other uses for the home, which is not anywhere close to full—it caters for only a small number of people—but they have had difficulty getting help and many people cannot quite understand why agencies are not able to work together. It is difficult enough  when we are dealing with a community-owned venture, but the difficulties are greater when we are dealing with a private venture. People in Ullapool look to the south and to the facilities that are available in Lochcarron. They are amazed by the Howard Doris Centre, which has nursing beds, care beds, general practitioner beds and convalescent beds, and which provides day care and respite care as well as housing and sheltered housing services. The people of Ullapool wonder how such a facility could be developed. The answer is that the people of Lochcarron were lucky—they had a trust fund and were able to use that money to draw down money from health boards and local government. It seems that the only way communities can get the care they need is by having their own money. The people in Ullapool do not have their own money. We need to tackle those issues. Rural areas are unable to sustain a separate nursing home, a separate care home and a GP-led centre with GP beds. Everything has to be put together. Many agencies have looked at other ways of dealing with rural areas and problems. The Church of Scotland, for example, has travelling respite for dementia carers. People set up in a village hall, provide a nurse to look after dementia sufferers and give carers a day, or less than a day, off. That gives carers a chance to shop or get some sleep. Crossroads is under stress: it has more requests for help than it can cope with.

We need to look at different ways of helping people in rural areas. I could say a lot more, but I will finish on that note and let the final speaker in.

I share the First Minister's disappointment about what Fergus Ewing's motion will do to the agricultural business development scheme. Does the First Minister agree that crofting is a successful way of enabling people to remain in rural communities? Will he ensure that this type of land tenure can be extended to other areas? Will he make a commitment to agree to review schemes such as the less favoured areas scheme to ensure that young people have an economically viable future in crofting?

We are all aware of the problems of the wild salmon fishery and of the reasons for the need for this bill so I will not repeat them. It is obvious that we need more research, but I am sure that some is taking place and the bill allows us to gather, consolidate and make use of that research. The bill has been criticised as being too little, too late, because it addresses only rivers and is only enabling legislation, but I am sure that that criticism will be allayed by the minister's statement this morning of her intention to introduce a green paper. Others have complained that the bill is an infringement of their human rights because it allows Scottish ministers and district salmon fishery boards to legislate on the way that they fish. It has also been argued that the bill gives too much power to district salmon fishery boards and/or Scottish ministers—people can take their pick. The fact that all those arguments have been made leads me to believe that the balance between the powers given to each of the bodies has been struck properly. A lot of the objections can be put down to suspicion of the unknown, because the measures that will be taken will not become clear until the secondary legislation is in place. The bill does allow the secondary legislation to address local circumstances. That is important, as a lot of the evidence that we have taken has shown that there are many reasons for the downturn in salmon stocks, depending on the river. The bill allows for local solutions to problems. Contrary to many rumours the legislation will be consulted on—everyone involved will have a voice. I hope that by the end of the day the legislation will be in place and that we will have another tool to tackle salmon conservation. We must look forward to consider how the bill will be used. We must never forget that without salmon there will be no fishery. Those who feel that their interests are being affected by the bill should consider that—if there were no fishery, their interests would be severely affected.  We must also consider the way forward. Many issues that came up for discussion cannot be part of this bill. We need to consider the make-up and role of district salmon fishery boards. Not all rivers have boards and the make-up of boards is not uniform. Some boards are progressive and do a lot of good work; others are not and do not. We need to examine the legislation that governs them and ensure that best practice is put in place throughout the country. We must consider too the role of water bailiffs and whether their powers are relevant in a modern society. If they are, we must consider standardisation, training and accountability. If they are not, we must consider other options for policing rivers. All those are questions that must be addressed in the future and that could not have been addressed under the bill. I urge members to support the bill and to put local solutions in place that will conserve salmon.

I welcome the news that the UK has secured a good deal on nephrops and that the cut in the TAC has been reduced. Many of the fishermen in fragile communities on the west coast in my constituency are dependent on the prawn fishery, which is vital to the local economy. Many of those fishermen use static gear, which has no bycatch. Will the minister use that information to seek a further reduction in the TAC cut?

I, too, welcome the debate. It is helpful to have had the debate at short notice—it shows that the Parliament can react to current events. I am disappointed that Fergusons has pulled out of building one of the ships, but I am glad that that does not mean that there will be a delay to the service. I welcome the improvements in the service—the new vessels and the improved timetable. I welcome especially the fact that the new vessels will be safer and will fit the purpose for which they were designed. However, I want to know whether the minister has ensured that the new ferries have good disabled access. The lack of disabled access has been a problem on many of the older ferries that serve the coast of Scotland. It is important that we ensure that any  new ferries that are built have good disabled access. The increased services will be welcomed, especially by the people of Orkney, who have a long journey up the A9 to get to Scrabster to catch the ferry. The increased services will mean that the people of Orkney can use that route with more confidence. However, will the minister ensure that there is integrated public transport? I have often heard people in Orkney complain that they sail into Scrabster harbour, only to see the bus leave. It is important to ensure that there is a dedicated ferry bus, which would encourage people to use public transport on that route. I also welcome the lower fares. Will those fares be extended to haulage and tractors on the ferries? Many crofters and farmers in the northern isles have told me about the increased costs that they face for feedstuffs and transporting livestock. Lower fares would help them at a time when they are struggling to make ends meet. I congratulate the minister on the consultation exercise that was carried out for the service. Many people in the northern isles appreciated that. I know that the people of Scrabster appreciated the minister's visit earlier this year. I would like to comment on the P&O road haulage services between the northern isles. Although I understand that that does not fall within the minister's remit, I ask her to monitor the situation to ensure that those services are not affected.

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Executive is taking to widen access to higher education in the Highlands and Islands. (S1F-738)

I agree that one of the most important aspects of the University of the Highlands and Islands project is that it will bring learning to remote areas. Will the First Minister ensure that the project is funded in a manner that allows small learning centres to flourish, thereby allowing people to access education in their own communities?

The minister will be aware that capping individuals who receive huge amounts of public funding will free up finance. Does he agree that that money could be used to provide additional payments to those who deploy sustainable and environmentally friendly farming methods? Furthermore, does he recognise that the crofting system provides those benefits as well as allowing people to remain in rural areas?

I welcome the opportunity to discuss sea fishing before the meeting of the European council of fisheries ministers. We are all aware of the problems with white fish stocks, which we must deal with now if we want a fishery for our children. I am encouraged by the steps that have been taken to regulate the Rockall fishery, which will lead to sustainability in that area, but we must find ways of managing fisheries in other areas in order to create a sustainable industry. We must involve fishermen in that work. Conservation methods are not worth the paper on which they are written unless those working in the area are signed up to them. We must use the knowledge that fishermen have. Many have fished those areas for years and know their fishing grounds; they know where fish spawn, where young fish are and where they can make good quality catches. We must take an holistic approach to the problem, rather than simply target one fishery, which is an approach that leads to missed opportunities for conservation. We must consider the marine environment as a whole and address pollution and bad practice. To coin a phrase, we need a joined-up policy on fishing. Zonal management would go a long way to achieving such a policy, but we must ensure that all involved are working towards the same goals. There is little point making an effort towards conservation in one area if that effort is being undermined in another area. Fish do not recognise boundaries. We must also examine the systems that we use to manage fisheries. I am unsure if the right approach is that of total allowable catches, because it creates bycatches—dead fish that cannot be landed because the fishing boat is over quota for that species or because the fish are too  immature. Throwing dead fish back into the sea is an incredible waste. We must consider implementing a system that allows people to buy extra quotas to enable them to land fish that they have caught but for which they have no quota. That system would reduce waste. This year, it looks unlikely that we will use our total allowable catch for haddock and cod. Therefore, there must be a way of making quotas available at ports where fishermen could buy extra quota to land those species of fish. While that might be less profitable, it would not encourage overfishing. Fishermen recognise the problems of bycatches and I acknowledge the steps that they have taken to lead the way in conserving fish stocks by fitting square-mesh panels. However, there will always be a bycatch; the challenge is to reduce it while ensuring that we find ways in which to avoid the practice of throwing dead fish back into the sea. Bycatches encourage predators by creating a ready food supply for seabirds and seals, which also feed on live fish, putting more pressure on the fishery. We are told that there is overfishing of sand eels, which means that the food source of haddock and cod is being exploited. Many of those catches are being used to feed fish in fish farms, and I wonder whether thought has been given to using the bycatch of immature fish for feeding fish in fish farms. We would need to examine that approach in order to ensure that it did not encourage bycatches, but it would be less wasteful than throwing fish over the side. We must also consider alternative fisheries, such as the pelagic fisheries, which have been mentioned. We all know what happened to the herring fishery during the 1970s; we must consider whether there are ways of adding value to it by encouraging consumers to buy herring. Many of the points that I have made are relevant to the review of the common fisheries policy and must be considered. The total allowable catch approach is a blunt instrument and we must consider ways in which it can be refined. We should aim for sustainability and conservation, instead of starving our fish and feeding their predators, which is what we are doing at present.

I welcome the statement and in particular the allocations for Argyll and Bute Council and for Highland Council, whose additional costs for serving island communities have been taken into account for the first time. Will the minister continue to review deprivation indicators, given that they tend to focus on urban areas and miss rural deprivation?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to improve monitoring of fishing in international waters. (S1O-2619)

Is the minister aware of the importance of the Rockall fishery to the Highlands and Islands? Is she aware that that fishery is threatened by significant overfishing by unregulated Russian vessels? What steps are being taken to address that serious situation?

Many people have spoken about the importance of salmon fisheries and I am glad that that has been acknowledged across the chamber. A lot of income comes from salmon fisheries, much of which is not quantified because the industry is so fragmented. The parties obviously agree on the general principles of the bill; the only cause for disagreement is in the details. When the Rural Affairs Committee took evidence, much of the discussion concerned possible solutions in  secondary legislation that would flow from this bill. Much of it also concerned issues that were wider than the scope of the bill. To an extent, that has happened today as well. However, we have to remember that this is enabling legislation. It has to fit the solutions that we have in mind at the moment and which may appear in the future. We should not lose sight of that. There has been criticism of the fact that the bill gives ministers powers to make legislation. People have argued that that should be open only to the district salmon fishery boards. That argument ignores the fact that some areas do not have a district salmon fishery board. Some fishery boards give conservation a high priority while others do not. We have heard about the variety of boards that are in place. The ones that are serious about conservation are happy for ministers to have such powers because they do not want to work in a vacuum. Another issue is that of the blanket powers that are given in the bill, which bring in regulations that cover all rivers. There have been concerns about those powers because conservation and management have been carried out on a river or area basis. That approach has worked well in the past and will do so in the future. Many different issues have caused the decline in salmon and we know that there is not one solution. However, there are some issues that would benefit from blanket regulations. One example would be a provision that all proprietors give uniform information to their boards. The boards would benefit greatly from such information being provided in a standard way. At the moment that information is quite haphazard. That would enable boards to compare like with like and would enhance the ability to use such information as the scientific basis for research, rather than hearsay on which we cannot rely. Some concern was expressed about the time length of the regulations. Historically, we have seen that conservation regulations have been hard to revoke. I welcome the minister's comments on the time-limiting of the regulations. Time limits should be the rule rather than the exception. That does not prevent similar regulations from being put in place, but these regulations would have to go through the same consultation process as the initial regulations, allowing us to consider whether the regulations had any current value. A time limit would also give some comfort to those people who fear that their rights might be compromised by the regulations. Alex Fergusson spoke about the netsmen, who have a great concern that the balance between their fishery and the angling fishery is not right. We must give them some comfort and ensure that we get that balance right. John Home Robertson mentioned the role of the  water bailiffs, which was an issue that I brought up in committee. He also made some good points about the role of the district salmon fishery boards. However, I understand that work is well under way to examine the salmon legislation with a view to its consolidation. I hope that John Home Robertson's comments are borne in mind when that is carried out. We must ensure that other interests are involved—which does not happen often—and that there is proper representation on salmon fishery boards. We must work with national and international partners and find a global solution to the problem. Recently, I spoke to the chair of the Icelandic fisheries committee, who appeared surprised at my concern about the decline in salmon fisheries. He firmly believed that it was a cyclical problem and he shrugged his shoulders and looked at me as though I was making a fuss about nothing. Perhaps he is right. However, Iceland does not have fish farms or drift-netters; it has only angling fisheries. Therefore, it does not follow that Iceland experiences the same problems as we do. Nevertheless, the chair of the fisheries committee may be right because about 60 years ago and 60 years before that there were drastic declines in salmon numbers. If that is the case, we must ensure that the climate is right for salmon to come back and breed in our waters to allow salmon to increase their numbers again. That is the bottom line. The more salmon that return to our rivers, the more they spawn and the more salmon will be available to future generations. The bill is a step towards salmon conservation and is therefore extremely welcome.

On the matter of gifts and hospitality, members of staff very often stay with relatives, friends or party members when visiting areas on MSP business. If that needs to be registered as hospitality in the register of staff members' interests, people might be dissuaded from offering such a service, which saves the taxpayer money.

I too would like to welcome today's statement. Is the minister willing to give farmers and crofters access to officials prior to submitting their forms? If forms could be checked over by officials from within the department, clerical errors could be picked up, which could avoid the need to use the appeals system.

I would argue that I was involved in the passage of the bill. I signed it and sat on the Rural Affairs Committee which considered it. However, I will keep my comments short, because it is very difficult to find something new to say about such an excellent bill. The bill may set a few records. First, it is likely to be the first member's bill to be passed by the Parliament. Secondly, for a long time it will probably hold the record of being the shortest bill considered by the Parliament. Thirdly, the smallest amount of parliamentary time will have been spent  on it. It will be very difficult to beat those records. The bill shows that the Parliament can work. Following two failed attempts to take the bill through Westminster, the Scottish Parliament—after just over a year of existence—will approve it. That shows that back benchers can change the law, which is important and should be welcomed by all members.

I welcome the minister's statement, including the additional spending on roads, the additional spending in the Highlands and Islands and the additional spending on council roads, to mention just a few of the measures. The minister mentioned having discussions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities about council road spending. Will she emphasise the need for spending on council roads in the Highlands and Islands? They are badly in need of repair and are essential to the people who use them.

I also welcome the minister's announcement. She said that the measures that have been announced should tackle inequalities. Can she confirm that the funding should be used to expand health care services in rural communities?

I congratulate Irene McGugan on securing the debate; I agree with the sentiments in her motion. Having our native languages included in those European projects would give them a great boost. Although funding has been invested in the Gaelic language, there is always the need for more—for example, to provide education not only for young people but for parents in the areas where Gaelic has skipped a generation. Not many people have been as lucky as John Farquhar Munro in having a teacher who spoke Gaelic. Winnie Ewing mentioned the ploy that was used by her parents of speaking the Scots language when they were trying to keep a secret from her. Imagine the plight of the parents when the children reverse the roles and speak Gaelic to keep secrets from them. Our languages would benefit not only from the increased resources but from the increased status that European Union funding would bring. It would help promotion of the languages, by encouraging innovative projects. For example, we should encourage Scottish companies to greet callers in one of our native languages: that would raise awareness of our culture. Many people want Gaelic and Scots to flourish, and it is essential that all the groups that want that to happen unite in a common cause. I urge the Executive to do all that it can to ensure that those languages are designated for European funding.

Can the minister give an assurance that the Scottish Tourist Board will highlight the availability of LPG throughout the Highlands and Islands? Given that many European motorists use dual-fuel cars, that could give a much-needed boost to tourism in the area.

I am glad to have this opportunity to speak about UHI, and I congratulate George Lyon on securing the debate. It is such an innovative project, and was never just going to be rubber-stamped. It must show that it is as good as, if not better than, other universities. I grew up in one of the more rural areas covered by UHI. Like many other people, I left home for further education. Some, however, did not, and that decision had to be made at a very early age. That is why it comes as no surprise to me that half the UHI students are over 25—around my own age. I dare say that most of them are accessing  further education for the first time. In the western isles, 70 per cent of school leavers go on to further education; 40 per cent go on to higher education, compared to the Scottish average of a third. Before UHI was set up, all the students going on to higher education would have had to leave home. UHI will help stop the brain drain, as it allows young people to decide where they are going to study. Half UHI's students are full time and half are part time. That shows that people who are employed, or who are full-time carers, can also take the opportunity to study. That assists lifelong learning, which is possibly more important in rural areas because of a lack of choice in career opportunities. The development of community learning centres in my constituency has met with overwhelming support. Education is now available in small villages, and there are more than 50 community learning centres. The access to those small community learning centres is the big picture, and we must never forget that. Certain personalities receive more attention from the press and politicians, but that is insignificant when compared with the thousands of people who will benefit from the UHI project. Designation as a university will come if we do not lose sight of the big picture. I hope that we can all unite behind UHI.

Is the minister aware that although in the past 16 months there have been substantial increases in petrol prices—around 20 per cent or more in parts of the Highlands and Islands—fuel tax has accounted for less than 2p of that increase? That is far less than the 15 per cent increase in taxation promised by the SNP in its budget for independence. What assurance can the minister give to the many people who live in areas such as mine, including elderly people, who have felt neglected by transport policies in the past because they do not drive?

Our linguistic heritage was debated in the Rural Affairs Committee and the Executive proposed an amendment to section 33 to include language in cultural heritage, which is mentioned in the first of the park aims. I am sympathetic to the amendment, as it aims to promote Gaelic, but I feel that the Executive's amendment takes that into account. I prefer "language" to "Gaelic" because, historically, more than one language has been spoken in Scotland. During the committee stages of the debate, reference was made to Gaelic and Scots, but those are limiting. A national park could be set up in, say, Shetland, which might consider its linguistic heritage, Norse, rather than Gaelic or Scots. While I would do everything I could to promote Gaelic, that does not mean that I demean other people's linguistic heritage. Although I support the sentiments behind the amendment, I do not support it.

I am pleased that the minister has lodged amendment 2. As she said, I had concerns about this matter at stage 2, when I was told that an amendment would be brought forward. I welcome the amendment. Although I find it inconceivable that it would be possible to propose a national park without considering the financial implications, it is important that the bill should include such a requirement. It would also be helpful to identify the costs of other agencies—for example, local authorities and enterprise companies that work in a national park area. I am talking not about the costs that they might have if they had representation on the park board, but about the additional costs that they might have by providing services within a park area. The report may have to look into that. Identifying such costs might not be possible until the park board is set up, but it should be borne in  mind.

It has been good to debate the way forward for agriculture, but I am a little disappointed that some members have wasted the opportunity. We are all aware of the problems that the sector has faced for the past few years. The Rural Affairs Committee spent the first few months in this Parliament dealing with various crises. We appeared to spend all our time fire fighting. That was also true for the chamber. That is why the Labour party welcomes this consultation.  I agree with Alasdair Morgan and Elaine Murray, who said that for too long we have been involved in crisis management and have never looked forward for a future strategy. A strategy should have been looked for a long time ago. We need to put priorities in place now—priorities that will protect the farming industry, not just the status quo. We need to have an industry that will provide us with competitive produce for this century. To do that, we have to learn from experience. We have to look at other countries and their farming industries and to learn from our own success stories. Cathy Jamieson again gave her support to the Agricultural Wages Board. The Labour party—the party that introduced the national minimum wage—also supports the retention of the Agricultural Wages Board. Over the years, it has protected the terms and conditions of agricultural workers. We need to sustain agriculture for owners and employees.  I was particularly pleased to read in yesterday's The Herald that the demand for crofts is outstripping availability. There is much to be learned from crofting. Outside the crofting counties, agriculture policy has done nothing to keep people on the land. Much of the best farming land in Scotland has been used to form large farms, which has pushed people off the land in much of rural Scotland. As Robin Harper said, the distribution of CAP funding does nothing to discourage that. In my view, it encourages it, because there is no capping on the amount that one person can claim, therefore the bigger the farm, the more is gained. That encourages landowners not to rent small farms, but to form large concerns. We should look at the example of France. It has succeeded in keeping people in rural areas and has a buoyant farming sector. Agriculture and the availability of land keeps people in rural areas. If there are no opportunities, they must move away, which means that the rural economy suffers. Crofting has stopped that happening in most of the fragile areas of Scotland. We must see whether we can use good practice in other areas. Agriculture must also change to meet the needs of the consumer. There is no point in producing something that nobody wants to buy. Cathy Jamieson mentioned some of the concerns of consumers; they must be taken on board. By processing produce locally, we can meet those needs, selling it in a form that appeals to consumers, which will lead to an increase in our market.

I agree that there are huge problems, but I do not agree that in the 21 st century it is beyond our wit to find solutions. That is why we need the consultation process to look at how we can finish products locally and sell them locally. That would add value, provide jobs in rural areas and maximise the sale of produce from farms. We must consider all those objectives, to create an industry for the 21 st century. The Labour party supports the strategy to address the long-term needs of the industry.

I welcome the opportunity to reflect on the experience of the first budgeting process. Although many comments this afternoon appear to be critical of the process and the consultation, we should bear in mind the fact that—as the Finance Committee has acknowledged and welcomed—this is a first. Such a process has never happened before, and the committee feels that it should be built on and improved. That does not detract from the fact that this exercise is a huge step forward. We would have been very naive to expect the process to have been perfect; it is a starting point on which we must build. I welcome the consultation process. The report was made widely available and the Minister for Finance also held a series of public meetings. It is extremely important for lay people to be involved and for ordinary citizens to be able to participate in the process. For too long, Government finance has been seen as the closely guarded secret of financial anoraks. It has been widely acknowledged that "Investing in You" is much more accessible than previous departmental reports. The committee acknowledged that much is to be welcomed. Although such comments do not make headlines, that does not mean that they should be ignored. If we want the Parliament to work, we must continue to learn from experience and improve where we can. I would like future budget consultations to be more widely accessible. By that, I do not necessarily mean that more copies of the document should be available, but I mean that the document should be clear and understandable to everyone. Some points that the Finance Committee highlighted could be fixed easily, as they concern mainly the layout and indexing of the document. Such improvements would make the document much more accessible. The wording of the  document should make sense to everyone and should avoid the use of jargon, which creates barriers. Improving the budget process is not a one-off exercise, and I am sure that it will take some years to get the process right. Getting the process right is about not just making the document useful and accessible, but encouraging people to read it and to question its content. The timing of the budget process does not sit easily with the UK budget statement. Some moneys from the UK budget statement were included in "Investing in You" while others were not, and that led to confusion. In future, we might have to decide whether moneys from the Exchequer should be included in "Investing in You". If they were left out, "Investing in You" would already be out of date on publication, but incorporating only some of them leads to confusion. We might need to reconsider the timing of the budget process, or to add another stage to deal with the UK budget statement. Many committees pointed out the willingness of the Executive to provide civil servants to guide the committees through the budget process, answer questions and provide additional information. That showed a willingness to improve the process. Hindsight is a wonderful thing. Things can be improved, and this new Parliament and its structures will enable that improvement to happen. There are issues that need to be addressed. There are no simple answers, but solutions will be easier to find now that we have completed stage 1 of the budget process. I welcome this innovative process, which has provided a basis that we can build upon.

Will the minister agree to seek the establishment by oil companies of a contingency fund to assist areas that are dependent on fabrication but that experience a downturn?

I welcome the opportunity to discuss an issue that is very important to many of my constituents. I am neither amused nor entertained by this morning's debate. The motion is narrow. It should consider the broader issues of transport in the Highlands and Islands, the things that are important to people. I will address some of those later. The Labour Government has recognised the problem faced by rural motorists and has abolished the fuel duty escalator. As Allan Wilson said, any future increases will be hypothecated to transport spending. The issue of real concern to people in the Highlands and Islands, in addition to the high price of fuel, is the differential between rural and urban areas. I can well understand the frustration and sense of unfairness that people feel when they see that petrol is so much cheaper in urban areas. There is no reasonable explanation for it; it is unrealistically cheaper. I look forward to the OFT report into the issue, which cannot come soon enough.

No, I must carry on, as I do not have a lot of time. We should concentrate on what this Parliament and the Executive can do. The Executive is aware of the problem and has identified areas for support. There has been help for rural petrol stations with the cost of tank replacement and ground water problems. The Executive has also given local councils discretionary powers to provide rates relief of up to 100 per cent for petrol stations. Such assistance keeps rural petrol stations open. Had they closed, people would have had to travel longer distances to put petrol in their cars, which would have added to their costs. That measure was within the remit of this Parliament and has been delivered. I urge the Executive to go further and to establish a Highlands and Islands transport authority. I also support Calum MacDonald's call for such an authority to be allowed to bulk buy fuel to sell on to rural petrol stations. However, that is not an easy answer. It needs to be examined in some depth. We need to negotiate with the petrol companies. Many stations are tied into contracts for many years. To establish a contract for one lot of petrol stations, which others cannot join, would create an unlevel playing field and would put more stations out of business. The policy must be considered and taken forward.  Giving an authority such powers would provide a wake-up call to the oil companies. They tell us that they cannot give discounts to the Highlands because not enough petrol is sold there.

I am struggling to fit into my time. I am sorry. The SNP blames the Government for high fuel prices, but has not come forward with a solution. The SNP constantly takes the pressure off the oil companies, getting them off the hook. Brian Wilson worked hard to urge the oil companies to reduce fuel prices. That paid off when BP announced the scrapping of the retail zonal premium, which resulted in a reduction of 1p. Okay, 1p might not be enough, but it is a cut that would not have happened if we had approached the issue in the same way as the SNP approaches it—ignoring the role of the oil companies and focusing on the Government makes scrutiny of oil companies difficult. If we all took that line, we could not have done it. The wider issue of public transport is really important. We must consider new solutions to address the shortage of quality public transport in rural areas. We cannot allow the debate to focus on the car. The car is an essential lifeline, but it is not the only one. The most recent census showed that in some of the most remote areas of the Highlands and Islands a third of households did not have access to a car. That is why we need alternatives, for example, community minibus or community car schemes to which all members of the community have access. The rural transport fund has provided funding and will provide funding for such schemes in the future. Those are real, innovative solutions to problems that this Parliament can address. I urge all parties to come forward with other solutions to tackle the problem.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in increasing transport choices for rural communities. (S1O-1965)

Does the minister agree that, as many people in rural areas do not have access to  a car, a key issue in such areas is ensuring that there is quality, affordable, reliable public transport?

I welcome the strategy document, as it seeks to take an holistic approach to the problems faced by rural communities. That does not appear to be the  case with the SNP. Before Christine Grahame criticises rural schools closures, she should remember that an SNP education convener in Argyll and Bute is seeking to close them.

No, I am not taking any interventions. SNP criticism of care of the elderly in Oban bears no relation to what is happening on the ground—I have had a first-hand view of the excellent services that are provided there. I am pleased that, in his introduction to the document, the First Minister acknowledges that, when rural areas are seen through urban eyes, they have not always benefited. That is why it is necessary to use the people and agencies on the ground to ensure that we have the best policies for individual areas. I am glad that the minister has acknowledged that rural areas are diverse and that what is appropriate in Shetland might not be appropriate in Argyll and Bute.

The six rural schools in Argyll and Bute have not yet been closed. The campaign to keep them open is on-going and the whole Parliament should support it. This morning, I will concentrate on two issues, the first of which is assistance to crofting communities. I am pleased that the Executive's initiatives are encouraging people to take up crofting. For example, the croft entrants scheme will encourage 260 young entrants into crofting by April 2002. However, I am concerned about the level of assistance that is received through the crofting building grants and loans scheme. Financial assistance does not meet the costs of building a house, and the scheme is all the more vital in view of the difficulties that crofters face in obtaining finances through banks and building societies. As those institutions do not understand crofting tenure, they are unwilling to lend money to crofters unless they are owner-occupiers. Purchasing a croft restricts people's access to grants and creates a vicious circle. For example, a three-bedroomed house might cost approximately £40,000. Anyone seeking help to pay for that would receive a grant of £11,000 and a loan of £17,500, which totals £29,000, leaving a deficit of £11,000. A young person would be prohibited from taking on a croft in the  knowledge that they would be unable to provide themselves with a home. As it is essential that measures to encourage young entrants into crofting go hand in hand with the measures that allow them to take up those opportunities, we need a package that addresses the full cost of building a house. The second issue on which I want to touch is fisheries. I am convinced that local fisheries management is the way forward, as local communities can set priorities and ensure that there is a healthy fishery for future generations. Inshore fishing must not be seen as the poor relation to deep-sea fishing; it should be recognised as an economic generator for small fragile communities. Local management would provide such a focus. We must find ways of improving the standard of the catch in all sectors, ensuring that the fish caught will fetch the premium market price. The economic well-being of fishing is inextricably linked to the economic conditions of areas that are dependent on fishing. The Executive's new approach is the way forward, as it integrates rural policy, allows departments to work together to formulate sympathetic policies and, most important, enables people and agencies on the ground to be the driving force of this rural strategy.

I will try to keep my remarks short. Many of the important issues have been discussed, so I will concentrate on two topics: Gaelic and marine national parks. There is a continuing debate as to whether Gaelic is the culture of the whole of Scotland or just of the Highlands and Islands. I would contend that our native language should be part of the culture of the whole of Scotland, although I recognise that that heritage has been lost in many areas. Interestingly, Airdrie now has Gaelic road signs, because of a recent visit of the Royal National Mod. I believe that Gaelic should be part of the cultural heritage of the national parks. It would give us a strong cultural identity—something that Ireland has recognised and used to its advantage, with tourism benefits. I listened to the evidence given to the Rural Affairs Committee on marine national parks, but I still believe that there is a strong case for marine national parks to be included in the legislation. In New Zealand, marine national parks have been used to conserve fish stocks. The younger fish mature in the park, forcing the more mature fish out of the boundaries. That has benefits for local fishermen, creating a bountiful catch on the boundaries of the park. Marine national parks could also protect species. In the Moray firth, we have a colony of dolphins that are under pressure because of activity in the area. No real studies have been conducted into what is causing the problems for those dolphins, apart from some research by a voluntary group working in the area. A marine national park could undertake those studies, discover what is damaging the dolphins and draw  up a plan for their protection that takes into account the social and economic factors in the area. Dolphins are a tourist attraction and the area would lose a great deal from the local economy and the natural environment if the dolphins were to go. They could be protected by a marine national park, working on sympathetic development and issuing guidelines to those who use those waters. It is in no one's interests to lose them. I have sympathy with the Scottish Fishermen's Federation when facing the unknown. However, I ask the minister to proceed with the legislation to allow wholly marine national parks on the basis that fishing interests would be widely consulted and would be represented on the park board should such a park be instigated. We must ensure that local interests are represented, giving people ownership of the park and thereby the motivation to make those parks a success. Legislation shaped today must reflect the needs of tomorrow and those needs must include the preservation of our cultural heritage. I urge the minister to include both marine national parks and Gaelic in the legislation.

How will the voluntary code of conduct be monitored, to ensure that it is being adhered to? Obviously, a small number of people will make difficulties for the whole industry, so how will they be dealt with?

I am glad to support the bill and to congratulate Tavish Scott on introducing it. It is possibly the least contentious bill the Rural Affairs Committee has had to deal with. The length of the debate does not reflect the importance of the bill, but it is  difficult to fill several hours of debate with people saying, "This is a good thing." When carrying out its consultation, the Rural Affairs Committee received responses from many organisations on the subject of several orders. They are contentious, but they are not what we are considering today. What we are considering is an amendment to legislation that would allow aquaculture and inshore fishermen to work together. Previously there was conflict between anyone who wanted to set up a shellfish farm—for which they required a several order—and local fishermen. The order prohibited any fishing taking place around the farm, regardless of whether it would cause damage. This bill would permit non-damaging fishing, allowing the fishing community to work together. As Tavish Scott said, the bill was introduced at Westminster but was unsuccessful—not because there was a problem with it, but because it is extremely difficult to take a private member's bill through Westminster. That highlights the benefits of the Scottish Parliament to small sectors in Scotland. Because of the small number of people affected by it, this bill would never have found its way into the Westminster Government's legislative programme; the same may be true of the Executive's programme. The procedures of this Parliament, however, make it easier for a member's bill to become law. I hope that this bill, if not the first, will be one of the first to be passed. That would show that this Parliament is accessible to all sectors of society, even those that do not have the backing of large organisations. That is especially true of the community from which I come and about which John Home Robertson spoke earlier, on Loch Torridon. I suggest that those who say that the Parliament is not working or making a difference speak to the small communities affected by this bill. Only a Scottish Parliament could take it forward. We must continue along that road. While looking at the big picture, we must never forget the issues that affect smaller sections of our communities. As I have said before, the Executive has taken the lead in empowering fishing communities. Shetland now manages its fishery locally and I hope that that will be extended to other areas of Scotland. By introducing legislation that helps people to make decisions at local level, we can empower communities. We must remember that one size does not fit all. In the e-mail to which Richard Lochhead referred, Doug MacLeod finished by saying: "I hope all goes well, and the Bill passes with the all-party support it deserves."  I hope so too. I urge all members to support the bill.

I am sure the Deputy First Minister will join me in welcoming the news that the Crown Estate is to investigate the ownership of the Cuillin. Will he also pay tribute to those who put on pressure for that decision—the Scotland Office, the Deputy Minister for the Highlands and Islands and Gaelic and members of the Scottish Parliament and the Westminster Parliament? Does the Deputy First Minister agree that as the investigation continues, we must look at the new duties of environmental protection as well as the effective use of public money in the Executive's land reform legislation?

The sale of the Black Cuillins has rightly created much comment in local organisations, by politicians and by members of the public. I am pleased that the press has also contributed to the discussion. It is fitting that the Scottish Parliament has the opportunity to debate the issue formally. I congratulate John Farquhar Munro on securing the debate and I believe that his motion hits the right note. Although we all have our own opinions on this issue, there are certain common questions on the ownership of the Cuillins, which is not clear cut. It is clear from the briefings that I and other members have received from Alan Blackshaw and Andy Wightman that there is at best a degree of ambiguity over the ownership. A time for reflection is needed: it is essential that there is a sufficient pause in the debate for a proper investigation to take place. There are two issues. The first is the need to improve and renovate Dunvegan Castle. I believe that solutions can be found, without involving the sale of the Cuillins, to ensure that the castle is upgraded. The second issue is the ownership of the Cuillins. John MacLeod has linked the sale of the Cuillins to the improvements to the castle. While that is an attractive option for him we should make it clear that the improvements to the castle can be made without the need to sell the Cuillins. There are  several bodies that could be involved, including Highlands and Islands Enterprise, Skye and Lochalsh Enterprise and the Heritage Lottery Fund. Some of them have an interest in ensuring that Dunvegan Castle is maintained. Dunvegan Castle brings people to Skye and is important to the local economy. Tourism is worth a great deal to the Highlands and Islands. I hope that John MacLeod has investigated those avenues. If not, many people will come to the inescapable conclusion that his decision has less to do with improvements to the castle than with holding interest groups to ransom and forcing them to pay the inflated and at best opportunistic price of £10 million. The sale of the Cuillins is controversial on two counts. First, does John MacLeod actually own them—are they his to sell? I urge the Executive to do all in its power to ensure that the appropriate bodies investigate the title. In the meantime, the sale should be put on hold. The second issue is long standing and quite difficult to put into words: what rights do the people who live in Skye have if their heritage can be put up for sale to the highest bidder? That issue will not go away and should be addressed in the land reform legislation. The debate has highlighted the need for proper investigation into the issues that have arisen. As the motion notes, there is considerable public debate about the title—as there is about the asking price and whether the sale is in the public interest. I believe that improvements can be made to the castle without that drastic measure. I urge John MacLeod to take on board public concern and to act appropriately. I am sure that he does not want his place in history to be part of the long list of discredited landowners, uncaring, unconcerned and deaf to the pleas of the people who live on the land. There are too many unanswered questions and there must be time to investigate the issues that have been raised. I hope that there will be time for reflection.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether funding for the new mart facility on Tiree will be made available. (S1O-1688)

I am glad that the minister is aware of the work that is being done by crofters and farmers, Argyll and Bute Council, Argyll and the Islands Enterprise, and United Auctions, which between them have managed to raise half the funding that is required for the mart. Will the minister consult, or agree to meet, one or all of those groups when he considers the decision?

Has the European Union done anything to make itself aware of the special circumstances of the Highlands and Islands before making its decisions?

While I firmly believe that the fishing boundary is not the most important issue facing the fishing industry, I believe that lessons need to be learned—and have been learned—from this matter. While the Rural Affairs Committee was taking evidence, I was struck by the fact that most arguments came down to potential problems. What if the Scottish Parliament legislated for different net sizes from the rest of the UK? Would the fishermen have to change their gear when  fishing in that area? What if the fishing crew was arrested and taken to an English court? Would they have to instruct an English lawyer to deal with their case? While such problems may never happen, one complaint that was not hypothetical was that of the lack of consultation with the industry on the boundary. That complaint stood up to scrutiny, which is why lessons must be learned and, I believe, why they have been learned. Organisations now complain to me about the mass of consultation documents they receive. That is good, as it shows that the Executive is willing to listen. The Executive has established the Scottish inshore fisheries advisory group, which enables the fishing industry to have an on-going dialogue with the Executive. The committee also dealt with the Shetland Islands Regulated Fishery (Scotland) Order 1999, which enables Shetland fishermen to manage locally their industry, to plan ahead and to protect their livelihood and that of their children. Such regulations are also being implemented in Orkney, and I hope that they will be extended to the Highlands. We are also in the process of considering Tavish Scott's Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Amendment (Scotland) Bill, which makes a simple but effective amendment to current legislation and which has important implications for fishermen. Much of the economy of the area where I was brought up depends on inshore fisheries. Because of the lack of local control and management of those fisheries, problems have arisen, with different fishing methods not being implemented sympathetically. When I was a child, many of the creelers caught lobsters and crabs, and some of them even caught prawns. Now prawns are all that is left in that area. The situation threatens the economy of that fragile area. All creelers have to make their living out of the prawn fishery now, as there is nothing left to diversify into. Along with the community, I was pleased when the minister arranged to visit the area, to see for himself the problems that local fishermen face. That was the first time that a politician with the power to do something about the problem had listened to the fishermen's concerns. He strengthened the liaison group set up to deal with their problems and, if that does not solve a problem, I will have no hesitation in returning to him to ask for other measures to be taken. We must listen to the industry and work closely with it to ensure that livelihoods are protected. I am glad that that is happening. We must ensure that we protect the rights of fishermen to fish in areas where, historically, they have made their livings, by working with partners in the north-east Atlantic, Westminster and the European Union.  We have jurisdiction over such issues. We can do something about them and we must spend the time available tackling them. They are extremely important to the fishing industry, more important than a boundary that does not alter the rights of our fishermen to fish and that has no effect on their livelihood.

I am sorry. I have finished my speech.

To ask the Scottish Executive, in the light of the closure of Kinlochleven aluminium smelter in June, what plans it has to ensure that workers who have lost or will lose their jobs will receive all the help possible to achieve employment in the future. (S1O-1496)

Will the minister agree to help those local agencies to market the facilities of the business units which are ready for occupation in Kinlochleven, thus ensuring that new businesses move into the area prior to June? That would go some way toward alleviating the economic hardship that will face the area when the smelter closes.

I congratulate George Lyon on securing the debate. I have just one or two comments to make. The Cowal peninsula's need for investment is a long-standing problem; the area's inclusion within the national park boundary would bring that investment. Fergus Ewing spoke about the consultation process. There has been almost universal agreement that Cairngorm and Loch Lomond be considered as national parks, but the local people at Cowal have not been consulted properly; we must start that process now to be in time for the secondary legislation. Bringing the Cowal peninsula within the national park boundary would certainly put the focus on transport links, such as new ferries. If those ferries were to be used to bring people into the park, it would be up to the park board to develop them with local authorities. I do not want to interfere in the argument between Fergus Ewing and Jamie McGrigor about which is the nicer place—Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber or Argyll and Bute—because I might lose out.

I am not sure whether Loch Mhor has its own monster; we will wait and see. Many members would argue for their area, but all the Highlands and Islands are extremely beautiful.

Will the minister join me in welcoming the increased scope for public spending in the Highlands and Islands? Will he also agree that that is good news for the Scottish land fund and for land reform? Will he further agree that it is an absolute disgrace that John MacLeod has put the Cuillins up for sale at a price of £10 million? Does he agree with the statement issued by Calum MacDonald earlier today?

I have no hesitation in supporting Elaine Murray's motion and I congratulate her on raising the issue. Many members will have been concerned over several months about the threat to impose charges for the withdrawal of money from cash machines. I am particularly concerned by the threat that those charges pose to rural areas. One of my first reactions to the news that banks were seeking to charge customers was to ask why they wanted to introduce yet more charges, given that profits in the banking sector have been plentiful for many years. Many people, in both urban and rural areas, cannot understand why charges are needed. Banks do not come high in the popularity stakes, although I do not know whether they rate as low as politicians—that would be something. The decision to charge for cash withdrawal will do nothing to improve the reputation of the financial sector. The reputation of banks should be a factor for them, but their main concern should be the interests of the customers whom they serve. There is no doubt that the charges that banks and  building societies impose on a number of services create the feeling that they are just out for themselves. Many people in the Highlands and Islands live outwith major towns and cities and have to travel long distances to use bank machines. Sometimes they are unable to do that. It is important that people in rural areas who have to travel many miles to use the machines should not suffer financially. The imposition of disloyalty charging would cut down choice and would force people in rural areas to bank with the local branch to avoid such charges, or to travel further to go to their own banks. Some banks and building societies ask people to bank with them when they arrange mortgages, so charging will also cut down choice in that respect. I am pleased at the response of the Scottish banks on this issue. After the news broke that charging was a possibility, I wrote to the chairmen and chief executives of the four major banks in Scotland. I was reassured that they would take into account the effect that charging would have on rural areas. That is the right decision and it will prove popular with current and future customers. I am also pleased at the response of the Westminster Government. The fact that banks and building societies will not be able to double charge and will have to choose whether to impose a disloyalty fee or a surcharge represents progress. I do not believe that banks and building societies have given an acceptable response to the question why they need to impose the charges. After this debate, I hope that they will do so.

I welcome this debate and hope that it is the first of many to examine the Gaelic language and the way in which we are promoting it. Those who are present may wonder why I am not delivering this speech in Gaelic, my native tongue and my first language. It is because I cannot. When I started school, authorities did not provide for Gaelic speakers. Everyone who attended my first school was a native Gaelic speaker, but our teachers were not. We needed to learn English to enable us to access education. We were not beaten and we did not have our mouths washed out with soap; we were simply not understood. That experience was widespread in the Highlands and Islands. I spoke recently to a constituent who told me that Gaelic had missed a generation in her village: children are fluent and so are their grandparents, but their parents are not. Many of those parents were in the same situation as I was and have ensured that their children have the access to Gaelic that they did not have. The Government, through education policies, has ensured that Gaelic-medium education is available in areas where there is demand, which is welcome. However, the revival of the language is not just about education. The artistic heritage of the Highlands and western isles is based in the Gaelic language, songs and poetry. Music and dance are very much part of that heritage. As many have already said, the fèis movement has advanced music and dance by encouraging young people to take part. The fèisean are now participated in and enjoyed by many young, and many not-so-young, people. We should also remember the contribution made by the Mod not only in promoting Gaelic, but as an economic boost to the towns that host it. There is a revival of all types of art in the Highlands and Islands, promoting pride and confidence in our heritage. Many people involved in promoting Gaelic feel that there is still much to be done. I ask them, while working towards that, not to underestimate what has been achieved—achievements that give a foundation for the future. In a few years, the children who have benefited will be in a position to carry the work forward. Gaelic survived despite the best attempts of those in authority to discourage it. That is no longer the case. The Executive is seeking to train and recruit more Gaelic teachers; more money is  being invested in Gaelic education and arts. Some people may say that that is a waste of money when we have poverty and unemployment to tackle. However, that money is tackling those issues. Gaelic language promotion has created jobs, kept artistic talent from leaving and given a much-needed boost to economic activity. We need to build on that, ensuring that the arts support each other with a strong cultural identity that will help them access markets at home and abroad. That will, in turn, enhance the profile of Scotland and increase investment and tourism. Ireland has led the way. The economic effect of their promoting their cultural heritage is evident—their economy is booming. Their identity is recognised throughout the world, bringing inward investment. We must catch up. In Gaelic we have a very specific heritage that can help us to do that. I urge the minister to build on the foundations that have been laid, to ensure that the Gaelic language is never again under threat.

Has the minister met the Crofters Union to discuss its concerns about the transfer of developmental  aid to Highlands and Islands Enterprise?

I congratulate Jamie McGrigor on securing the debate. We all need to underline the fact that public health comes first. We know that and so does the industry. There need be only one case of scallop poisoning for the industry to be decimated; we have seen what happened with BSE. I did not sign Jamie's motion; I should explain why. His motion concentrates on end-product testing. I believe that we need a mixture of monitoring and end-product testing. To move exclusively to end-product testing would mean that our fishermen were permanently removed from the live market, which is a lucrative trade for scallop farmers and divers and should be protected. Monitoring would continue as at present, but when toxin was detected, we could move to an end-product testing regime for any catches in a closed fishery. The European Commission is considering such a regime at present. It has been pointed out that the current directive would not have to be changed if the EU were to approve end-product testing.

I think that that is what I am saying. The attitude of the European Commission leads me to believe that there is scope to move to end-product testing now. A mixture of both kinds of testing would have to be thought through. Systems would have to be put in place to safeguard public health. That is why I am asking for end-product testing to be introduced now. For additional safety, the derogation could be limited to the adductor or white meat only, readings for which fall consistently within the maximum safety limits. That would give the industry and the Executive time to draw up a programme in which both kinds of testing could be used, allowing measured decisions to be made. Monitoring would continue as normal but, when the boxes were closed, those fisheries could be  end-product tested. We need to consult on the best way of policing that system—either by total closure or by a licensing system for fishermen. There are options that must be considered, such as who is to carry out the end-product testing. There is concern that Government laboratories are under much pressure at present with monitoring. More testing could lead to fewer resources for research. I have been contacted by private companies that would be willing to carry out end-product testing in conjunction with fish processors. That proposal requires consultation and examination. The whole industry needs to be involved in drawing up the long-term solution. Dredgers, divers and farmers each have different requirements, and must have input. We need to be able to ensure public safety, and allow the industry to work safely. By examining those issues, we can ensure safety for the public and for the industry. I have not mentioned fishermen, but that does not mean that I am not aware of the suffering caused to them. However, it is important that we look at end-product testing—and a mixture of product testing—as that will alleviate their suffering.

To ask the Scottish Executive what reports it has received on the recent conference of trade unions and trade union councils in the Highlands and Islands. (S1O-1115)

Does the minister agree that the best way of encouraging businesses to invest in the Highlands and Islands is to create a climate in which they have confidence in the skills and abilities of workers, and that the best way of encouraging workers to stay in the Highlands is to ensure that employers, particularly in the service sector, recognise the benefits of having a well-paid and well-motivated work force?

I congratulate Jamie Stone on securing this debate. As he said, it is important to people throughout Scotland that their Parliament debates issues that concern them. The A9 concerns many people who believe that social and economic trends are adversely affecting the economy of Caithness and other rural areas. The A9 is a lifeline for businesses and families in Caithness and Sutherland. It is easy to underestimate the impact that a road can have. The A9 provides a link for people who are isolated from major towns—the people who live in the north. I want to concentrate on the impact of the underdevelopment of the A9 on the economy of Caithness. One of the key factors that will encourage business to invest in Caithness and Sutherland is a properly developed infrastructure, which includes not only the A9, but rail services. It is crucial that we accept that an improvement to the A9 is fundamental to enhancing the economy of Caithness and Sutherland. By encouraging businesses to invest in the area, we can give people the opportunity to stay in the community in which they have grown up and we can give them the prospect of a job and a career. Rural areas are not simply to be conserved; the people who live there need jobs and economic regeneration. According to Highlands and Islands Enterprise, Caithness appears to be suffering from a lack of business growth. That reminds us that improvements to infrastructure are necessary. One way in which to ensure that unemployment is effectively tackled is by attracting businesses to Caithness and Sutherland. Improvements to the A9 are only one issue, but are nevertheless important to achieve that. In the meeting with Sarah Boyack last week that Jamie Stone spoke about, we pressed the need for a strategy to improve the road. There is a fear that piecemeal improvement will deal only with the symptoms, not with the cause.

I think that we should explore all options for improving the roads network in Caithness and Sutherland. I understand that European funding may concern infrastructure less than it did previously, but it could still be considered. Simply undertaking improvements when necessary will not tackle the narrow twists and bends that are a feature of the single-carriageway sections of the road in its present state. It is important to move freight off the road and on to rail, which will help clear the A9 and prevent delays. Some congestion on the A9 is due to slow-moving traffic. The movement from road to rail has already begun at Georgemas Junction station. The growth in information technology has allowed the development of home shopping. That is very exciting for people who are geographically dispersed, especially the elderly and disabled, who do not have access to shops. We must avoid the frustration of that development in rural areas where people have poor transport links. Mary Scanlon mentioned the Berriedale braes. People in the north are realistic. They are not asking for improvements at Berriedale, because they know that that would be very expensive at present. They want substantial improvements to the other parts of the road. I hope that the minister will address some of those points when he is winding up.

This is an important debate, and I congratulate David Mundell on it. Many of us agree that rural sub-post offices are important; people who are concerned about the issue can be reassured that the Parliament takes it seriously. The decision to automate benefit payments through bank accounts is not in itself wrong—it might be more convenient for some people to receive benefits in that way. However, there must be choice. The policy should not be compulsory—and it is not compulsory—because it would have a detrimental effect on rural post offices, which provide a lifeline service to our aging rural population. In rural areas, there is very little access to banks and many pensioners and families on benefit prefer to collect cash in hand, while some do not have bank accounts. They cannot afford to travel to the bank, even if they have access to a car. In some areas, that can be an 80-mile round trip, and in the case of the smaller islands, a ferry trip might be necessary. We also face the prospect of banks charging £1 for the privilege of withdrawing money from autotellers—that is unacceptable. People on benefits must have a choice as to how to collect them. Some banks levy charges on account balances below £100. Those figures might not sound much to us, but to someone on a tight budget, every penny counts. Post offices are more than a place to pick up  benefits; in many small villages, they are the only public place where people can meet to chat and even do their shopping, as many double as shops. Many are located in unusual places—Maureen Macmillan told me that her local post office is in Mary Finlayson's porch. Post offices are, of course, a reserved matter. I welcome the fact that broad consultation will take place with communities if post offices are to close, but the Scottish Parliament must also examine the matter and consider innovative ways of making those post offices more viable. Pay-phones used to be located in post offices before everyone had telephones; now we might have to consider locating computers in post offices for the community to access.

I agree that many accidents are caused by foreign drivers driving on the wrong side of the road. They are also caused by young people who lack driving  experience. Will the minister examine ways of improving road signage for tourists? Will she consider lending her support to the pass-plus scheme, which provides further experience for recently qualified drivers?

The minister is aware of my concerns regarding the infrastructure in the Highlands and Islands. Will the changes mean that there will be more investment to improve and extend the  infrastructure in the area?

I welcome the chance to debate the dispersal of civil service jobs to Caithness, Sutherland and Easter Ross, and, I would like to add, to other areas throughout the Highlands and Islands.  Those areas have much to offer. Highlands and Islands Enterprise has produced an excellent document, listing potential locations throughout the area; for example, Lerwick, Kirkwall, several in the Western Isles, Wick, Ross-shire and many others all the way down to Argyll. Those sites were selected for what they could offer: good transport, with links by air, sea and road; a well-qualified work force; infrastructure that would allow new workers to come into the community; and suitable business accommodation. Proximity to centres of learning has also been deemed important; it not only gives access to a qualified work force, but the opportunity to continue the learning process. With modern technology, there is no reason that many areas of work cannot be dispersed. Most of the colleges in the Highlands and Islands form part of the University of the Highlands and Islands project, giving access to videoconferencing and cutting down travelling time to meetings. However, when travel is required, the locations selected have good transport links. The Highlands and Islands provide a much-improved standard of living, scenery, strong, safe communities and a totally different way of life. However, we need to go further than asking the Executive for the dispersal of civil service jobs. We need to ask Government agencies, the health service and local government to do the same. Many crofters in fragile areas require jobs, along with running their crofts. It would greatly enhance the sustainability of the rural economy if our relatively small number of jobs were dispersed to those areas. One or two jobs in a village could support local shops, schools, post offices and other services that are important for the sustainability of those areas. We may not wish to force all civil servants out into the country, but it should be considered for new civil service jobs. I welcome the debate and I hope that the Executive will continue to support and strengthen its stance in this area.

This is another important debate for this Parliament, which addresses the real needs of Scotland's people. Children and young people are not tomorrow's society—they are today's. It is our duty and responsibility to ensure that those children have the opportunity to fulfil their potential. I congratulate the Executive on the lead that it has taken. The recognition of the responsibility of the state as a parent is important for this reason: it shows a change of mindset that affects the sort of  care that children will, and should, receive. More can be done to ensure that those who work as carers are aware of the training that they can receive. At present, many people join the profession and receive little or no additional training. Training will benefit not only the children and young people in their care but the carers themselves, as they will be better equipped to handle children with a variety of needs. Many folk have spoken about people learning parenting skills from their own parents; there is a bond between parents and children. Carers and children in care do not share that bond, which is why training is important. Levels of pay should also be considered, as a couple of issues are involved. The first is that an increase in pay would reward those people who give their dedication and time often in difficult circumstances. The second is that a better pay structure would encourage more people into the caring profession, which would benefit children and young people. Connected with pay is the issue of having a proper career structure. It is important that carers feel that they have a future in the sector in which they work, that they are rewarded for their skills and training and that their expertise is put to the best possible use. The ideal way of looking after children is to bring them into smaller caring units. In the past, children with different problems have been lumped together. To some extent, that has led them to learn from each other. Instead of learning important skills that will help them in life, they end up becoming more socially excluded. To end that situation, the way forward is to bring children into either a family or a unit that has children with similar problems but whose number is limited. Perhaps the biggest problem for children in care in rural areas is the large distances that they must travel to access care. For example, those who live on islands may have to move to the mainland to receive care. That causes disruption, as those children are separated from their family and friends, and a change of schools is often required. Local authorities have a duty to maintain the contact between children and their family, but that is often expensive to provide in sparsely populated areas, due to travel constraints. It would be preferable to have care provided in the local area, so that children could receive the support that they needed without losing contact with family and friends. That would enable children to attend the same school. A professional fostering scheme, made up of highly trained foster parents looking after small numbers of children, is an attractive option. However, those people must be properly trained and remunerated. Part of the problem is that they might not be used often, and may be lost from the  system if they seek full-time employment. Those people could be used to provide respite care for young, disabled or elderly people. That would ensure regular employment for them. I hope that the minister will address some of those issues when he replies, particularly the issues of training, pay and proper career structure.

ISA has imposed a major burden on affected farms. To what extent do today's measures provide relief for an industry that is a major contributor to the rural economy?

I am a member of the Rural Affairs Committee, and we appear to be firefighting all the time when it comes to the traditional industries of the Highlands and Islands. It is with a sense of relief that I welcome the opportunity to step back and consider the direction that the sea fishing industry might take to ensure a more stable future. In the sea fishing industry, there are potential problems. One that worries me is the future allocation of quotas to fishing boats. At present, quotas are traded for large amounts of money. That means that young people who want a career in the industry will be unable to have one. To become a fisherman, not only does someone have to spend a large amount of capital on buying a boat, but they must also buy a quota. If that continues, there will be no young people in the industry, and quotas will increasingly be bought by large organisations. There is no easy solution to that problem. To prohibit the sale of quotas would drive the market underground, perhaps, or mean that those who had already laid out large amounts of money for their quota would be unable to recoup that outlay. However, the trade in quotas is a risky business, as quotas can be cut, meaning that that investment is lost. We need to find another way in which to allocate quotas, so that the gamble is taken out of the equation and young people will be allowed to join the industry. A few weeks ago, we debated community ownership of the land. Perhaps we should consider community ownership of the sea. A scheme is running in Shetland, for example, whereby the community buys quotas that are then allocated to local fishermen. Under the current quota regime, they must buy those quotas at market value. That may not be regarded as the best use of public money, when the risks that are involved are taken into account. That said, if we are in the business of protecting fragile economies, that is the best way forward in the current climate. The Executive has made much progress in including the fishing industry in decision making that affects it, and in involving the industry in policy making. I welcome the minister's announcement about the local management of fisheries. I ask the minister to involve the industry and communities that are dependent on fishing in the finding of ways to allocate quotas. Perhaps quotas could be allocated to the local management groups. The initiative taken by Shetland shows that communities are already aware of the problem and are beginning to deal with it. We do not want to end up debating a crisis in the fishing industry due to the allocation of quotas. We have to work together to find ways to protect the industry and  ensure that young people from all parts of the Scottish coast are able to find a career in sea fishing.

I welcome the announcements that the minister has made today. They will go a long way to meet the needs of the community that I represent. The debate on land reform has gone on for many years and it is great to see that our new Scottish Parliament can deliver on those important priorities. At the end of the process, there must be a workable solution that is designed to meet the needs and demands of future generations. I am therefore delighted that the minister has  addressed crofting. Under the present legislation, a crofter has the right to buy his or her croft and an apportionment of the common grazings. Working out that apportionment can be difficult and has discouraged crofters from taking up that option. The right to buy the whole township would offer a greater opportunity for diversification, enabling crofters to start wind farms, build larger community businesses and attract inward investment. I have for some time been dealing with members of the crofting community at Laid on the north coast. Crofters there want the right to buy their crofting community jointly. Now they have that right. That will enable them to put their ideas for diversification into practice—ideas that they have been unable to develop in the past. Today's announcement will help to sustain the fragile community in that area and will allow the people who live there to expand and develop. In my dealings with the people of Laid, it has become clear to me that the community is at a disadvantage because people do not know who owns their land. The estate owner is a company called Vibel SA, which is registered in Liechtenstein. Under Liechtenstein law, it is impossible to find out who the shareholders, and therefore the beneficial owners of the estate, are. I recognise the difficulties that are involved in tracing the identity of beneficial owners who are involved in companies registered outside Scotland and the United Kingdom, but we must recognise that communities are at a great disadvantage if they lack such information. They are unable to make direct representations to their landlord and to discuss issues that affect the running of the estate. To tackle the problem, we must set up a land register in Scotland that lists not only owners, but beneficial owners of land. That is a much bigger project, but we must start it now to ensure that future generations do not face the same problems as the crofters in Laid. I congratulate the minister on today's announcement, but I ask him to address the issues by considering the setting up of a land register.

I welcome the opportunity to debate the modernisation of the Scottish economy and the actions that we must take to ensure that that happens. On the one hand we have enterprise and on the other we have social justice. Since 1997, the Labour Government has shown that those two objectives are not mutually exclusive. Governments can encourage businesses to be competitive but also to seek social justice. Our society is changing beyond all recognition because of global forces. Global forces tie our economies together, which means that we cannot simply act alone. Access to information has greatly increased with the growth of the internet. Therefore, there needs to be an emphasis on giving people access to the sources of information enjoyed by many of us in the chamber. The Executive has emphasised the need for social inclusion; part of that is about having the opportunity to engage in the knowledge economy. There are barriers to economic growth, and it is our job to address them. Having talked to constituents, I believe that there is a distinct lack of knowledge about the initiatives that are already in place. As a consequence, people do not know how to access knowledge and services. Asking some people to draw up a business plan for a new enterprise can sometimes prevent them from putting a good idea into practice. We need facilitators based in communities to advise and assist people to develop their ideas into real initiatives. During the past 20 years, our economy has totally changed. There has been a decline in the manufacturing sector, leaving behind much pain and disenchantment for the communities that have been affected. In its place, the service sector and the information technology sector have grown. Those sectors, with their new demands, require a re-equipping of our work force so that people can work in them. In rural areas, we have seen the decline of traditional industries such as farming and fishing. Other types of employment are hard to find. With the innovations of modern technology, that can change. Indeed, it has already begun to do so. I agree with the minister that the University of the Highlands and Islands is an important development. It aims to bring knowledge closer to  people, by creating small learning centres in remote communities. I cannot emphasise enough the importance of that development. Communities that have previously felt neglected will have the opportunity to take part in learning. The UHI will also give our young people the opportunity to stay at home to study, rather than having to leave. That raises the prospect of young people staying and studying in the Highlands, where they will, I hope, contribute to the economy. It will stop young people being cleared from the Highlands in search of education and opportunities. Through learning, we can equip our young people with the necessary skills to play an active role in the expansion of the Scottish economy. There is much to be done, and I am greatly encouraged that the Government recognises the specific needs of the Highlands and Islands. To ensure that progress continues, we need investment in infrastructure. Multinational companies that control the digital links must be made to address the social need of providing those services in rural areas. I urge the minister to hold talks with those organisations, to ensure that the infrastructure required does not stop in towns, but is continued into villages and crofting communities. If that happens, the geographical barrier need not be considered a major issue when it comes to equipping our rural work force with the necessary skills and knowledge to participate in the Scottish economy in the 21 st century.

Does the minister remain open to the possibility of progress on the A9 north of Helmsdale, the A82 from Glencoe to Inverness and the A96 Inverness to Aberdeen road, all of which are in need of repair? Is she prepared to hear representations from me and from councils in the Highlands on the priorities among those schemes?

I welcome this opportunity to discuss issues of agriculture and rural affairs. Such issues are of great concern to my constituents, many of whom depend on farming, fishing and tourism to maintain their standard of living. However, although this motion presents the opportunity to raise those matters, it badly lets down the people whom we are trying to represent. The people of Scotland, and of the Highlands and Islands, have a right to expect answers from the Government, but part of political debate is the right to expect the Opposition to come up with alternatives. This motion is not a solution; it is an attack on what the Executive is trying to achieve for rural areas. The motion mentions "affordable rural housing". In February, the Government announced that an additional £4 million was to be provided for rural areas. In that announcement, the Highlands and Islands were to receive an additional 11 per cent, as part of an additional rural funding. That money was used for excellent schemes such as the rural housing grant scheme, whereby people who are in need can apply for a grant of up to a third of the cost of building or buying a house. That is a real policy to assist rural areas. Let me pre-empt the SNP, which will no doubt consider the additional funding insufficient. No  doubt it will issue a press release calling for more funding for rural housing. Someone will then call for more funding for the tourism industry, closely followed by someone else calling for money for—well, members can take their pick. Whatever the issue, whatever the area, the SNP will ask for more money, but it will never say where that money is to come from.

No, I will not give way. The Executive, by contrast, is offering practical solutions to some of the existing problems. In September, Sarah Boyack announced that nearly £500,000 was to be allocated to the rural community transport grant scheme, to support the provision of quality public transport in rural areas, in addition to the annual £3.5 million that subsidises bus routes, ferries and rail services. Significant help has also been available for rural petrol stations. Another measure that was announced by the Government was the extension of financial assistance for the construction of croft houses for crofters who are tenants, who are single and living with their parents, or who need to live on the crofts for business reasons. That is an important aspect of the crofters building grants and loans scheme and will bring vital support to crofters in my constituency. Last Thursday, it was announced that help would be given to the Highlands and Islands from the special programme. That should not be ignored when considering what is being done to help those who live in rural areas. A sum of €300 million has been committed to help the Highlands and Islands from 2000 to 2006. The measures that I have outlined do not sound like the policies of an Executive that is failing to address the problems of rural areas. I cannot deny that there is more to be done and I am sure that the Executive would be the first to admit that. However, the tone of the SNP's motion completely ignores the positive measures that have been introduced. It is simply party political and does not encourage members to engage properly in the debate. The people whom I represent want politicians to address the issues properly, so I appeal to members to avoid repeating the yah-boo politics of Westminster and to work together to address the problems that concern the vast majority of people in rural Scotland.

Members of the Executive are addressing the problems and we should congratulate rather than criticise them. If we are to criticise, we must propose good alternatives.

Owing to the current ASP outbreak, profits that would have been used to improve facilities in the fish processing industry are threatened. Will there be assistance for that sector to help it improve its facilities?

I am pleased to have the opportunity to highlight the value that we attach to those who work in the voluntary sector. We must encourage people to volunteer and take part in the enormous support system that the voluntary sector provides for society. Voluntary effort is even more important in regard to children and young people. For generations, adults have complained about young people wasting their time hanging around the streets, but they do that because they have nothing else to do. Many voluntary organisations—scouts, guides, the Boys Brigade and youth cafes to name but a few—provide them with something to do. That requires a huge time commitment on the part of adults, the majority of whom are generous and well meaning. However, those who prey on children try to join those organisations. We must protect children from them, so I support the initiative that gives voluntary organisations access to the SCRO checks that they require. I understand that that may put pressure on volunteers and voluntary organisations, so I welcome the Executive's decision to monitor the situation. Some volunteers contribute money as well as time, and checks will not be a barrier for them, but there are others who are unwaged who look to volunteering to provide them with a focus. It also enables them to provide support for young people.  We need to consider their needs and ensure that we do not prevent them from making a contribution. I urge the minister to bear that in mind when she carries out her review.

I thank Fergus Ewing for introducing the debate. I am pleased to support his motion. This is not a recent concern, as Fergus Ewing said. Lord Russell-Johnston mentioned the subject in his maiden speech to the House of Commons in 1964, and David Stewart has campaigned tirelessly for improvements to the road. He took two ministers to see the road for themselves and I am also pleased to say that Sarah Boyack took the time to go and see it for herself during the summer. The community has fought hard to have the road improved. It set up the Mallaig road action group and sought to use reason and persuasion to help its cause. It has spent a huge amount of time and resources promoting the need for improvement, and as time elapses, patience is beginning to run out. As Fergus said, the case is special because the road is the only single-track trunk road in Scotland. Those in the local community are not asking for a motorway or even for a dual carriageway—they just want a double-track road. The stretch of road is only 12 miles long. The part from Morar to Arisaig requires only funding as planning considerations have already been met. The second stretch is currently being examined under the route action plan, but it is important that both sections are completed. Improvements have already been carried out on a piecemeal basis, but they must be completed now. I represent the Highlands and Islands, and I am aware of the problems with roads and of the dependency of rural areas on roads. Although I welcome the improvements that will be made to public transport through the rural transport fund, I understand that, because of sparsity in the Highlands and Islands, it is difficult to move dependency away from road transport where there is no practical alternative. Mallaig is a major fishing port, as Fergus said, and I welcome the large investments in the harbour that have been made through objective 1 funding. The harbour has been developed to support increased fish landings. However, Mallaig remains the only port in the country where one suffers sea sickness on the way to the sea. The problems are twofold. First, because of the improvements, larger boats are landing at Mallaig: up to 500 tonnes of fish per boat can be landed there. Such a catch requires  31 articulated lorries to transport it. If it is taken into account that up to three boats could land in a night, that could lead to up to 93 articulated lorries using the road in one night. Imagine the problems that that would cause during the tourist season. Secondly, there are community safety implications. If any of those lorries go off the road, they block the only access to Mallaig for long periods. Emergency services are unable to enter or leave Mallaig. Mallaig also has strong ties with the western isles, through ferry links to Skye, Barra and the smaller isles. To assist tourism and fishing, we must improve the road. I know that we do not have a never-ending supply of money for roads, but we must meet that challenge. I ask the Scottish Executive, local government, transport providers and local industries to join in partnership to find a way of funding those much-needed improvements.

I have a great interest in transport as I represent a rural area. This Executive has shown that it recognises the challenges to transport provision in rural areas. I would like more to be done, but many initiatives have gone largely unnoticed. Work has been done to move freight off the roads by providing freight facilities grants to companies such as Safeway plc, which enables them to remove 30,000 trucks from the A9. Local Highland companies such as Lovat Pride Mineral Water have also begun to transport freight by train. In Caithness, Norfrost has built a freight terminal at Georgemas Junction, which has been used by other companies to move steel pipes, aviation fuel, flagstones and timber off the roads. This is only the start. By moving freight on to the  railways, we not only cut the cost to companies by a third, but cut pollution and free up the road system. Previous Governments cut funding for road maintenance but did nothing to ease the pressure on the roads. Ferries have also benefited. CalMac's grant has increased by £3.2 million, and it has received additional funding to build two new ferries. That will help it enhance the service it provides. Northern isles ferries have also benefited by their grant being increased by 25 per cent. Yesterday's announcement of a 25 per cent increase in spending on the rural transport fund was a huge boost. I would like to list all the organisations in the Highlands and Islands that have benefited from the increase, but I do not think that I will have time. I particularly welcome the funding for social car schemes and dial-a-bus services. It not only provides for people to become less dependent, but allows those without access to cars to become self-reliant: they do not have to depend on friends, family or neighbours to take them shopping. The Executive's policy goes a long way towards tackling social exclusion in rural areas. Much has been made of high fuel taxes and their effects on rural areas. I look forward to the Office of Fair Trading report on fuel pricing. I hope that it will lead to equal pricing between rural and urban areas. Over the past decade, many petrol stations have had to close. The rural petrol stations grant has stemmed that decline, ensuring that many rural filling stations can continue to trade. The grant ensures that people in rural areas have access to petrol locally and do not have to travel a huge distance to buy it. Those initiatives are real investments that make a difference to people's lives throughout the Highlands and Islands and the rest of rural Scotland. I support Sarah Boyack's amendment.

I welcome the Executive's legislative programme, especially its proposals for public transport. To fight social exclusion, we must improve public transport. That is even more important in rural areas. In the Highlands and Islands, many people are excluded from society because they do not drive and there is little co-ordinated public transport.  We need an integrated public transport system. That will mean involving all providers in a partnership: local authorities, CalMac, P & 0, Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd, ScotRail, other organisations that provide transport services, such as Royal Mail, and private providers. Such organisations need a forum in which they can work together to co-ordinate timetabling.  I welcome the proposal for a Scottish national public transport timetable, which would allow people and organisations to plan their journeys. That would be especially useful in rural areas and would involve looking at strategic issues such as whether funding is being put to the best use and what the new priorities are.  The Highlands and Islands integrated transport forum was a good starting point. There have already been many new initiatives, such as community buses, subsidised taxis and social car schemes. The rural transport fund will allow more services to be developed in rural areas.  All this is a far cry from the days when I walked miles along a track to primary school and travelled to church by boat. We need to go further; we must examine ways of devolving funding to organisations that can make strategic plans for rural areas. Perhaps we should consider a transport authority that can administer the rural transport fund.  Whatever decisions we take must involve people who live and work in rural areas. I look forward to the local transport strategies, which will enable local authorities to set out local priorities. We must devolve power to rural communities to make the decisions that best suit their needs.  Question , That the meeting be now adjourned until 2.30 pm today , put and agreed to .- [Lord James Douglas-Hamilton.]   Meeting adjourned at 12:27.   On resuming-