Notwithstanding our differences on the constitutional future, will you join me to praise the work of Renfrewshire Council and its innovative approach to helping tenants through its hardship fund?

I commend Jackson Carlaw’s speech and the comments that were made by Nanette Milne, which demonstrated that, irrespective of the aggression and confrontation that we sometimes see in the chamber on a number of subjects, as far as the national health service in Scotland is concerned the consensus across all political parties is that the NHS is a valued and valuable asset to everyone in this country. I sometimes hope that we might have a debate about the national health service that reflects the fact that we are generally starting from the same starting point and that we have much in common, rather than one that focuses on all our differences. When I saw the motion in the name of my colleague Neil Findlay, I was surprised—I suspected that his promotion to the Labour front bench had moderated his views and tempered his natural enthusiasm to have a go and an argument. I think that his motion is perfectly reasonable, and, for once—[Interruption.] The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing shouts from a sedentary position, but I was deeply disappointed by his reaction to Neil Findlay’s speech because there is much in the motion on which we could build. Neil Findlay was not suggesting that the NHS is a basket case. There is much that we can be proud of in our NHS and in much of what has happened since devolution under the previous Labour and Lib Dem Administration. Indeed, to give credit where it is due, a number of initiatives have taken place under the SNP that are still worthy of support. We know that that party has the NHS embedded in its views and its philosophy. However, that is not what this debate is about. The debate is—or at least should be—about a recognition that the NHS is facing problems. When we highlight and articulate those problems—Roderick Campbell said that improvement is needed, and we should all be big enough to recognise that—and express our concerns and those that many of our constituents and their family members as well as NHS staff members come to us with, we are not criticising the NHS or attacking or condemning NHS staff. Rather, we are aspiring to do something better, which is in the interests of each and every one of us.

In many respects, I am glad that there are continuing self-evaluations and reviews of what is going on. However, interestingly, despite what the cabinet secretary said to Neil Findlay, it is not just the Labour Party that says that there is a need for a review. The Chartered Society of Physiotherapy in Scotland recommended that there should be a baseline review. What would that mean? The RCN has said that an entire system review of the NHS in Scotland, including staffing and beds, needs to take place if we are to consider providing an extended hours NHS. Does the member have difficulty in understanding that?

I am glad to hear that offer from the cabinet secretary. I also hope that he goes that bit further and agrees to work with all parties within and outwith the Parliament on what is needed to review the health service, because there are fundamental problems. We know that no health board has met the 12-week out-patient guarantee. On the day that I asked a question of the cabinet secretary about mortality rates at the Royal Alexandra hospital, a different set of figures to the ones produced for Ian McConaghy and highlighted in the Paisley Daily Express were suddenly produced by the NHS. Either there is incompetence in some of the information that is provided or there is manipulation of the statistics. We need to look at that together because I am not criticising the cabinet secretary or making a political point—the fact is that, under freedom of information, members of the public are being given wrong information.

I regret that I lost some time because of the interventions that I took. I think that there is much that we can agree on and that we can work together. I wish that, sometimes, we could put aside all the point-scoring arguments and concentrate on what is needed. A review would be a good place to start that process.

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that the settlement will mean that Labour councils will continue to see greater spending reductions than SNP councils, which means that Renfrewshire Council will continue to languish at or the near the bottom of the funding table?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Given everything that the minister has said that she has done and that she claims that the SNP Government has a vision, why has she failed to come to the Parliament to have a debate on that?

Chic Brodie said that he wanted to speak about facts. He set out the case for the promises that were made and asked that things be measured against them. He then said that the SNP had claimed that it would build 30,000 houses, but if he had been completely open and transparent with the Parliament, he would have included the phrase that Alex Johnstone reminded us of—“social rented”. Regardless of what the figure was, that is key. That promise was abandoned without any explanation. It would have been helpful if, at some point, the minister had come to the Parliament to explain why that promise was abandoned. John Mason said that we should attack the policies and the Administration, not the person. That is fair enough, but earlier the minister told the Parliament that the reason why she had not come here in the 15 months since she was appointed was that she had been too busy going out to meet people who really mattered. She said that that had prevented her from coming to the Parliament to discuss the key issue of housing. Apart from showing a fundamental contempt for the Parliament—to be honest, she is not alone in the SNP Administration in that—the minister’s explanation represents a profound statement of what the SNP’s priorities are. While she has been too busy meeting important people to come to the Parliament to talk about housing, we have had to debate—yesterday—Scotland’s census, which hardly ranks higher than a housing crisis. Rather than debate the housing crisis, we had to debate—for two and a half hours—the fact that it was a year till the Ryder cup. We had to discuss something that we had no control over: the noble aspiration of Dundee to be a city of culture. We had to debate the fact that we wanted to celebrate Scotland’s public science engagement, instead of talking about how science and money might help to improve the lives of ordinary Scots by being used to build good-quality, affordable social rented houses. We had to debate St Andrew’s day: a celebration of Scotland while the minister was too busy to come here to talk to the Parliament. It is about time that the SNP Administration put on the Parliament’s agenda an issue such as housing, which is fundamental to the lives of people the length and breadth of Scotland. John Baillie, who is the chair of the Accounts Commission, made a highly pertinent comment when he said: “Good housing is important for individuals and families but also for wider society. It can support economic growth, promote strong, resilient communities and improve health.” The problem is that the housing minister cannot be bothered to come to the chamber to discuss the things that John Baillie talked about. There are things that can be done. John Mason and others are right to say that there are problems with the financial situation not just of the Scottish Government, but of the wider public sector. Despite that, there are measures that could be taken, decisions that could be made and priorities that could be set out. We have heard a lot about the distinction between housing association housing and council housing, but housing associations and councils are telling us that they need capital funding for new social housing developments to be restored because, without that, they will struggle to provide the houses that are needed. There are a number of things that could be done immediately—Jackie Baillie listed many of them. There is also the problem of mixed-tenure estates, which people have brought to the Parliament to discuss with us and work on with us—yes, let us work together—to see what we can do to enhance the power of councils to intervene and deliver improvement work that would assist the allocation of funding to help owners to deal with on-going maintenance problems. I realise that affordability tests need to be built into that, but there are still things that can be done. Unfortunately, we have heard nothing from the minister and we have not had the opportunity to discuss that with her. There has been 15 months of silence and inaction as far as the Parliament is concerned, and that is not good enough. I genuinely accept that we should work across the political spectrum to see what improvements can be made. If the minister wants to do that through parliamentary committees as a starting point, and then produce something that can come back to the chamber, that is fine. That would be something that we could look at together when it comes to the budget. We did make suggestions during the budget process about the use of consequentials to improve housing, but if those are not acceptable to the minister and the Administration, that is fair enough. Let us work together on it. However, the prerequisite for working together is talking with each other, and 15 months of silence is unacceptable. We cannot afford another 15 months of this.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I am glad that the minister has clarified who she has spoken to, but it was her words in this chamber that suggested that what she was doing was more important than coming to Parliament. Whether she likes it or not, the reason why she is a Government minister is because the Government is accountable to this Parliament.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the reported concerns of teachers regarding their workload in relation to the new national exams. (S4O-02595)

I note the additional resources that have been put in and the work that has been done. Teachers are certainly to be commended for their efforts in trying to make a success of the changes. Notwithstanding what has been done, I hope that the minister will have a listening ear to the concerns that continue to be expressed, because it is painfully clear that teachers across the country have an increased workload. With their developing entirely new materials for the new nationals, the change in study leave arrangements and a lack of in-service days, teachers are left to take their work home just to cope with the planning and developing demands of the new nationals. It is imperative that the materials are available and that more support is given. Will the minister commit to addressing any concerns that continue to be expressed?

I take from what the cabinet secretary said that not only was it a demand-led issue, but there was a reduction in the number of disabled students making applications. Can the cabinet secretary tell us whether in fact there are fewer disabled students at colleges?

Presiding Officer, you will be aware of claims made this week by a former senior examiner that the higher maths paper has been dumbed down. Previously, the team of senior examiners for higher maths resigned. Those people know the higher maths paper better than any bureaucrat or politician. Pupils, their families and teachers need to be assured of the integrity of higher maths. Will the First Minister order an investigation into what is going on with higher maths?

Perhaps the minister could outline the not obvious good reason for Renfrewshire Council, under the Scottish National Party, doing away with classroom assistants.

Take a bold decision.

There can be no doubt that the wellbeing of universities and colleges is significant to Parliament and everyone in Scotland. The better our colleges and universities operate and deliver, the better it is for Scotland. It is unfortunate therefore that, in a bill of such significance, we have reached this situation. It is a wasted opportunity for the Parliament to come together and deliver something that would make a lasting and significant difference to our colleges and universities. The cabinet secretary said that it was the Government’s intention to listen, but I do not see any evidence of that, unless he meant that he was going to listen to himself and to his own party. There was certainly no evidence of listening to anything that any of the Opposition parties proposed in the Education and Culture Committee. It is unusual for such a significant bill to get to stage 3 in Parliament and not have the support of other parties. I hope that the cabinet secretary will reflect on that and ask why. The cabinet secretary said that there was no political reason to oppose the bill, and he is absolutely right. Scottish Labour is not opposing the bill for political reasons but because it was badly conceived, badly constructed and badly designed, and it has been badly delivered in the process. This has been a wasted opportunity. There is a range of areas in which we think that the opportunity has been wasted. Jenny Marra made the points about gender equality eloquently. I cannot for the life of me fathom why the Government could not reach out and grasp the opportunity given by Scottish Labour—by Jenny Marra—to do something about what we all recognise is completely and utterly unacceptable. It is disappointing that the Scottish Government refused to take the opportunity to go further in its attempts to widen access. I do not just mean by doing more about the number of young people from disadvantaged communities who go to university. I concur with Liz Smith about the widening access debate starting in the early years and coming through school, so that our young people, irrespective of their background, are ready, able and confident to go to university because of their abilities and not their financial circumstances. That investment needs to be made, and yet the evidence, in council area after council area throughout Scotland, is that councils, irrespective of their political leadership, are struggling to deliver essential education and services in the early years. If, as he said, the cabinet secretary thinks that Scotland has the best student support package, why does the Government persist in financially penalising poorer students by cutting grants in order to generate funds to give wealthier students access to cheap loans? We should not penalise the poor to help the better-off. That is a perverse notion. It is something that the cabinet secretary could have addressed in order to widen access, and he refused to do so. There is a trend in the bill that is deeply worrying and indeed a bit scary. I remember the debates before the Parliament was created in which some people in Scotland feared that power, control and services would begin to be centralised in the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government. They were told that that would not happen. Yet, since 2007, we have seen a clear trend towards the centralisation of power under the control of ministers. The bill does that in spades: we are seeing more centralisation, more ministerial influence and more ministerial control. That is the wrong way to take things forward. The cabinet secretary described the bill as real reform. Does he believe that the chaos that has been caused in our further education sector is positive reform? No one outside Parliament sees what is happening as positive. Staff and students are worried and we are seeing people at each other’s throats at a local level, where they see services and courses beginning to drift away. Others are scared to speak out because they fear for their positions, particularly with the mergers. All the while, more and more power is coming into the hands of the minister. That is the wrong way to go. It is creeping centralisation and it is undermining a long tradition of decentralisation in Scotland. We are going in the wrong direction.

We have heard a lot recently about the Scottish Government’s determination to help students from lower-income households to succeed in higher education. Indeed, allegedly tuition fees were scrapped to encourage those students to access a university place. The rhetoric is all there; sadly, the reality gives the lie to that commitment. Just this week, Professor Ferdinand von Prondzynski, who was hand-picked by Mike Russell to advise on changes in governance in our universities, said that the main beneficiaries of free tuition are middle-class parents who do not have to pay fees for children who would be more likely to go to university in any case. He pointed out that the current tuition fees policy does not support people from poorer backgrounds, who would not have had to make any contribution anyway, whatever the system. Professor von Prondzynski is not alone in that analysis. Last week, Professor Sheila Riddell of the University of Edinburgh pointed out that the proportion of students from working-class backgrounds at Scotland’s ancient universities has fallen. She said that “Overall, young people from poorer backgrounds are much less likely to go to university”, compared with those from better-off families. She has also claimed that, to date, free undergraduate tuition has not markedly altered the pattern of recruitment to Scottish universities. What other challenges might there be in addressing the problem? Clearly, student debt is a major issue. The Scottish National Party came to power in 2007 promising to write off student debt. Scottish Labour said that it could not be done—I remember at the time Allan Wilson being derided by Fiona Hyslop and Nicola Sturgeon, but the SNP persisted in saying that the debt would be written off. Lo and behold! The promise was broken and is now being conveniently forgotten. However, superficial opposition to student debt remains a feature of SNP rhetoric and it is one of the main arguments that the SNP uses for the abolition of tuition fees. Unfortunately, opposition to increased debt does not seem to apply to Scottish students from the lowest-income families. We might think that the failure to bring more lower-income students to university and the much-trumpeted opposition to debt would mean that the SNP actually did something to reduce debt levels for students from lower-income families. Let us look at the SNP Government’s record. SNP ministers have told us that the so-called minimum income guarantee is the best student support package in the United Kingdom. The most recent statistics on HE student support in Scotland show that, between 2010-11 and 2011-12, the amount of non-repayable awards, or grants, actually decreased by £24 million, which is a reduction of 19 per cent. At the same time, the amounts authorised in loans—loans that lead to debt—increased by £20.6 million. So much for writing off student debt. That switch to loans is hitting the poorest students the hardest. Those who are living in households with an income below £25,000 will lose between £890 and £1,640 per year. It should be remembered that more than 40 per cent of full-time students who are supported by the Scottish Government come from households with incomes below £25,000, so they are the ones who are most directly affected. At the same time, students with a family income of £61,000 or more will now qualify for a cheap £4,500 loan. In other words, poorer students are being asked to subsidise better-off students. Debt is being piled on to poorer students, and somehow that is supposed to make it easier for them to go to university. Since when did debt become part of our income? Those of us who have a mortgage know that that is a debt that has to be repaid. However, according to the SNP and the National Union of Students, for lower-income students, debt is now part of their income. The idea is bizarre and perverse. We should remember that this is from the same Scottish Government that said in 2008: “We believe that it is wrong for students to be put into debt by the state.” It is clear that it did not mean—or did not care about—students from lower-income families, whose debts are being increased and whose grants are being cut. We should listen to Lucy Hunter, who is a former head of higher education in the Scottish Executive. She said: “The grant reductions now planned will add considerably to the overall debt of students from lower income households without increasing the cash they have to spend.” In other words, the amount that those students have to spend is being switched from grants to loans, which leads to more debt. Scottish graduates from poorer backgrounds will end up with higher Government debt and less disposable income later in life. Comparisons are often made with students in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Are bursaries and grants being cut for poorer students in those jurisdictions? In England, students whose household income is of up to £25,000 can claim grants of up to £3,354. In Scotland, the same grant could be as low as £500; at most, it would be £1,750. Even the much-derided English system is prepared to give more help to poorer students. In Wales, grants of £5,161 are available to students whose household income is under £18,730. In Northern Ireland, maintenance grants of £3,475 are available to students whose household income is £19,203 or less. It seems that, in Scotland, the rocks will melt with the sun before any significant assistance is given to poorer students. It is not just younger students who are being hit. As Lucy Hunter demonstrated in her excellent article, Scotland is the only part of the United Kingdom in which mature students are given lower grants than young students receive. Apparently, we have a commitment to lifelong learning in this country, but grant support for mature students, who often have family and other financial commitments to meet, is being reduced to a flat rate of £750 for those with incomes of up to £17,000. Poor mature students are being given a grant of £750, which is the worst in the United Kingdom. I know many teachers and lecturers in colleges and universities who went back to education after having been made redundant or having decided on a career switch. It seems that the Scottish Government is turning its back on such people, who often have a huge amount to contribute by drawing on a wealth of working and life experience. In SNP-led Scotland, mature students will receive lower grants and finish their studies with around 45 per cent more debt than all students from the most well-off backgrounds. Over four years, young Scots from lower-income homes will need to borrow £22,000 to obtain their full state support for living costs. So much for writing off student debt. Lucy Hunter pointed out in her excellent article, “With much the lowest grants and universal free tuition”, Scotland is the part of the United Kingdom that is moving “closest to treating higher education support as a flat-rate benefit, while other jurisdictions choose instead to give more grant to those from lower-income homes ... As a result, the Scottish Government is the only one in the UK which expects graduates from poorer backgrounds to end up with a higher government debt and, therefore, a larger claim on their future earnings” and less disposable income in later life “than their peers from wealthier homes.” The SNP quotes the NUS in its amendment—both parrot the “best support package” nonsense. Yes, Scotland stands out from the rest of the UK—we should be quite clear about that—but the reality is that Scotland stands alone in its diminishing use of student grants, in asking poorer students to subsidise the better off and in refusing to take the action needed to help more students from poorer backgrounds succeed at university. The new support package is penalising the poor to help the rich. It is time to admit that the present system is perverse and unfair; time to move from paying lip service to social justice to making it a reality; time to ditch the present funding system, which hits poorer students the hardest; and time to bring in decent grants now. I move, That the Parliament notes the introduction of the minimum income guarantee for students; notes that grants for lower-income students are being cut; believes that lower-income students are being financially disadvantaged in Scotland compared to elsewhere in the UK; does not accept that lower-income students should be disadvantaged in order to provide support for those from better-off households, and believes that the cuts to grants for lower-income students should be reversed in order to address inequality in access to higher education in Scotland.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Perhaps the cabinet secretary has not read the motion, because there is nothing in the motion that talks about that particular point; what it is saying is, “Let’s restore grants to poorer students.” That is what the cabinet secretary is ignoring.

More debt.

Perhaps the art of answering a question is actually to give an answer. I have read that legal opinion, and it does not give the unequivocal answer that the First Minister seems to suggest. Could he tell us whether, if it is correct and if he accepts it, it means that European Union students will now qualify—sorry, will no longer qualify—for free tuition and could in fact be charged for university tuition in Scotland?

I thank Anne McTaggart for giving the Parliament the opportunity to put on record our appreciation of the contribution that Mary Barbour and the generation that she came from made to Scottish society. We must recognise that without the efforts of people such as Mary Barbour, we would not be sitting in this place today. Not only did Mary Barbour’s generation ensure that women got the vote; they proved that women could play an active and useful role in politics. Without the lead that was taken by Mary Barbour and her generation, not only working women but working men would not have made the advances that they made. Mary Barbour and the people around her at the time were a product of their generation. They were impelled to political activity because of the injustice and unfairness that surrounded them in society. It is right that we mark the contribution that those pioneers made, as we have so much to be thankful for. Not only do we have the opportunity to engage in democratic politics in places such as the Scottish Parliament and Glasgow City Council; we owe our education, our health service, decent housing conditions and—more significant—the fact that workers are now treated fairly in factories and offices to the efforts of that generation, who struggled so much. I put on record the contribution of not only Mary Barbour and people from Govan and Glasgow, but of Renfrewshire, because Mary was a product of Renfrewshire, which I represent. Like Hanzala Malik and Sandra White, I was born in Govan, but Mary’s formative years—as Anne McTaggart said—were spent in Kilbarchan and Elderslie in Renfrewshire. She married David Barbour, who came from Johnstone. Kilbarchan was a hotbed of political radicalism. It was the home of radical, educated weavers who fought for democratic rights and workers rights. They were hugely political and that clearly influenced Mary. Mary moved to Elderslie and worked in Stoddard’s carpet factory there. That, too, was a community with strong industrial and trade union roots. Members can imagine what it meant when she moved from the political environment in which she grew up to the hotbed of political radicalism in Govan, where the injustice and poverty were stark. She had the confidence of her upbringing to be able to take that a step further. I am delighted that Maria Fyfe and others in Glasgow are doing much to mark Mary Barbour’s contribution to society, but I also pay tribute to my colleagues Councillor Derek Bibby and Councillor Chris Gilmour in Renfrewshire Council, who want Kilbarchan to mark the contribution that Mary Barbour made to Scottish society. She was a product of Kilbarchan and made her mark in Govan, but the whole of Scotland benefited from her activities. The worst thing that we could do is to say that all we need to do to commemorate Mary Barbour is to stick up a statue and the job will be done. Actually, the significant thing is what she stood for. She stood against injustice and exploitation. Where injustice and exploitation exist, the need for Mary Barbours of today is greater than ever. When we have injustices such as the bedroom tax, as Patricia Ferguson and others have said, the present generation of Mary Barbours needs to come forward and stand against them. When there are tragedies such as the one in Bangladesh in which women and child workers are killed because of poor working conditions, we can say that Mary Barbour’s work is not finished. The best tribute that we can pay to her is not only to mark her contribution with a statue but to say that her work goes on and will not finish until we see fairness and justice throughout the world.

Can the minister explain why the specified text has been reintroduced, despite its having been previously discarded for offering too narrow an assessment?

17. To ask the Scottish Government for what reasons schools continue to report problems in the recruitment of supply teachers. (S4O-02151)

The cabinet secretary refers to historical problems, but in recent years the problem has been exacerbated by the salaries that are on offer to supply teachers. The problems exist across Scotland and are not confined to specific geographic areas. Councils and teachers know that there is a problem; indeed, teachers are refusing to work on the current salaries that are on offer. Will the Scottish Government therefore provide extra funding to councils to ensure that the present failing arrangement is scrapped and a fairer and more attractive scheme is introduced?

We have got all afternoon.

The minister mentioned the big bang event on a couple of occasions. I suspect that the two hours and 50 minutes that we are devoting to this debate will be slightly less educational and entertaining than two hours and 50 minutes spent watching reruns of “The Big Bang Theory”, which might be commended to people. We have missed an opportunity today. Just a few months after a debate on science, we had the opportunity to do something that had a focus, intent and purpose. There is nothing in the minister’s motion that I would disagree with and, indeed, there is nothing that the minister has said that I would disagree with. The problem is that I am not sure that that takes this Parliament or anyone else further forward, other than with us all standing up and saying how much we agree with each other about the significance and importance of science. We as a Parliament might want to reflect on whether we can do our business and engage with the public in different and better ways. Given the significance that the minister says that he and the Scottish Government attach to science, some of our committees could have held an investigation—indeed, there could have been joint committee investigation—into different aspects of science. For the people here today, two hours and 50 minutes could have been better spent in a round-table meeting, with scientists, academics, teachers and, indeed, students and pupils, to find out the issues that worry people and what can be done to drive forward the encouragement of science and the debate on it.

Sandra White might not understand how the Parliamentary Bureau works—I do not know—but she might want to talk to her business manager about in-built majorities and how the Parliament’s business is determined. I am trying to suggest that we could find better ways of having a specific focus and coming back to a debate in which there is something relevant and pertinent that could move the debate and agenda forward. I have no doubt that Sandra White will have a lot of interesting things to say, and I am sure that other members will have interesting things to say, but I suspect that they will all stand up and agree with one another on the significance and importance of science and ponder how we can encourage more people to engage in it. We are missing an opportunity to take things another step forward from the debate that we had just a few months ago. I cannot disagree that we need to encourage more young people into science. I accept that that is partly about looking at how science is taught in schools, and I think that some of the initiatives that will no doubt flow from the curriculum for excellence will make a significant contribution to that, but there is also a challenge for us all in making young people see the relevance of science in academic study and as a career path to follow. We have said that in previous debates, and that accounts for part of my frustration. We are still not doing enough. That is despite the sterling work that is being done in our universities, many of which are thriving despite problems at an earlier stage. We have a problem that starts from the early years and goes through our whole education system. Young people do not see the necessity and value of science and, worse, they do not see the opportunities that it can bring. It requires investment, focus and a change of emphasis to address that situation. My colleague Neil Findlay asked about women and why the motion does not pay more attention to the need to engage women in science. That is a glaring weakness in everything that we do and say. When we look at the number of women who come out with suitable qualifications but do not follow them through in academic or career pursuits, we must ask ourselves why that is and what it means in respect of wasted opportunity for our country. We can have all the debates in the world about inward investment, call centres and our financial services, all of which make a significant contribution to our economy, but there is no doubt that, if we are to thrive as a successful country in the 21st century, we need to do more to improve engagement in science, technology and engineering. Coming up with cutting-edge ideas, being able to develop them here, and selling them abroad will make this country successful. When it comes to engagement in science and technology, we cannot afford to ignore women in the way that we continue to do. There is a fundamental, structural problem in our country that we are not addressing properly. The first Prime Minister of India, Nehru, stated: “Who indeed could afford to ignore science today? At every turn we have to seek its aid ... The future belongs to science and those who make friends with science.” That is true for 21st century Scotland, and the people who are engaged in science in our universities know the significance of that. The minister has mentioned a number of innovative projects in our universities. A whole list of what is going on right across the country could be reeled out, and it needs to be given significant and added status. I would much prefer it if we could do that not only by holding a two hours and 50 minute debate but by embedding that into the work of the Parliament’s committees, so that parliamentarians have the opportunity to go out and engage. That work could happen across party lines because I agree fundamentally with the minister on the matter and, as I said, there is nothing that I would disagree with in his motion. It is in the interests of everyone in the country that we do things better than we are doing right now. The significant worries about funding science festivals and centres and ensuring that science has a future must be addressed. That future comes not only from investment but from access to research council funding for our universities. We cannot ignore the worries that many academics have about access to research council funding. It is not good enough simply to say to them that it will be okay or to tell them not to worry about the constitution because the money and the access will still be there. Those worries need to be answered soon because they know the significance of research council funding. The debate is about the value of something that should be fundamental to our education system but which in some cases is unfortunately not. That means that we need to invest in, resource and empower our teachers. As I have said, curriculum for excellence will give us opportunities in that direction. However, we cannot ignore the damage that has been done by the cuts in continuing professional development funding and access to CPD courses that many teachers face. Teachers need to ensure that they are up to date with developments so that they are confident and empowered to teach their pupils. If they do not have the enthusiasm, knowledge and wherewithal, they will not enthuse and motivate the next generation of scientists that we so badly need. Perhaps we should take the debate as a wake-up call that science is important and that we should not devalue and underestimate it. Let us see whether we can—perhaps in private and not within the confines of the chamber—sit down and discuss how we can move the agenda forward, and then come back with debates that will engage people and maybe even fill the gallery with people desperate to know what we want to do in the advancement of science. Without that commitment or understanding of the significance of science, we will face a bleak future. However, when I look at the enthusiasm, techniques, knowledge and skills that are available in our colleges and universities, I am confident that we can do something that will make a difference.

We have got all afternoon.

The minister mentioned the big bang event on a couple of occasions. I suspect that the two hours and 50 minutes that we are devoting to this debate will be slightly less educational and entertaining than two hours and 50 minutes spent watching reruns of “The Big Bang Theory”, which might be commended to people. We have missed an opportunity today. Just a few months after a debate on science, we had the opportunity to do something that had a focus, intent and purpose. There is nothing in the minister’s motion that I would disagree with and, indeed, there is nothing that the minister has said that I would disagree with. The problem is that I am not sure that that takes this Parliament or anyone else further forward, other than with us all standing up and saying how much we agree with each other about the significance and importance of science. We as a Parliament might want to reflect on whether we can do our business and engage with the public in different and better ways. Given the significance that the minister says that he and the Scottish Government attach to science, some of our committees could have held an investigation—indeed, there could have been joint committee investigation—into different aspects of science. For the people here today, two hours and 50 minutes could have been better spent in a round-table meeting, with scientists, academics, teachers and, indeed, students and pupils, to find out the issues that worry people and what can be done to drive forward the encouragement of science and the debate on it.

Sandra White might not understand how the Parliamentary Bureau works—I do not know—but she might want to talk to her business manager about in-built majorities and how the Parliament’s business is determined. I am trying to suggest that we could find better ways of having a specific focus and coming back to a debate in which there is something relevant and pertinent that could move the debate and agenda forward. I have no doubt that Sandra White will have a lot of interesting things to say, and I am sure that other members will have interesting things to say, but I suspect that they will all stand up and agree with one another on the significance and importance of science and ponder how we can encourage more people to engage in it. We are missing an opportunity to take things another step forward from the debate that we had just a few months ago. I cannot disagree that we need to encourage more young people into science. I accept that that is partly about looking at how science is taught in schools, and I think that some of the initiatives that will no doubt flow from the curriculum for excellence will make a significant contribution to that, but there is also a challenge for us all in making young people see the relevance of science in academic study and as a career path to follow. We have said that in previous debates, and that accounts for part of my frustration. We are still not doing enough. That is despite the sterling work that is being done in our universities, many of which are thriving despite problems at an earlier stage. We have a problem that starts from the early years and goes through our whole education system. Young people do not see the necessity and value of science and, worse, they do not see the opportunities that it can bring. It requires investment, focus and a change of emphasis to address that situation. My colleague Neil Findlay asked about women and why the motion does not pay more attention to the need to engage women in science. That is a glaring weakness in everything that we do and say. When we look at the number of women who come out with suitable qualifications but do not follow them through in academic or career pursuits, we must ask ourselves why that is and what it means in respect of wasted opportunity for our country. We can have all the debates in the world about inward investment, call centres and our financial services, all of which make a significant contribution to our economy, but there is no doubt that, if we are to thrive as a successful country in the 21st century, we need to do more to improve engagement in science, technology and engineering. Coming up with cutting-edge ideas, being able to develop them here, and selling them abroad will make this country successful. When it comes to engagement in science and technology, we cannot afford to ignore women in the way that we continue to do. There is a fundamental, structural problem in our country that we are not addressing properly. The first Prime Minister of India, Nehru, stated: “Who indeed could afford to ignore science today? At every turn we have to seek its aid ... The future belongs to science and those who make friends with science.” That is true for 21st century Scotland, and the people who are engaged in science in our universities know the significance of that. The minister has mentioned a number of innovative projects in our universities. A whole list of what is going on right across the country could be reeled out, and it needs to be given significant and added status. I would much prefer it if we could do that not only by holding a two hours and 50 minute debate but by embedding that into the work of the Parliament’s committees, so that parliamentarians have the opportunity to go out and engage. That work could happen across party lines because I agree fundamentally with the minister on the matter and, as I said, there is nothing that I would disagree with in his motion. It is in the interests of everyone in the country that we do things better than we are doing right now. The significant worries about funding science festivals and centres and ensuring that science has a future must be addressed. That future comes not only from investment but from access to research council funding for our universities. We cannot ignore the worries that many academics have about access to research council funding. It is not good enough simply to say to them that it will be okay or to tell them not to worry about the constitution because the money and the access will still be there. Those worries need to be answered soon because they know the significance of research council funding. The debate is about the value of something that should be fundamental to our education system but which in some cases is unfortunately not. That means that we need to invest in, resource and empower our teachers. As I have said, curriculum for excellence will give us opportunities in that direction. However, we cannot ignore the damage that has been done by the cuts in continuing professional development funding and access to CPD courses that many teachers face. Teachers need to ensure that they are up to date with developments so that they are confident and empowered to teach their pupils. If they do not have the enthusiasm, knowledge and wherewithal, they will not enthuse and motivate the next generation of scientists that we so badly need. Perhaps we should take the debate as a wake-up call that science is important and that we should not devalue and underestimate it. Let us see whether we can—perhaps in private and not within the confines of the chamber—sit down and discuss how we can move the agenda forward, and then come back with debates that will engage people and maybe even fill the gallery with people desperate to know what we want to do in the advancement of science. Without that commitment or understanding of the significance of science, we will face a bleak future. However, when I look at the enthusiasm, techniques, knowledge and skills that are available in our colleges and universities, I am confident that we can do something that will make a difference.

Affordable, good-quality and flexible childcare has become an absolute necessity for the economic wellbeing of many hard-working Scottish families. For some families, the absence of such childcare means that they are unable to take up employment. Even worse, some families have had to give up work either because they could not afford the childcare on offer or because none was available locally. In its report “Making Work Pay—The Childcare Trap”, Save the Children said that high childcare costs are affecting parents’ ability to work, train and study in Scotland. The report said that eight out of 10 parents living in severe poverty said that cost was a barrier to accessing childcare. It also said that parents in severe poverty have cut back on essentials such as food and other household bills simply to pay for childcare and that the high cost of childcare means that work is not paying for the poorest families. I am sure that I am not alone in saying that childcare costs are higher than housing costs for some parents. The Daycare Trust’s childcare costs survey in 2012 painted a sombre picture, reporting 44,000 fewer families receiving help with childcare costs since the tax credit cut in April of that year. The survey also reported that in many parts of Britain the average cost of childcare now exceeds £100 for a part-time place—that is for 25 hours—with the average yearly expenditure for a child under two standing at £5,103. Good-quality, affordable childcare is essential not only for families’ personal wellbeing, but for our country’s economic wellbeing. There is no doubt that the introduction of the universal entitlement to free nursery education by the Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition transformed the lives of many families; it also marked a revolution in the way that we educate our younger children. In 2007, both Labour and the Scottish National Party promised to extend the number of available hours, and the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill will finally deliver on that seven years later. This debate is not about that bill, but I will make a few comments in passing. The extension of hours will, no doubt, be warmly welcomed by families across Scotland, as will the introduction of flexibility. However, we should not confuse education with childcare nor suggest that childcare is a substitute for education. For very young children, early childhood education and childcare are inseparable but they are not indivisible. When we educate a young child, we have also to care for that child. In seeking to meet parents’ legitimate childcare demands, we should not abandon the progress that we have made in early years education. To do so would risk widening the educational attainment gap and setting Scottish education back 40 years or more.

Perhaps the minister has failed to understand what I am saying. Because childcare and education are not indivisible, we should not substitute one for the other. The welcome extension to 600 hours should be an extension of education, not necessarily of childcare—but we can have that debate at another time. Early education is planned as any teacher would plan it. It must be focused on the progressive development of the child and it cannot be ad hoc. The staff involved must have an advanced knowledge of child development. On the other hand, childcare can be the physical and social care of the child. It can even be about leisure activities for the child. That is the case in many excellent out-of-school care projects, which certainly care for the child but do not necessarily educate the child. It is disappointing that the Scottish Government’s amendment tries to suggest that the bill is the answer to the childcare problems faced by families throughout Scotland. That carries the danger of diminishing early years educational input and substituting it with childcare. We also need to remember that the focus of the bill is on three and four-year-olds. It will do little, if anything, for children under three and nothing at all for those aged five and upwards. The childcare needs of Scottish families start when the child is born and continue up to the age of 14, but the amendment is strangely silent on that. Even the reference to the work of the early years task force is only about the early years. It is disappointing that the amendment has nothing to say about the wider childcare needs of Scottish families. Families need help at the end of the school day, and sometimes they need it before the school day begins. They need help during in-service days and school holidays. Given the demands on the many women who work in retail, families may need help into the evening, too. I spoke recently to a number of Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers shop stewards who reported pressures on women being asked to change shift patterns or to work extended hours temporarily, which can sometimes cause a childcare crisis. Not every family has two parents to share the load, whereas in others both parents have to work. Not everyone has an available and willing extended family to take on some of the pressures of childcare. Therefore, when we talk about a comprehensive childcare strategy, we need one that looks at childcare from birth to 14 and does not just talk about the early years. We need a strategy that is not only flexible enough to meet families’ needs, but affordable. Above all, any extended childcare provision must be underpinned by quality and high standards and be subject to rigorous scrutiny and rules. We cannot afford to gamble with our children’s wellbeing just to save money.

The minister again fails to understand. She does not even understand the words “early learning and childcare for all” that she uses. I am saying that childcare goes up to the age of 14; we are not talking just about early years. I realise that the delivery of such a service will present financial and physical capacity challenges. If there was an easy solution, it would have been presented long before now. That is why Scottish Labour is proposing a Scottish childcare commission, which I hope will have all-party support. For something that is so essential for hard-working families, we need to set aside our political differences and come up with a sustainable proposal that will make a real difference to them. I accept that politicians need to engage experts in early childhood education, but they also need to engage those who have expertise in the delivery of childcare and knowledge and understanding of working with children. We also need to engage those who have responsibility for delivery. We should not be too big to admit that, individually, we do not have all the answers, or that there are others who might know better. We must engage those who know what they are talking about. Above all, we need to work out how much such a service would cost and where the money would come from. That is why Johann Lamont has offered to work with the First Minister, but that work should not be restricted only to the Scottish National Party and Scottish Labour. There are practical things that we can do now, if there is the will across the political spectrum—we need not wait until 2014 or 2016. If we are to make a long-term difference, we need to start working together and not delay while Scottish families struggle. I do not mean any disrespect to the Council of Economic Advisers when I say that it is not best placed to come up with a practical model of comprehensive childcare delivery. Its members may be noted economic experts—I accept that financial underpinning is essential for the service—but we need the expertise of those who educate and work with children. I agree with one thing in the Scottish Government amendment: we need to look at the best models of delivery and funding for Scotland. That is why, even at this late stage, I appeal to the Scottish Government not to move its amendment. Let us work together and put our differences aside. Let us agree to share the knowledge and expertise in not only the political spectrum, but the professional spectrum. Let us agree, for once, to put party-political differences aside and work together to come up with the affordable, flexible and quality childcare that families in Scotland want and need. Let us put families first. I move, That the Parliament agrees that good quality, affordable childcare is essential to support hard-working families; welcomes the proposed extension of fully-funded early years provision to 600 hours and believes that it is essential that this has a clear educational underpinning; notes the financial and logistical challenges of extending childcare across Scotland and believes that all parties should work to reach a consensus on delivery, availability, affordability and financing of a comprehensive childcare strategy, and believes that a Scottish childcare commission with all-party support should be established to investigate and make recommendations on the expansion of affordable quality childcare across Scotland.

The minister has spoken at some length about early learning and childcare and although I welcome any additional resources in that respect does she accept that a debate about childcare is not just about the early years? The crisis facing Scottish families is often about out-of-school care and, sometimes, care in the mornings. Does she accept that we need to work together to come up with something, or does she intend to ignore that completely?

Will the member take an intervention?

It was not enough.

There is hardly a community in Scotland that has not over the years been affected by death that has been caused at work. It is not just the deaths that have happened in the workplace that blight lives but, as John Pentland eloquently said, the disease and illness that is also caused. I thank John Pentland for bringing the debate to Parliament, because it is timely, given the incident in Bangladesh, which reminds us of what workers have to suffer in many parts of the world. To return to the Scottish dimension, over the generations steel workers suffered and died or their health was blighted, while coal miners in many communities in Scotland suffered greatly because of the conditions in their workplaces. However, the legacy is not only industrial: over the years, many agricultural workers in rural areas in Scotland suffered because of carelessness, thoughtlessness and—to be frank—disregard for their wellbeing. Unfortunately, that is not an historical issue for Scotland and the United Kingdom. As Bill Kidd, Neil Findlay and others have said, the cuts to the Health and Safety Executive show, to be frank, a blatant disregard for the wellbeing of people who are doing nothing but simply trying to do an honest day’s work. We can look at deaths and injuries in all our communities over the past few years. Wanda Lustig, who is a Polish worker, was injured while working for a Dunblane farming company. Her life has been ruined because of the injury that she sustained at work and her employer has now been fined. There are also tragic deaths. Patricia Ferguson will, no doubt, talk about the Stockline disaster, which affected families in my area in Renfrewshire. Also, prosecutions were reported in the news this week in relation to the capsizing of the Flying Phantom tugboat, which affected a family in Houston in Renfrewshire, which is part of my constituency, as well as other families in Greenock and Gourock. Every one of those events shows carelessness and disregard for workers because they were, in a sense, an afterthought. I am pleased that my colleague Neil Findlay has been doing so much work on blacklisting, but it is a disgrace that when workers attempt to protect themselves and their fellow workers, they are blacklisted as a result of doing nothing other than saying that their health and safety should be paramount when they do their day’s work. Those blacklists existed in secrecy and families were denied an income coming into the house because people had done something that most of us would think was the decent and right thing to do. As a socialist and a trade unionist, I do not think that my responsibilities simply stop at my community, my workplace, Scotland or, indeed, the United Kingdom. The tragedy in Bangladesh reminds us that my family and other families in Scotland have benefited on the back of the turmoil and tragedy of workers who are producing cheap clothing. It is a disgrace that Bhopal is still an issue and that it will continue to be an issue for many years. Workers in many countries scramble about waste sites trying to earn a day’s living, with no regard for their health, which shows that there remains a problem. Our duty is to workers in Scotland, in Britain and internationally. We need to stand by them. It is a disgrace that profits still matter more than lives.

The minister has indicated that partnership will be voluntary. If local authorities show no willingness to participate, how will the Scottish Government deliver the commitment?

James Kelly asked a specific question about how much would be saved from the merger of the three colleges that he identified. The minister indicated that she knew the global figure. We can get a global figure only when we add individual figures together. Will she now give the specific answer about how much will be saved by that merger?

There are undoubtedly times in a parliamentary process when issues of political difference need to come to the fore and when the different political parties can argue about their respective policies as they try to show the weakness in the cases put by the other parties. There are also times when we are required to do our job as parliamentarians and when we need to consider our responsibilities not just to the people we represent but to Parliament as an institution in holding Government to account. When I was convener of the Public Audit Committee, there were a number of occasions when I was extremely critical of events that had happened when I was a minister in the previous Administration, because that was the right thing to do when the evidence presented itself. I took my responsibility as a member of that committee seriously. This is an occasion when we need to reflect on the role of committees on behalf of Parliament. The Education and Culture Committee has attempted, within certain limits, to do a job on behalf of Parliament. The role of committees is to scrutinise, comment and criticise in cases where things are not as they should be. Unfortunately, we can perceive a weakness in the Scottish Parliament if we compare ourselves with what happens at Westminster. We have taken pride and delight at times in criticising the inefficiencies and ineffectiveness of what happens there, yet in Westminster we see the robustness of the reports published by committees that are led by members of different political parties, who are prepared to stand up to the Government of the day and tell the facts as they really are. There are times when we need committees of this Parliament to do exactly that job. The scrutiny of the Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill is one of those times when we need the committees of the Parliament to stand up and tell the Government where our concerns lie. We do not disagree with the fundamental principles that have been outlined by the cabinet secretary. We do not disagree with the need to widen access. I do not disagree with the need to widen governance. When I was a committee convener, George Foulkes and I criticised the membership of college boards on a number of occasions, and we highlighted how complicit and cosy some of them were in relation to college principals, because that was the right thing to do. Some of our concern is reflected in comments that the cabinet secretary and others have made. On a number of occasions, George Foulkes and I criticised the unseemly way in which university principals had hiked their pay at a time when the pay and conditions of many members of their staff were being severely constrained. There are times when we need to tell things as they are. Our concerns do not lie with the principles and doing the right thing—we will stand shoulder to shoulder with the cabinet secretary in trying to effect improvements where they are necessary. Our concern is about the detail of the bill. Time after time, the evidence from witnesses has shown that there are flaws and concerns with it. That does not mean ditching the bill and its never seeing the light of day again. We are saying that we should take our time to get the legislation right and ensure that it is effective. While we are arguing about that, let us use the powers that we have that do not require legislation, including those in areas such as widening access, as Liz Smith and other members have mentioned. The debate is about a parliamentary process, not the rights and wrongs of a bill. As I have said, I agree on issues of governance and widening access. Stewart Maxwell said that Parliament should not be overtimid in its approach. That is right—but the committees of the Parliament should not be overtimid in their willingness to hold the Government of the day to account.

I did not criticise the report—if Stewart Maxwell had listened to me, he would have heard that. Where I have a difference is on the conclusion that Stewart Maxwell and the other SNP members drew in saying that the report represents support for the bill, when the evidence in the report demonstrates that that support is not there. That is where there is a need to stand up and be counted. As Liz Smith said, the bill lacks clarity. Stewart Maxwell used the word “clarity”. If he went back to the report, he would find that word used time after time. Indeed, the report says that “greater clarity” on the bill is required. That is why we think that more work needs to be done. George Adam gave yet another interesting history of his family. Some of the things that he said absolutely give the reason why action needs to be taken to widen access. However, that does not mean that the bill is good or that the measures in it are the right ones at this time. It does not mean that the Government should not pause and reflect on what needs to be done.

Actually, I did not say that it is a good bill; I said that the intentions and principles are good, but I share Liz Smith’s and Liam McArthur’s concerns that the bill is bad and is flawed. It is badly constructed. We need to put in efforts to widen access. As Liz Smith said—and to repeat—we do not necessarily need legislation but, if legislation can help, by all means let us have it. If we need legislation to improve the gender balance, as Jenny Marra talked about, or to widen involvement for trade union members, by all means let us have it. There are issues on which more work needs to be done, but the problem is that the bill as it stands has not been well constructed and all the criticisms and concerns that have been expressed have not been answered. I do not want to put the bill into the dustbin of history. However, Scottish Labour believes that, because the criticisms in the Education and Culture Committee’s report are so substantial, the cabinet secretary is required to go away, reflect and come back to us with something that is more fit for purpose.

The cabinet secretary referred to attempts to undermine colleges. Perhaps that is why college lecturers in the Educational Institute of Scotland, without opposition, passed a motion of no confidence in him. The cabinet secretary talked about misleading figures. Will he confirm the figures that were recently obtained from a number of colleges, including Edinburgh College, which placed on the waiting list 961 people, and Reid Kerr College in my area, which placed on the waiting list 1,461 people? Will he do a comprehensive check of all colleges so that we can have accurate figures?

The issue is not just about marches and demonstrations. I, too, have received complaints over the past few months from constituents who include Rangers supporters as well as Celtic supporters. It has been suggested that the 2012 act is being used to harass football fans, not deal with illegal behaviour. The cabinet secretary would be foolish to ignore those growing complaints. Will he act and order an inquiry with a report to the Parliament before large sections of football supporters lose confidence in the police?

Will the cabinet secretary give any assistance to those students with learning disabilities who can no longer access courses at local colleges?

The commission spoke of the devastating consequences of social and economic disadvantage. Will the First Minister allocate additional resources, to enable schools in disadvantaged areas to tackle the issue head-on?

5. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to address concerns expressed by teachers in an Educational Institute of Scotland survey on readiness for the new national qualifications. (S4F-01208)

Teachers will welcome any additional support. If the First Minister has confidence in the actions that have been taken, will he give his personal guarantee that no Scottish pupil will be disadvantaged by the changes?

How does the minister respond to parents’ representatives who believe that the Scottish Government’s proposals cannot be implemented or achieved?

I can agree with much that Michael Russell said. He is right that we must have “access ... based on the ability to learn, and not on the ability to pay.” No one on the Labour benches would disagree with that. We recognise the benefits of free education. The problem is that, for many people, significant parts of education are not actually free. Any education, no matter how it is described, comes at a cost. The question is who pays for it and how is it paid for. I suspect that, this side of the referendum, it will be impossible to have a sensible debate about confronting the wider challenges that face Scotland. Instead, the SNP Government will present us with a list of promises and unverifiable assertions about how we can live in a land of milk and honey, if only we listen to Alex Salmond. The Administration has form when it comes to promising popular and superficially attractive policies. The SNP promised to dump student debt. Scotland voted for that, only for the promise—rather than the debt—to be dumped. We were solemnly promised that, as part of a free education package, class sizes in primaries 1 to 3 would be reduced to 18, but that, too, was abandoned. We were told that free school meals would be provided in primaries 1 to 3, but the SNP Government refused to provide the money for that, so that, too, has withered on the vine. We were told that free university education is part of a package of free universal benefits, only to find that not everything is universally free. We do not have free universal entitlement for NHS dental treatment, housing benefit is not a universal entitlement and neither is council tax benefit. Because of the huge costs that are being forced on councils, we find that care services for the vulnerable have been cut, and charges have been pushed up. So much for free universal entitlement. So, I turn to free university tuition. “The rocks will melt with the sun” before that is abandoned, apparently. However, part-time students, often from lower-income backgrounds, have to pay their own tuition fees. Did the rocks melt? Postgraduate students also have to pay their own fees, even though postgraduate study can be an essential part of the academic process. Why the difference for them? We see the reality of the SNP’s priorities when it comes to colleges. A couple of weeks ago, we had the shameful spectacle of SNP members cheering a cut in college budgets.

If the cabinet secretary examines the record, he will see that he voted to cut the college budgets, compared to previous expenditure. We have seen college courses cut, thousands of Scots denied places and staff being made redundant. We see the sneering attitude of the SNP in the comments from Alex Salmond’s adviser, Joan McAlpine, about part-time courses, which are valuable to low-income students and students with disabilities. She said: “Many of these will be leisure classes, such as flower arranging.” Scotland’s colleges have had to shoulder the burden in order to make the SNP look good when it comes to universities, but even in our universities, there are problems. Universities are still exclusion zones for many young people from low-income families. We have failed to widen access, and have made universities the destination of choice for those from better-off families, while the few from lower-income backgrounds struggle to gain access. Of course, even if they are accepted for a place, they will find that the SNP Government has cut the bursaries for lower-income students by £890 a year. The SNP boasts about a minimum income guarantee that is largely based on loans. My mortgage has never been part of my income, so why is a loan regarded as income for those who are starting out in life with nothing? What has been done to address the higher drop-out rate for students from lower-income families? There is no point boasting about free education at all levels if it is at some levels increasingly available only to the better off. What about the free tuition for non-Scottish students? We are paying more than £75 million a year to provide free university tuition for European Union students from outwith the UK. In January 2011, Mike Russell said that European students were becoming “an increasingly significant drain on the university sector”. He promised to fix that, but he has not. What will happens, then, if Scotland decides to separate from the rest of the United Kingdom? Students from England, Wales and Northern Ireland would also qualify for that free tuition, which would push the bill to more than £225 million a year. On top of that, the universities would automatically lose the money that they currently bring in from those students. Worse still, those students would have to compete with Scottish students for the capped places that are currently available. The only way to guarantee the same number of Scottish students would be to increase the cap on student numbers, which would mean finding even more money for universities and cutting college budgets, school budgets or home-care services for the vulnerable. Is that the socially just Scotland that we want?

It is the Scottish Government that has allowed that to happen. All that is taking place at a time when budgets are being cut. Universities have a stable financial settlement for the next couple of years, but what then? There will be severe constraint on public expenditure thereafter, so to protect universities within current policy will mean harsh cuts elsewhere. Professor David Bell from the University of Stirling has highlighted the challenges that face the Scottish Government and Scottish politicians. Crawford Beveridge, the Scottish National Party’s expert adviser, was last week held up by the SNP as an internationally renowned economist. He was previously asked to carry out work for the SNP Government on the pressures on public services. His report said: “A debate needs to be had on whether those who can afford to pay might be invited to do so, thus allowing better targeting of those most in need.” John Swinney agreed, saying: “Our task now is to encourage the widest possible debate about the range of options that are contained in this Review.” Just to be safe, the SNP asked the Christie commission to come up with ideas. That commission said: “Contentious issues ... must be considered openly and transparently rather than in the current polarised terms.” The SNP’s own experts are saying that we need a debate. We do need a debate on how we allocate scarce resources; we need to decide on our priorities and whether we are prepared to spend in order to protect the vulnerable, the weak and the disadvantaged. We need to discuss how we protect and develop Scottish education and we need to consider how we pay for that. The English system is not an attractive or effective one and we can, and should, do better than that. Many people believe that that should be done through direct taxation, with those who are better off making a greater contribution. However, increased taxation has been ruled out by John Swinney, so how will we shape further and higher education in Scotland? How do we pay for education that is essential for the wellbeing of our country? How do we do that without making the most disadvantaged people in our country shoulder the greatest burden? How do we resolve the complexities and contradictions that exist in so many areas of Scottish education? Scottish Labour believes that it is time for an open and thorough debate. We need to put aside the political posturing. We cannot keep postponing the difficult decisions. The future of Scottish education is too important to be left to any one group of politicians, who are often driven by short-term expediency and opportunism. That is why we are backing an independent commission on further and higher education in Scotland. I move amendment S4M-05652.2, to leave out from “and will” to end and insert: “; recognises the continuing underrepresentation and higher dropout rates at universities of students from lower income backgrounds; notes that part-time and postgraduate university students have to pay fees; further notes with concern that the financial settlement for universities in this spending round has coincided with cuts to college budgets; believes that the long-term sustainability of university funding beyond 2014-15 needs to be addressed; recognises that maintaining the funding of Scotland’s universities could lead to cuts elsewhere; rejects the funding model prevailing in England; notes that the report of the Scottish Government-commissioned Independent Budget Review Panel stated that ‘a debate needs to be had on whether those who can afford to pay might be invited to do so, thus allowing better targeting of those in most need’; supports the view of the Commission on the Future Delivery of Public Services that ‘contentious issues must be considered openly and transparently, rather than in the current polarised terms’, and supports the establishment of an independent commission on further and higher education in Scotland.”

Stewart Maxwell said that Johann Lamont is “hell-bent on making young people pay for their education”. I do not recognise those words. Could he quote what Johann Lamont said?

Will the member take an intervention?

The member mentioned Scandinavian countries not charging tuition fees. Does she advocate Scandinavian levels of taxation? [Interruption.]

The issue is not so much tuition fees as how we pay for university education and all decent public services. A number of options are open to the Scottish Government and the Parliament and all members can form an opinion. Joan McAlpine takes the view that we should have fair taxes, as is the case in Scandinavia.

If the member lets me finish my point, I will do so. Mike Russell demurred from such a view. He probably takes a similar view to John Swinney. Indeed, we know what he thinks the first four years will be like if Scotland votes to separate from the United Kingdom, because he has said that the Scottish Government intends to reduce personal taxation by £2 billion—a drop of 25 per cent. Mike Russell is quite clear that there is a tax-cutting agenda, so how do we pay for services? Michael Russell rose— I will take an intervention from Joan McAlpine.

I take it from that intervention that Joan McAlpine cannot answer my question. A number of accusations were made in the debate. George Adam and others talked about Labour’s cuts commission. I know of no cuts commission. Johann Lamont rightly said that we should have a sensible debate about how we provide and pay for services. Stewart Maxwell claimed that Johann Lamont wants young people to pay, and Clare Adamson said that Labour thinks that free education should not be available for Scotland’s population. That is the first I have heard of that—I have seen no such evidence. In any case, what is wrong with Johann Lamont trying to form a debate? Can any member of the SNP tell me why it would be wrong for Johann Lamont to say: “universality, as presently practised, robs the poor of resources which would be best in their hands ... takes away from those who most need help and who most deserve support and rewards those who need neither ... is unjust and indefensible”?

Can John Mason answer that question?

Actually, it was not Johann Lamont but Mike Russell who said that. Those are the words of Mike Russell as he was trying to form the debate. Before John Mason and others rush in and condemn Johann Lamont for saying the same thing, they should ask Mike Russell whether he has resiled from that position. Labour has said nothing about making the poorest students pay. We are not suggesting for a moment that we should adopt its system, but even in England the poorest students do not pay. Nothing that we did when we were in power in Scotland saw the poorest students pay—

No, thanks. Nothing that Johann Lamont has said has been about making the poorest students pay. It is a complete figment of the SNP’s imagination that coincides with what it wants to spin and tweet. However, we are facing a problem. The budget for the next few years is being squeezed and going down and we need to ask ourselves how we will continue to pay for those services and what services will be prioritised. If we value education, we need to ask not how we maintain the university budget at its present level—after all, universities are now silent because they are fine up to the end of this spending round—

No, thanks—I have already taken two interventions. The question of how more will be found for our universities will have to be answered, because that is what they are asking for. We have heard from George Adam and others a justification for why they cheered the cuts to college budgets, but the reality is that they clapped like seals when they heard that the budgets for our colleges were being cut year on year. There will be two years of cuts, one after the other. They did not like it; they tried to fiddle and use smoke and mirrors; but the reality is that the budgets are being cut. What we have, then, is a fictional debate from the SNP in which it is the protector of everything in Scotland that is free, which we know is not true because they are loading debt on to the poorest students and cutting bursaries; a fictional debate about Labour having a cuts commission, when there is no such thing; and a fictional debate about tuition fees when what we need is a mature debate about how Scotland will defend its vital public services and education and solutions about how we find the money to pay for that. We know what Mike Russell would do if he was left to his own devices. Alex Salmond will not give him his head at the moment, but God knows what might happen if we were ever to separate from the rest of the UK. The crazy ideas of Mike Russell might just see the light of day. The only person in this chamber who has ever advocated the swingeing cuts that the SNP members have referred to and huge reductions in taxation for the rich is, in fact, Mike Russell and the only people who have consistently defended the vulnerable and the weak in our society have been those in Scottish Labour. That is what we are founded on. No matter what Mr Russell might say, he has a right-wing tax-cutting agenda that would make even George Osborne blush and will impoverish Scottish public services. We need a mature debate but, unfortunately, until we get the referendum on separation out of the way, it is unlikely that we will get it.

The minister mentioned degrees offered by colleges. Can she confirm that colleges are given less money to deliver those degrees than universities are given for theirs?

I begin by addressing the last part of the motion. Scotland’s colleges have been given an exceptionally bad deal by the Scottish National Party Government. They have been treated like second-class citizens compared with our universities, and it is as if their product is not as highly valued. Worse still is the contempt that has been shown to staff and students, who were told by Mike Russell—aided and abetted by Alex Salmond—that funding was increasing when it was actually being cut. Mike Russell and Alex Salmond had to be dragged kicking and screaming to the Parliament to reluctantly admit that what they had been saying was not true. Had they not been forced to apologise, no doubt they would still be insisting that college funding is increasing. Students and staff want not just an apology but a recognition that the cuts are having a profound and damaging effect on college education. Courses are being removed and cut, and students are being denied places on the courses of their choice. We have heard in this chamber the disdain that SNP members have for many courses, with contemptuous remarks about “hobby courses”. Just as bad is that the idea of lifelong learning is becoming a distant memory, which is bad news for the thousands of workers who are being made redundant and who want to retrain in colleges, but who will now struggle to find a place. College staff and students across Scotland know exactly why there is a crisis and why morale is at an all-time low: it is precisely because of the budget cuts that the SNP Government is imposing. Mike Russell needs to break the habit of a lifetime and eat some humble pie. He needs to reverse the cuts to the teaching grant, not to work some sleight of hand with money for Skills Development Scotland or some other indirect route. He should give our colleges the money to deliver what they excel at and give a boost to the students whose life chances depend on our colleges. I turn to the main part of my motion. We know that Mike Russell has a high regard for himself and that he probably thinks that the rest of us do not measure up to his high intellect. That is why Opposition members have tried to ask simple and straightforward questions about college waiting lists, hoping that the great oracle might actually give us the facts. However, even on that issue, Mike Russell could not bring himself to be straight with the Parliament. On 23 October, my colleague Neil Bibby asked Mike Russell: “Are you saying that there have been no waiting lists for college places?” We might think that that was a fairly clear question but, no, apparently Mr Bibby is not equipped to ask a question on college waiting lists. Mike Russell’s haughty apply was: “You have to know something about the college system before you ... make that assertion.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 23 October 2012; c 1561.] Leaving aside the fact that Neil Bibby had made no assertion, it is clear that Mike Russell believes that only so-called experts should pose even simple questions to someone in such an exalted position. Undeterred, Neil Bibby tried again on 24 October. He asked Mike Russell in this chamber to say “how many people are on waiting lists for college places.” Gallantly, Liz Smith also entered the fray. She asked a direct and unambiguous question: “how many people in the 16 to 19-year-old group are on college waiting lists?” Those were two direct questions. To be fair to Mike Russell, he at last answered in a very direct way and left us in no doubt that Neil Bibby and Liz Smith were wrong. He said: “I am happy to explain again that the concept of waiting lists as presented by Neil Bibby and Liz Smith is utterly false.” We cannot get clearer than that. Neither Neil Bibby nor Liz Smith had placed any wider construct on the issue; they had simply asked how many people were on waiting lists. They were told that the concept of waiting lists “is utterly false.” Given Mike Russell’s track record of playing fast and loose with the facts, my colleague, Neil Findlay, can be forgiven for wanting to nail the issue once and for all. Like Neil Bibby and Liz Smith, Neil Findlay did not suggest that the figure in the Scotland’s Colleges press release was correct; he just wanted to make sure that he clearly understood what the grand panjandrum was actually saying. Neil Findlay, for once in a suitably humble manner, said: “With no preamble and no prejudgment, can I ask a simple question? How many people are on college waiting lists? We are asking for a number.” The cabinet secretary rose to the occasion with all the authority of his office and Alex Salmond behind him. He said: “The concept that Neil Findlay raises is a false concept and a false construct. There are no waiting lists of that nature.”—[Official Report, 24 October 2012; c 12503-4.] So that is that: waiting lists are a false concept and a false construct, and there are no waiting lists of that nature. I am not sure what “that nature” is—I do not know what that means. Neil Bibby, Liz Smith and Neil Findlay did not state any figures or suggest that everyone who applied for a college course and was not accepted was on a waiting list; they merely asked a simple question. To be fair to the cabinet secretary again, he then ordered an audit to get to the bottom of the problem. The difficulty is that only seven colleges, all in urban Scotland, were picked. The cynic might think that that was because it gave the greatest chance of showing duplicate applications to different nearby colleges. Indeed, the interim report of that shallow audit, which was issued by the Scottish Government, points to inconsistencies and duplications, and we should all accept that. However, even that partial work has confirmed that there are waiting lists in Scotland’s colleges. The officials of the Scottish Government have contradicted their own cabinet secretary. The report says: “Analysis of waiting lists confirmed that there is duplication of applicants”. If there are no waiting lists, how could there have been analysis of waiting lists? Elsewhere, the report states: “Follow-up analysis is continuing to clarify the status of those on waiting lists”. If there are no waiting lists, how could Scottish Government officials look at the status of those on waiting lists? The report goes on with reference after reference to waiting lists—not a false concept or a false construct, but reference to waiting lists. It is perfectly clear that, even if the Scotland’s Colleges figure from October was incorrect, there are still students on waiting lists. In December, I submitted a freedom of information request to all Scotland’s colleges. I asked how many people applied for but did not receive a place. I did not mention the words “waiting list”, but, unprompted, at least seven colleges admitted that there are waiting lists. All of them gave details of students who were not offered places. That is the reality. If colleges have admitted that there are waiting lists why will not Mike Russell do so? When Neil Bibby, Liz Smith and Neil Findlay asked how many people are on waiting lists, the cabinet secretary could have said that there was duplication. He could have pointed to inconsistencies in data collection. He could have said that he would investigate and report back to the Scottish Parliament. Instead, he chose to mislead Parliament and belittle the people who had asked questions. We are often told that the way to hold the Government to account is through questions in this Parliament. How can that be done when ministers persistently mislead and give false information to Parliament? The cabinet secretary clearly believes that he can say what he likes. He admits the facts only when he is wrong. If the Parliament is to have any credibility, ministers need to be open and honest. If the Parliament is to have any integrity, we cannot allow weasel words to be substituted for the truth. Mike Russell owes it to this Parliament and to staff and students in our colleges to admit that he was wrong. He needs to admit that there are waiting lists—irrespective of how few—and he needs to apologise. We cannot allow Alex Salmond’s majority to trample on what is right. The Scottish Parliament and the Scottish people deserve to be shown respect by this SNP Government. I move, That the Parliament notes that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has stated that college waiting lists are a “false concept”; further notes that the Scottish Government’s interim report on the audit ordered by the cabinet secretary and carried out by the Scottish Funding Council has indicated that there are waiting lists; accepts that it is important for Scottish Government ministers to be truthful to the Parliament and the public; believes that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning should apologise and correct his misleading statement, and further believes that the cuts to the college teaching grant that are causing these waiting lists should be reversed.

Will the member take an intervention, as he mentioned me?

Will George Adam confirm that the Educational Institute of Scotland and Further Education Lecturers Association branch at Reid Kerr College has passed a motion of no confidence in the cabinet secretary?

As a starting point, can we confirm that—irrespective of how few or how many are on them—there are waiting lists in Scotland’s colleges?

The audit was partial.

On Monday night there was a major fire at a recycling plant in Johnstone, next to residential properties in the town centre. Some local residents were evacuated and rail services to Ayrshire were halted. Will the First Minister consider a review of legislation to ensure that such operations are not located in such public areas and will he ask his minister to come to Johnstone to meet me and relevant agencies to discuss a way forward?

1. To ask the Scottish Government for what reason reported death rates at the Royal Alexandra hospital are higher at the weekend than on weekdays. (S4O-01699)

I look forward to that information. However, the fact remains that the health board provided information about the mortality rate at the weekend that showed that it was double that during the week. There can be lies, damned lies and statistics, but if what Mr Neil said is the case, why did the health board put out information that showed that the death rate at the weekend was twice that during the week? As well as writing to me, the cabinet secretary should ask the health board to go back and interrogate its statistics. Further, he is the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, so he should undertake his own investigation into those worrying and shocking statistics and give everyone an assurance that, in fact, the health board is not fiddling figures and let us get the real facts.

I commend the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning for being able to step in at short notice for Alasdair Allan. However, listening to his opening remarks, I thought that he might have picked up the wrong set of notes. When he said “When we don’t know, we ask someone else”, I thought that he was about to talk about college funding, but he went on to focus on the topic of the debate. I come from a generation that was perhaps scarred by science teaching. I could never understand why we had a textbook called “Physics is Fun” because I discovered nothing in the learning of physics in my school that was anywhere near fun.

It is not for me to speculate on what has gone on in Stewart Stevenson’s life and how he enjoys himself. When he talked about his teacher taking him round the school searching for infinity, I thought that an early Buzz Lightyear had got in there first. Whether he discovered anything remains to be seen. How physics and science in general were taught when I was at school unfortunately soured them for many people. However, in our schools and through the opportunities that are afforded by the curriculum for excellence, we now see an imaginative way of stimulating interest and allowing our youngsters to see the relevance of science and experience the joy of learning. Scotland’s history of scientific achievement through the many notable individuals we have referred to has come out in the debate. We realise that, if Scotland is to succeed in the 21st century, we need to breed and develop a new generation of scientists to enable them to play a similar role today. That must start at a young age. Young people must understand the value and significance of science. There is no point in our talking about science shaping policy development if we have a population that does not see the value of science in itself. We still have a long way to go. When I listened to the exchange between Marco Biagi and Iain Gray about Karl Popper, I reflected that when many people in Edinburgh and Glasgow talk about “popper”, they are talking not about eminent philosophers but about something completely different. Much of the debate, learned as it is, would pass many people by. We must ask ourselves why science and its value still fail to touch so many people. Most people agree that we need data, research and evidence, and that we should listen to and be advised by scientists. However, as many speakers said, ultimately, it must be politicians who make the decisions, and we hope that they make them wisely. Helen Eadie made an interesting point when she talked about the experience of radiation at Dalgety Bay. She mentioned how some scientists were hugely dismissive of the early evidence. That proves that, sometimes, the context in which science does its work and in which information is delivered can be the ultimate determinant. If we do not create the political culture and environment in which scientists feel free to challenge information and interrogate evidence, as a society we will be the losers. Some of the good work of scientists in Dalgety Bay that is beginning to come out shows that there has been a long-standing problem there. In this as in many aspects of Scottish life, it is undoubtedly the case that too few women are engaged at the top levels. Neil Findlay and others spoke about the need to encourage women into the debate on science. In an excellent speech, Iain Gray made a worthy suggestion: if we can have a Council of Economic Advisers, surely a council of scientific advisers is worthy of consideration. A number of speakers in the debate mentioned MMR. Of course, the whole MMR debate and discussion was a warning about politicians ignoring scientific evidence and debate. Indeed, politicians in this Parliament did no service to the communities and individuals they represented in shunning much of the scientific debate that took place.

No, thank you. The tragedy is the human damage that can be caused when politicians wantonly ignore the evidence simply to make political points. If anything has come of out of the debate today, I hope that it is that caution and warning to us all. I dispute some of what Fiona McLeod said about the evidence from the Sheffield study in the alcohol minimum pricing debate. The study included one model, but many scientists and economists would challenge much of the evidence that was brought forward by that model.

No, thank you. I am just about to conclude. We should always be cautious about how we use information, but we should never be scared of seeking out information and advice and then using them wisely in the proper context. This has been a good, interesting debate. For someone who does not have a scientific background, it has been very informative. I end by repeating what I said earlier: despite the progress that we have made on science in Scotland over many generations, we cannot afford to rest on our laurels. There is a danger that if we do not encourage, promote and advance scientific endeavour, this country and society will be the losers.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The First Minister made a welcome commitment to try to proceed on the basis on consensus. I presume that he therefore has an open mind. Would it be possible to request that, as the lead minister in the debate, he attends it to hear what is being said?

We should not take for granted the value of having a free and robust press in this country. Christine Grahame talked about the need for a robust, independent and thrawn press. We have all been beneficiaries of such a press over the years. Many scandals would never have been uncovered had it not been for the work of the press in this country. The press often does the job that politicians should be doing, in that it identifies a need for change and for justice. We can see that if we look back at many papers over the years, including papers that are in the News Corporation stable. Groundbreaking investigations have been carried out by The Sunday Times insight team, for example. We need a free and rigorous press. We need only look at countries that have not had a free, robust and independent press to remind ourselves of the dangers of such a situation. Graeme Pearson and other members talked about some of the work of the press over the years. If it had not been for the press, would there have been change in the regulation of MPs’ expenses at Westminster? If it had not been for the press, would the banking scandals that emerged from the financial crisis have been fully exposed? Johann Lamont mentioned the thalidomide scandal; families suffered for years and the work of the press brought the scandal to light. We should be able to say proudly that we have a campaigning and independent press in this country that is valued. It is also right that we identify abuses of the press and say that they are totally unacceptable. The press cannot take on itself the responsibility of saying how the law should be interpreted and applied. The press cannot somehow be above the law. A number of things that have come out in recent years have been a disgrace and a scandal. Collusion with the police has undermined the democracy of this country. Ordinary citizens need to know that there is some way of holding the press to account when it behaves badly and there is abuse. We cannot have a system in which it is left to the few wealthy individuals who control the papers—or the corporations that control the papers—to decide what will be printed and when, and what is right and what is wrong. Victims demand something more than currently exists. Paul Martin gave a moving example of the impact on a family in Glasgow. Arguments about a last-chance saloon, which members mentioned, no longer apply; we cannot keep giving the press one last chance, because it has not shown itself to be willing or able properly to implement recommendations. Something more is needed. The Leveson inquiry has given politicians the opportunity to move things forward. The fine balance that must be struck is between safeguarding an independent press and ensuring that the aspirations of regulation are properly met. What is the suitable legal underpinning of regulation? The public would not forgive us if we allowed the debate to be caught up in the constitutional arguments that are going on. The public want the best and most effective way of dealing with a press that has let them down, and we should not bring other arguments into the debate. If there is a need to underpin an approach in Scots law, I do not think that anyone in the Labour Party will argue against doing so. How that is done is a separate matter. However, most members of the public to whom I have spoken would value a UK-wide system that was underpinned in whatever way was appropriate, because papers in this country, by their nature, cross borders. News crosses borders, as do people. Let us not get caught up in nitpicking about the constitution; let us ensure that we come up with something appropriate. I welcome the First Minister’s commitment to try genuinely to find a way forward. I hope that none of the proposals that he has made today is written in tablets of stone. I hope that he has an open mind, that he has not made a decision and that other parties will have an influence and be able to contribute. The approach can be consensual only if no decisions have already been made. The final point about the First Minister’s contribution is that he needs to reflect on public perception, on how he has been seen and on how he was the only political party leader to meet and provide hospitality to Rupert Murdoch after the Milly Dowler scandal came out.

It would be better for us all and for the Parliament if the First Minister allowed someone else to take the issue forward on his Government’s behalf.

Can the cabinet secretary confirm the view of the Scottish Government that a loan is now regarded as part of income?

I note what the minister said about the responsibility of local authorities and his expectation that curriculum for excellence should not narrow opportunities. Will he issue guidelines to local authorities so that they are clear about what they are doing and so that there is a degree of consistency throughout Scotland?

That is not what you were asked.

Larry Flanagan is right. We should get back to the facts. Would he not support getting to the truth of the figures?

Will the member take an intervention?

Mike Russell is no Sean Penn, but I am reminded of the film “Dead Man Walking”, in which Sean Penn appeared, because it is unprecedented to have the three main opposition parties together calling for the resignation of a Government minister. There is no doubt that we have a crisis in further education.

No, thank you. People at staff level across Scotland are speaking out, but people at senior level are being gagged. There is a crisis in morale. As my Labour colleagues have articulated during the debate, the issue is the impact that the cuts are having on students the length and breadth of Scotland—including, tragically, students with learning difficulties. The problem is that, when we try to reflect our constituents’ concerns, we are faced with college-cuts deniers on the SNP benches. That is what they are. They deny consistently that there are college cuts—or they did until recently.

This is not just a parliamentary spat; it is about whether we can believe anything that is said by those who are charged with protecting Scotland’s colleges. Staff in Scotland’s colleges have watched Mike Russell’s performance in recent weeks with astonishment. Other members have referred to the Kirk Ramsay episode, which revealed an inappropriate use of Mike Russell’s position and power to deal with an issue for which he admitted he had no responsibility. Mike Russell said that he did not think that it was right for Kirk Ramsay to make a recording of a meeting, but the details of the meeting had, in fact, been put on the internet by Scotland’s Colleges. We were able to see in full detail exactly what was said by Mike Russell and by just about every speaker at the meeting. There is an issue when Mike Russell very publicly berates someone who has a hearing impairment and who uses something to assist them. Disability discrimination legislation talks about supporting people to overcome their impairments and disabilities, but that seems to have mattered not a jot to the cabinet secretary. It was astonishing that he bothered to take legal advice on whether he could do anything, when his Government did not bother to take any legal advice on membership of the European Union and then went to court to avoid telling us whether it had taken any legal advice. Mike Russell has denied, spun and twisted, and in that he has been ably supported by Alex Salmond. They have denied the facts. They said one thing in the chamber and were forced to apologise only when they were discovered. They did not come to apologise because they had realised that there was a problem and wanted to put the record straight; they came back to Parliament only when the facts were prised out. Members should listen to some of the things that Mike Russell has said over the months. He has said, “My figures are impeccable.” Oh, yes: aren’t they, indeed? How about this one? He said: “One of the problems is that sometimes figures are misrepresented”.—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 23 October 2012; c 1553.] They certainly are, and Alex Salmond was very good at doing that, was he not? Then, it took five months—five months!—for Mike Russell to come and apologise. He knew that there was a problem in June, because Neil Bibby made a point of order and pointed out that what he had said was not true and had been contradicted the day before by Alasdair Allan, as Patricia Ferguson said. Mike Russell knew then that there was an issue of accuracy, but still he did not come to Parliament to apologise. His apology was prised out of him five months later. Last week, Alex Salmond, apart from telling us that he was giving us the most accurate figures that the Parliament had ever seen, did not know, and his officials did not know, despite—

No. Alex Salmond and his officials did not know the figures, despite our having given them Audit Scotland’s figures and, indeed, their own figures. The press was given the information. We have a problem when ministers are either incompetent or are knowingly misleading colleges. Jamie Hepburn talked about investment in colleges. Investment in colleges went up every year since devolution, with the exception of 2008-09, when there was a small reduction for the first time, and now, when there is a significant reduction. In every year since devolution before the SNP came into power, there was an increase in the resource budget in real terms. Mike Russell asked college heads to take an 18 per cent cut and they more or less agreed to thole that. He then went back on his word and came back for more, despite college heads having tightened their belts. He told colleges that appointments would be done through the public appointments process, but he went back on his word and started to impose people himself. He broke his word on two issues. His ministerial interference on appointments risks the loss of charitable status. Mike Russell said that there was a “false concept” in relation to waiting lists, but now it appears that he is auditing the false concept. What is happening now is that there is a shift of money away from urban areas, the areas of greatest deprivation and the areas of greatest need. There are cuts, cuts, cuts by the SNP Government. Staff throughout Scotland are losing confidence. As we heard, trade unions in Angus College and Dundee College have lost confidence. Jewel and Esk College EIS members passed a motion of no confidence. George Adam said that colleges across Scotland have confidence in the cabinet secretary, but the EIS-Further Education Lecturers Association branch committee at his local college, Reid Kerr College in Paisley, declared that it has no confidence in Mike Russell. Over the next week we will hear more college staff say that they have no confidence in Mike Russell, because across Scotland we are witnessing the human cost of the callous disregard for our colleges. If Mike Russell had any integrity and decency he would step down. He would go now.

2. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning first became aware that there would be a reduction in college budgets for 2012-13. (S4T-00132)

Presiding Officer, there should have been a full statement by Mike Russell. To apologise in this way shows a real contempt for the Scottish Parliament. Presiding Officer, I ask you to release to MSPs the original letter of apology that was sent to you by Mike Russell. The ministerial code—

Certainly, Presiding Officer. The ministerial code says that any inadvertent error should be corrected at the earliest opportunity. Mike Russell misled the Scottish Parliament in June despite knowing the true figures since February. Why has it taken him five months to apologise?

I did not ask why the ministerial code has not been applied. The question that I asked was why it has taken the cabinet secretary five months to apologise, and he has just ignored it. The ministerial code also says that ministers who knowingly mislead Parliament will be expected to resign. Mike Russell knew in June that he had misled the Parliament when he said: “There is no reduction in funding ... in ... 2012-13.”—[Official Report, 28 June 2012; c 10776.] He then, knowingly, misled the Parliament again last Wednesday when he said: “I have never said that there were no cuts”.—[Official Report, 14 November 2012; c 13463.] He has knowingly misled the Parliament not once, but twice. Why has Mike Russell not offered his resignation?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I wish to raise a point of order about First Minister’s question time. The ministerial code says that ministers should give accurate and truthful information to the Parliament. The First Minister is fond of quoting Rabbie Burns and, in particular, the line that says: “facts are chiels that winna ding.” Well, ding dong, Presiding Officer. Today, the First Minister told the Parliament that college funding had risen from £545 million in 2011-12 to £546 million in 2012-13. At the Education and Culture Committee meeting on 23 October 2012, a paper was tabled from the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning. In it, the cabinet secretary said: “I set out below the information you requested in respect of draft and final college resource budgets for 2011-12, 2012-13 and 2013-14.” The paper gave the total for college funding in 2011-12 as £555.7 million and the total for college funding in 2012-13 as £546.4 million. Clearly, the evidence presented by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to the Education and Culture Committee contradicts what the First Minister said in the Parliament today. Both cannot be correct. For 2011-12, the First Minister gave a figure of £545 million, which did not include any budget revisions. For 2012-13, he gave a figure of £546 million, which did include a number of budget revisions. The comparison for the £545 million figure for 2011-12 without revisions, would have been £507 million for 2012-13—a drop of £38 million. The figure for 2011-12 with revisions is £555.7 million and for 2012-13 it is 546.4 million—a drop of £9.3 million. The First Minister, rather bizarrely, said today that what he had said was “as exact an answer as anybody has given in any Parliament”. God help us if the First Minister of Scotland actually believes that.

Either the First Minister made an elementary mistake, not worthy of an esteemed economist such as he is, or he deliberately fiddled the figures to achieve the answer that he wanted. The Parliament needs to know which it is. Presiding Officer, I ask that you invite the First Minister to return to the Parliament at decision time to explain whether he made an elementary error and is guilty of misleading the Parliament through incompetence, or whether he deliberately fiddled the figures in order to mislead the Parliament.

It is just not true that members in this chamber are opposed to change. Scottish Labour does welcome some of the changes that are being discussed for Scotland’s colleges, and there is undoubtedly an argument for ensuring that Scotland’s colleges are fit for the challenges of the 21st century. However, at issue is how we bring about change and whether we dictate and impose, or discuss and move forward together. What we have seen from the cabinet secretary and the Government is dictation, dictatorship, imposition and a failure to discuss and to take people with them. [Interruption.] The SNP members can sit and name call and catcall, but they cannot deny—

Excuse me, but I said nothing during the cabinet secretary’s speech, although others may have done so. However, if SNP members want to shout and bawl because they know that the cabinet secretary is on dodgy ground, that is fine. The fact is that Scotland’s colleges can and should improve—there is no doubt about that. However, it is wrong to suggest that everything that went before was, as the cabinet secretary seemed to suggest, a failure. Many thousands of people across Scotland have benefited from the excellence that is delivered by Scotland’s colleges, including some people in this chamber, whose lives have been transformed by those colleges. It is therefore wrong to rubbish the past simply to try to persuade for the future. If there was ever a time when we needed colleges, it is surely now, more than ever before, when there is rising unemployment and the number of unemployed young people is at nearly 100,000. The latest statistics show that Scottish unemployment has risen by 4,000 from the previous quarter, while United Kingdom unemployment fell. They show that employment has fallen by 27,000 from the previous quarter, while UK employment rose, and that youth unemployment rose sharply over the previous quarter, increasing by 10,000 among 16 to 24-year-olds. Now, more than ever, we need Scotland’s colleges for our young people. However, we also need them for the workers who are facing redundancy at Hall’s of Broxburn and for the workers in Glasgow, East Kilbride and across Scotland who have to retrain and to rethink their future. That is why we need Scotland’s colleges and why we need to build on the excellence that they deliver. We know that Scotland’s colleges have a fantastic record in reaching out and helping people who would otherwise be marginalised in Scottish education and, indeed, in Scottish life. Colleges can give people chances that they would otherwise never have. How can we expect our colleges to transform and to rise to those challenges when they face unprecedented cuts in their budgets? People talk about smoke and mirrors and about lies, dammed lies and statistics, but what we have heard from this cabinet secretary is an absolute failure to face up to the facts and to admit, for once, that he is wrong and that Audit Scotland is right. Is he trying to suggest to members that Audit Scotland—a body that has the respect of just about every section of Scottish public life—does not know what it is talking about and does not know the true facts? Audit Scotland said that there is a 24 per cent cut over the spending review period. That is the reality. How can colleges cope when budgets are falling, they have fewer staff, courses are being cut and there are fewer places? We know that there are waiting lists. The cabinet secretary had the chance to accept that during parliamentary questions on education and lifelong learning, when he was asked three times to face up to the issue, but he said: “the concept of waiting lists ... is utterly false.”—[Official Report, 24 October 2012; c 12504.] Yet again, Scotland’s colleges are completely wrong and he is completely right. The fact is that there are waiting lists. If the concept is utterly false, why is there an audit of something that is utterly false? That is bizarre. We still do not know who is carrying out the audit or what the terms of reference are. We do not know what is being done or how. Yet again, the cabinet secretary is hiding the facts and the process and is trying to distort and confuse the issue. The cabinet secretary’s premise is based on that philosophy. I do not have time to go into the detail of what happened at Stow College. It is unfortunate that the incident has painted the cabinet secretary in a bad light. He used unacceptable tactics to get his way; he tried to intimidate when discussion would have been far better. The meeting in question was not private. I googled it this afternoon and was able to get the details of everything that the cabinet secretary said. I was able to get the details of everyone who spoke and the answers that they were given. I know exactly what went on during the meeting. It was no secret meeting. Whether the man was right or wrong to record it, the response from the cabinet secretary has been shameful. He has abused his position and has let himself and Parliament down by his actions. I move amendment S4M-04787.1, to insert at end: “, and notes the recent Audit Scotland report that states that college funding is set to be reduced by a quarter over the next three years and that there are major challenges ahead.”

The minimum income guarantee includes loans. I do not know whether, like me, the member has a mortgage. My mortgage is not part of my income, so why are loans considered to be part of students’ income?

Will Marco Biagi take an intervention?

Marco Biagi has just said that Labour opposes the reforms. He must have been sleeping when I made my speech, because I said clearly that we welcome change and that there has to be change. I do not know what he is talking about, although I suspect that neither does he.

Will the minister—

Will the minister take an intervention?

Not even about the 10,000—

1. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the appropriateness of the comments by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning in relation to the chair of Stow College. (S4T-00116)

Leaving aside the recording of meetings for accuracy or, indeed, whether it is in the public interest to publicise what the cabinet secretary says or how he behaves at meetings, I think that the issue is his reaction to the event. I have been contacted by further education staff who believe that the cabinet secretary is behaving inappropriately and that he is attempting to bully and intimidate. On reflection, does he not agree that he could have handled the situation better?

I think that Mr Ramsay might dispute that the recording was “surreptitious”. Many education staff are contacting me to say that they are frightened to speak out about how the cabinet secretary is treating them. Surely how he has behaved towards Mr Ramsay reinforces their fears. Is it not time for the cabinet secretary to reflect and to rebuild relationships and to start that process by apologising to Mr Ramsay?

The issue is not just late applications. The cabinet secretary has had correspondence from one of my constituents, Mr Nick Hortin, whose son has been threatened with a review of his place on a course at the University of Reading. Mr Hortin says that his son was not a late applicant. However, as of 1 November his problem had not been solved. Difficulties sometimes arise that must be faced. Nicola Mable, from Jedburgh, was offered a place at Heriot-Watt University only on 5 September, but has because of delays, had to give up her place. She is a single parent and could not afford the uncertainty. That is the human cost of problems that have been known about for months.

This has been an excellent debate. One thing that has marked it out as such has been the informed comments by so many members, who have drawn from their personal experiences. It is telling when we have heard not only about the joy of going through the adoption process and the contribution that it can make to someone’s life, but the frustration that members have articulated and the consequences of that frustration. We have all accepted the fundamental premise of article 8 of the ECHR, which states that everyone has the right to a family life. However, that right is denied to so many children in this country not only because they do not have a parent or a parent has been removed from their life due to a tragic event, but because of the circumstances in which they live and the failings in their parents’ lives, whether they are linked to violence or addiction of whatever nature. It is staggering to hear about not just the extent but the consequences of the problem. Hanzala Malik said that 23 per cent of Scotland’s looked-after children are in Glasgow, which allows members to see where the concentration of the problem lies. When the areas surrounding Glasgow are added—Lanarkshire, Renfrewshire and Ayrshire—we see that poverty and deprivation are a huge factor in causing many of the problems. If we are fully intent on coming up with an adequate solution that serves the many children who we are talking about, we must make an impact on poverty and deprivation and the areas where they are concentrated. Nanette Milne made an excellent speech. She said a number of things that were telling and with which I entirely agree. All of today’s speeches have echoed what she said: the focus must be on the child’s wellbeing. That must be the starting point for everything that we do. Nanette Milne made a remarkably telling point, too, when she spoke about the social circumstances of adoption when she adopted and the social circumstances of many children who are up for adoption now. Life is completely different. When she and her husband were looking into adoption, many children were placed for adoption because of illegitimacy and the social stigma attached to that. That compares with now, when so many children are considered for adoption not because there is a social stigma but because there is a problem in that child’s life and in the lives of that child’s parents as a result of alcohol, drugs or violence between adults and violence inflicted on children. That fact changes significantly the whole debate about what adoption is for and why we should do it. That is why so many members have emphasised the need for early intervention. The funny thing is that Nanette Milne spoke about early intervention in totally different circumstances, but she testified to its success. Now we need early intervention not just to enable a child to develop to their full potential but, in many cases, for the child’s safety. Graeme Pearson gave us another staggering fact: children in care are 13 times more likely to end up in prison. Members talked about the need for intervention. Liam McArthur said that problems can start at the earliest stage, even before birth. We know about such problems—we know that children are more likely to fail if they grow up in disadvantaged circumstances. My heart goes out to the people who have made the effort to offer themselves as adoptive parents and who are prepared to take on kids who have specific needs. The fact is that many children are damaged, not by the time that they reach the age of seven, eight, nine or 10 but by the time that they are one or two. It is tragic that the mental and physical abuse of a child in the first year or two years of their life has an on-going effect on the child’s development throughout the primary education years and into the secondary education years and adolescence. I do not think that we fully understand the lasting damage that such experiences inflict on youngsters. That is why we all need to ensure that we translate our words into action. Stewart Maxwell talked about inconsistency across the country. When we talk about such things, we are not being critical for the sake of it or trying to score points. We identify issues because we genuinely and passionately want to make a difference for every child in this country. As Stewart Maxwell said, it is unfortunate that shared values do not always translate into common practice, for example in the context of training. Let us face it: there are problems with resources, as Stewart Maxwell said, and unless we address them we will find ourselves talking about the same issues next year and in five and 10 years’ time. There is a challenge for the Parliament: do we genuinely and passionately want to make a difference on the issue? If we do, are we prepared to make decisions and take the consequences, even if there is an impact on other policy priorities and areas of our lives? We should not underestimate the scale of the challenge. Margaret McDougall talked about parental neglect and substance abuse. I would bet a pound to a penny that just about every member can give examples of that from their casework. That is the reality. What can we do to make a difference? Agencies are struggling. The voluntary sector is struggling. Social workers are struggling. It is right that so many members paid tribute to the contribution of social workers—Neil Bibby did so not just from the political perspective but with reference to his family’s experience. Social workers do an immense job. They work in extremely difficult circumstances, under huge pressure, and they need support. We should not wait until something goes wrong and then blame them. Let us try to do something that makes it easier for them to do their jobs properly. We have had a good, well-informed debate. Let us try to do something that makes a difference. I make one suggestion for the minister to consider. There has been no disagreement among speakers in the debate. Is there a chance for us to put aside our party political differences and set up a minister-led working group that involves all parties in the Parliament and draws in experts from outside the Parliament, to ascertain whether we can do something that will make a lasting difference?

As someone who opposes what the SNP is trying to do to Scotland, perhaps I should have welcomed the events of the past week in undermining the SNP’s case and perhaps fatally wounding its proposition, but a lot of what has happened in the past week leaves me profoundly sad. It demonstrates that the First Minister holds the Parliament in contempt. He really does not care about the Parliament’s workings or the way in which it operates. He feels that he can say anything, even though it does not resemble the facts, and no one will be able to do anything about it.

No. I will do so in a couple of minutes. The First Minister’s contempt is contempt of the highest order. We are seeing a number of people who have had principled views on independence for many years and who passionately believe in it prepared to put aside all their other principles and their integrity in order to bolster the First Minister’s fading credibility on something on which he has clearly been found out. In that respect, the First Minister delivers all the sincerity and all the talent of a snake-oil salesman at Glasgow’s Barras at the weekend. Willie Rennie and Ruth Davidson made two very interesting points. Willie Rennie put to bed the issue that there are people in his party or my party who believe that somehow Scotland would be refused membership of the European Union. We have never said that that would be the case if Scotland decided to separate from the rest of the United Kingdom. The issue is the terms on which Scotland would become a member of the European Union and what the consequences of that would be. Ruth Davidson was right to highlight the inadequacies of the rigged inquiry by a hand-picked man appointed by the First Minister to investigate him. There is no substance in such an inquiry, which is why Johann Lamont is right to call for an independent judicial inquiry. The other thing that is conveniently overlooked in all the debate about the Scottish ministerial code is section 1.1 of that code. It says: “Scottish Ministers are expected to behave in a way that upholds the highest standards of propriety.” Can we honestly say that, over the past week, our First Minister and his Deputy First Minister have upheld the highest standards? We cannot. The number of people, including people who believe in independence, who have spoken to me in the past week and are appalled by what the First Minister has done over the past number of months is unbelievable. With everything that the First Minister says, he is losing credibility with people who believe in independence. There are other issues relating to the ministerial code and legal advice that we need to bottom out. I would like clarity about who provides that legal advice and why the law officers are now being asked to provide it. The ministerial code says: “The Scottish Law Officers ... have Ministerial responsibility for the provision of legal advice ... on all matters relating to the law of Scotland ... The primary source of legal advice for the Scottish Government ... is the Scottish Government Legal Directorate”. Why are the law officers being asked to deliver advice on something that the legal directorate should be delivering advice on? That needs to be clarified. We have heard a lot about some other things. The First Minister said on STV: “That’s quite clear in the Ministerial Code. It’s both the fact of whether it exists, and the content. I would need to clear it with the Lord Advocate if I wanted to say I had not sought legal advice.” As Jackie Baillie pointed out with reference to the ministerial code, “The fact that the legal advice has or has not been given to the Scottish Government by the law officers” is the issue, but “the content of any legal advice given by them to anyone else must not be revealed ... without the Law Officers’ prior consent.” In other words, ministers can release the fact of whether or not advice has been given and then advice has to be sought on whether the content should be released. The Scottish Government needs to be up front and honest about that. The ministerial code goes on to say—[Interruption.] We are being told that ministers cannot release advice, but that is not true. It goes on to say that the “release of the content of legal advice is likely to be appropriate only in highly compelling cases.” How much more compelling does it need to be than whether Scotland stays in the United Kingdom or leaves to have an uncertain future? Nothing is more compelling than that. The First Minister has form in terms of not being totally up front. In September 2007, I asked him whether his pledge on class sizes would be met within the lifetime of that session of Parliament. He said, “Yes.” However, I know for a fact, and it was subsequently revealed, that the ministers had been told that not only would it not be achieved by 2011 but it probably could not be done by 2015. The ministers and the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning knew that, and I am told by well-placed sources that the First Minister’s office had been informed. We have a First Minister who has a track record of hiding the facts and hiding the truth. That is shameful and he is bringing this Parliament into disrepute.

The issue—to be frank—is not about a bill; it is about freedom from fear. All workers in this country should have a right to be free from fear. “Freedom from fear” is one of the slogans that the campaigning trade union, the Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers, has used for many years in lobbying members of Parliament of all parties. USDAW cannot understand—nor can the other unions that are involved, to some of which I will come in a moment—why it hears warm words from politicians, but gets so little action on an issue that affects so many people. It is true that the issue affects many people; we are talking not only about retail crime, which affects not just shop and retail staff, but communities. The issue impacts on public sector transport workers, housing workers and others. We know that the impact on communities can be quite profound. Many years ago, I remember meeting a community group from Jackie Baillie’s area, which faced the loss of the local convenience store because the shopkeeper could not withstand the level of attacks against and abuse of staff. The community in question was a particularly impoverished one, in which the loss of that retail outlet would have been keenly felt. That story could be repeated across Scotland. We should have it enshrined in the Scottish Parliament that every worker has the right to be treated with dignity and respect. Every worker should have the right to a working life that is free from fear, threats, bullying, physical assault and verbal abuse. Unfortunately, that is not the reality. Some of the most recent figures that have been produced show a worrying trend. The “Retail Crime Survey 2011”, which was published by the British Retail Consortium in January 2012, shows that retail crime across the United Kingdom cost shops £1.4 billion in 2010-11, which represented a 31 per cent increase on the previous year. However, money is not necessarily the issue. More worrying was the reported increase in violence towards retail staff, 35,000 of whom had been the victims of physical or verbal attacks or threats. The total number of incidents against employees rose by 83 per cent in comparison with the previous 12 months to a staggering 26 offences per 1,000 employees. That rise was due largely to an increase in the number of incidents of verbal abuse—there were 13.3 such incidents per 1,000 employees—but verbal abuse can be debilitating, shattering and life changing for those who are on the receiving end of it and the perceived physical threats that can underlie it. The Scottish Government’s crime and justice survey has revealed that 37 per cent of public-facing workers have been abused in the past 12 months and that 10 per cent of them have been physically assaulted. Unison, the public sector union, conducts an annual survey of violence against public service employees, which showed that 34,739 staff reported violent incidents in the past year—7,000 more than in the previous year and almost 15,000 more than when the survey was first conducted in 2006. Dave Watson, Unison’s Scottish organiser, said that those figures “demonstrate an appalling level of violent incidents faced by staff who are simply doing their job.” The phrase “doing their job” can be translated into many areas of employment, such as the bus workers simply doing their job. If they are assaulted, the bus service is lost to a community, which puts at a disadvantage people without motors who rely on public sector transport. There are also the train drivers and train guards who are faced with violent assault, and there is the potential consequent loss of service.

Margo MacDonald touches on a profound issue that is worthy of a more detailed and prolonged debate than a short members’ business debate. I agree that cultural issues are involved and that there is an acceptance not just of the physical aspects but of the view that it is all right to abuse staff. For example, USDAW reports that every year, in the run-up to Christmas, some members of the public who feel that they are harassed into buying presents think that it is acceptable to abuse the overworked, harassed staff who are simply trying to do their job. Yes—there is a cultural issue, but for the staff involved it is a problem that affects their health and wellbeing. That is why USDAW is so determined to keep its freedom from fear campaign going. It believes that it should not just remind the public that such behaviour is unacceptable, but should remind politicians that the workers involved need more than warm words. They cannot understand—I pose this question without putting forward a specific alternative—why the Scottish Parliament thinks that the law was inadequate in relation to nurses, police officers or doctors, but is adequate in relation to retail staff, bus drivers, train drivers, housing workers and others. They merely ask for some consistency in that regard and for the protection that some other workers in this country are given. They believe that the law in that respect is inadequate and they ask why they should not be counted in the same way as the workers who are protected. Why is that protection and support not given to them? USDAW and other trade unions will not let up on the issue, and we will keep hearing the refrain that they want politicians to give them more than warm words; they want politicians to give them something that will give them some protection when they do their jobs.

That is the nub of the argument and of the debate. The dilemma is that if, as many have argued, the law of the land is sufficient to give workers protection from assault, it should be sufficient for police, nurses and other medical staff. If extra legislation is required for them, why not for others?

I agree with the minister on that. Perhaps she could help to answer a question that was put to me today in a phone call. Is it the case that statistics in relation to violence and attacks on workers that were kept before 2007 have been dispensed with? I think that she is right—we need to get the right figures. Will she check whether there has been a change in the way in which information and statistics are compiled?

I have been contacted by students at James Watt College, Reid Kerr College and Clydebank College who are concerned about transport provision if courses are centralised in a specific location. Will the outcome agreements look at students’ transport requirements to ensure that everyone can participate in places and courses that are on offer?

It is a shame when a debate as significant and serious as this one is reduced to sloganising about independence. Whether or not Scotland votes to separate from the rest of the United Kingdom, we will still have to confront the problem that is in front of us and we will still have to face up to hard realities. That will not change, whatever Scotland decides. The SNP is attempting to present itself as favouring universalism while all the other parties are against it, so let us get this clear from the start: the SNP is not in favour of universalism. The SNP has not advocated universal housing benefit or council tax benefit. It did not argue for universal free central heating systems. It does not support universalism in the context of NHS dental treatment, NHS optical vouchers, travel costs to hospitals, free school meals or legal aid. This debate is not about one party supporting universalism and the others opposing it. The debate should be about what we regard as our country’s priorities and how we use our resources to tackle those priorities. Is it a priority to do something for the sick, the disabled and the disadvantaged? Is it right to skew resources in favour of people who are least able to look after themselves? Or do we think that the easiest thing to do is to give all members of the Scottish Parliament more money, through a council tax freeze, through free prescriptions and in other ways?

It is in exactly the same position as my own council in Renfrewshire, which said the same thing in the local government election campaign. The reality is that if those councils do not freeze the council tax for five years they will be financially penalised by this SNP Government. They faced a very hard choice: were they willing to make the elderly, the poor, the sick and the disabled pay even more as a result? They decided, pragmatically and correctly, that they could not do so.

No. What is the reality of what is happening in our councils across the country? I can speak only from my experience in Renfrewshire; in fact, Renfrewshire Council’s ex-leader, Derek Mackay, is in the chamber this afternoon. In 2010, under this SNP Government, that council faced £75 million of cuts targeted over three years—and the situation has worsened. It produced what it termed a difficult choices consultation and decided that in order to do all these things that are so good for everyone in the chamber it would have to cut £300,000 from home care services, £175,000 from care homes for older people and £743,000 from the social work budget. As for the question whether we believe in universalism, do we believe in it for those who have to rely on community alarms and who had to pay more money for that service? Do we believe in universalism for the older people who go to and get meals at day centres? We asked them to pay more every day for those facilities. Do we believe in universalism for those who need extra care and get housing meals? We put up their charges by £7 a week. Do we believe in universalism for disabled people or those with learning disabilities who need transport to day centres? In Renfrewshire, when Derek Mackay was council leader, we decided to charge them £2.50 a day so that people like me could get their council tax freeze. Is that fair? Is that humane? Where is the universalism there?

This will be the same Derek Mackay who voted to give free school meals to the school that his child attended while cutting all the other services. He can afford it. This debate—[Interruption.]

This debate should be about priorities for the least well-off. The SNP has shown that it has no care or compassion for those people.

It is about choice—

The issue is that Derek Mackay voted to give only a few schools free school meals in early primary and he as a parent benefited financially. He voted not to give universal entitlement, but he voted to make disabled adults pay for their transport to day centres.

I commend the minister for his contribution to the debate. When we travel abroad on holiday, we often marvel when we hear young people switching from their native language to English and we say how wonderful it is to hear youngsters being fluent in more than one language. However, we often overlook the fact that, in Scotland, many thousands of young people are fluent in more than one language. The recent wave of immigration means that many youngsters are fluent in Urdu or Punjabi and English, and many are fluent in Polish and English, but we give scant recognition to the many thousands of young people who speak Gaelic and English and can interchange between both languages fluently and seamlessly. There is a growing recognition of the value of being able to speak more than one language. It gives youngsters the ability to learn and become adept at other languages, and it contributes to their overall learning ability and experience. In that context, we should not see the exhortation for young people to learn and speak Gaelic as something of an imposition or an abstraction. We should see the language as something that it is fundamental for many young people to learn. Annabel Goldie spoke about the attitude of speaker communities to their own language. Her comment echoed the minister’s example of the survey in which some people saw it as possible to be supportive of Gaelic but not to use it. He said that people should use it or lose it. The surest way in which to lose a language is to allow it to wither on the vine by becoming complacent and lazy about its use. If it is not a living language, it will surely die. There are examples of how a language that is rooted in its community and its background can wither and die. Many people in my community came to this country speaking Irish as their first language. Many came from the hills of Donegal, but their children did not continue to speak or to learn Irish, and the language is now completely alien to them, even though their parents and grandparents might still have a knowledge of it. When people are taken away from their background, their heritage, their culture, their roots and their environment, languages can surely die. Gaelic has made a huge contribution to the cultural, social and indeed economic life of Scotland. As the minister and others have said, we need to encourage more Gaelic speakers. The fact that some 1,000 Gaelic speakers are dying every year means that there is an urgency in replacing those who have Gaelic as their first language, and the fact that many people in Scotland can understand and read Gaelic but cannot speak it fluently means that there is more to be done with them. Equally, however, unless we can persuade young Gaelic speakers that there is a purpose to their speaking Gaelic, they will lose their initiative and their enthusiasm. We need to encourage healthy, vibrant communities in the heartlands of Gaelic so that those who remain can see the benefit of continuing to participate and to speak Gaelic. We know that many people move and, as they do so, they sometimes lose their willingness to continue with the language, although it is interesting to note the statistic that 19 per cent of Gaelic speakers live in the greater Glasgow area. There are now huge pressures on young people. Many of them are still fluent in more than one language, but we know the challenges that the introduction of satellite television, such as Sky, has created. Even where households and the community encourage use of the language, there are external pressures on children, and when they are playing with each other they mimic and reflect what they see and hear on television. That should warn us that the challenge is a significant one, and it cannot be met cheaply or easily. Irrespective of our backgrounds and our culture, we should recognise the distinct and unique place that Gaelic has in Scottish life. We should all commit ourselves to ensuring that everything possible is done to ensure not just the survival but the flourishing of a language without which Scotland would be a much poorer place.

The minister will be aware that East Renfrewshire Council’s previous funding bid for a new Barrhead high school was unsuccessful. Now that the council has submitted another application, will the minister look favourably on its bid for a new Barrhead high?

11. To ask the Scottish Government how much it will cost to meet the university fees of non-UK European Union students in 2012-13. (S4O-01236)

I noted what the cabinet secretary said in reply to Liam McArthur earlier about resolving the issue. The cabinet secretary has been saying for almost two years that the problem will be fixed. Can he tell the Parliament when it will be fixed?

I associate myself with Stuart McMillan’s comments and the passion that he articulated about not wanting to be part of a society in which people are going hungry and poverty is increasing. It is right that Stuart McMillan places issues such as that at the forefront, but he tried to suggest that somehow those problems are all to do with Westminster and that the problems of increasing poverty were evident under a Labour Government at Westminster. However, when we look at that Labour Government’s record on tackling child poverty, we can see real success. If we contrast that with what has been happening in Scotland since 2007 under the Administration with which Stuart McMillan wishes to associate himself, we see that child poverty is increasing.

No, thank you. Let me make some progress. We need to get some kind of balance. We also need to recognise that if we are willing to talk about tackling inequality, injustice and unfairness, we need to question some of the things that have been done since 2007.

I will not just now, thanks. Is it right that people like the First Minister and myself continue to benefit from the policies of this Scottish Government, while more children in the communities that Stuart McMillan and I represent are driven into poverty? Is it right that the better off in society are continuing to flourish under this Scottish Government, while the poor, the dispossessed and the marginalised are suffering? Those questions need to be addressed.

No, thank you. John Mason said what many SNP members articulated this afternoon—that, for them, the issue that is most important is the constitution. “The constitution is central to what we do”, John Mason said. That is the difference between SNP speakers and members on the Labour benches. The constitution is not central to what we do; tackling poverty and injustice is central to what we do.

No, thank you. It is interesting to note the flexibility of language and interpretation in “Working for Scotland: The Government’s Programme for Scotland 2012-2013”. For example, on page 72 we are told that “the Scottish Government has exceeded the agreed target number of teachers in Scotland’s schools.” The Scottish Government set a target in 2007 for the number of teachers in Scotland’s schools. It said that it would match the numbers that the Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration had delivered. However, that was a mere expedient, which was abandoned when it suited the Scottish Government. Now we have something like 3,000 fewer teachers in Scotland’s schools than we had under the previous Administration. The Scottish Government’s targets are flexible and its words are often hollow. The Government goes on to say in its document that “Scotland now has the lowest level of teacher unemployment in the UK—with the rate now lower in 2012 than in each of the last three years.” Each of the past three years was a year of SNP Administration. The Government is boasting that it is doing better than it did in the previous three years. The First Minister mentioned Angela Constance’s dedicated post, but unemployment among women aged 18 to 24 went up by 30 per cent in Scotland between March 2011 and March 2012. The number of women in that age group who have been receiving jobseekers allowance for 12 months or more has gone up by 335 per cent since June 2011. That is the reality with which the SNP Government is associating itself. The Scottish Government talks about opportunities for all, but it cuts college budgets.

No, thank you.

No, thank you. The Government boasts about modern apprenticeships, but it is counting people who are already in work.

No, thank you. Why has it taken five years to bring forward proposals to extend the number of hours of early years support? There is no mention of access to teachers in the document. When will teachers be included in discussions about pre-school education?

The cabinet secretary can answer the question in his speech tomorrow. There is no clear role for teachers in pre-school education and SNP ministers need to clarify the situation. The First Minister has said that it is right to concentrate on the early years and to take preventative action. I agree. However, if we want to do that, we need to do something about vulnerable two-year-olds. Experienced social workers recently told me that often, in vulnerable families, the damage has been done by the time a child is five. We are being told that the Government is offering the best package that exists anywhere in these islands, but in England 15 hours of free childcare per week will be provided for disadvantaged two-year-olds by 2014. The policy is being introduced gradually: the first phase will reach 150,000 two-year-olds by 2013, and some 260,000 two-year-olds will be reached by 2014. In Scotland, according to a rough estimate from social work figures, just under 400 vulnerable two-year-olds will benefit. If we are serious about getting in early and tackling problems, we need to do something about vulnerable two-year-olds. We need to acknowledge that it is not just about looked-after children. There are many vulnerable children in Scotland’s towns and villages who are not formally looked after but who are at risk.

Time after time, we hear warm words, glib statements and empty promises, but the SNP Government has the power, the ability and the opportunity to start doing something about vulnerable children.

Do not believe a word that he says.

I thank the cabinet secretary for advance sight of his statement. Labour generally welcomes the process of improving governance and bringing more transparency and accountability to further and higher education. We also support initiatives that improve on the excellence already being delivered. We have no doubt that further improvements can be made, but we have general concerns about the power grab by ministers, which we see particularly in relation to further education. They have forced through shotgun marriages and have introduced an unprecedented level of ministerial control and interference in our colleges. For example, new chairs and boards will be appointed, and can be removed, by ministers. The cabinet secretary said that he has, today, notified the Education and Culture Committee of details of who has been invited to lead regional planning bodies. In fact, my colleagues on the committee have not yet had sight of those details; it would have been helpful to ensure that they were made available before the statement was made to Parliament. Will the cabinet secretary spell out in detail the criteria that are being used to appoint the chairs of college and regional boards? Is the public appointments process being used for the initial appointments? If not, why not? Scottish Labour generally welcomes the direction of travel in relation to higher education governance, but why has Parliament not been given a copy of the Scottish Government’s response, as was done with the response on further education? The cabinet secretary has said that he has accepted virtually all the recommendations. Will he spell out which ones he has not accepted? We welcome moves to improve student support. Will the cabinet secretary tell Parliament why the announcement will be made in August, rather than to the Scottish Parliament?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I know that you have an aspiration that members should be able to hold ministers to account and that that is an important principle for you. That aspiration can be delivered only if ministers are prepared to offer information and answer questions that are asked. Today, the cabinet secretary has said that he has accepted “virtually all Professor von Prondzynski’s recommendations”. That suggests that he knows what he has accepted and what he has not accepted. On three occasions, he was asked what he has not accepted, but we are still waiting on an answer. Can you ensure that, in order to hold ministers to account, we can get an answer to a straight question?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I recognise what you say on that specific point, but we have a serious situation. We have two ministers in the same department saying two different things on two different days. If, as you say, it is not for you to ensure that this Parliament is given accurate information—and, clearly, the ministers concerned do not give a damn about whether what they say is accurate—[Interruption.]

Damn? Interestingly, then, Presiding Officer, I will withdraw it—

I will withdraw it, and in the future when we talk about people being damned, I will make sure that that word is not used—

No, Presiding Officer—

I thank Patricia Ferguson for giving us the opportunity yet again to put on record in the Parliament our appreciation of the work that colleges across Scotland are doing. It is clear from the many debates and questions that we have heard in the chamber over recent months that everyone knows that colleges have a unique role in trying to address the problem of rising youth unemployment and ensuring that this generation of young Scots are properly equipped to make their contribution to 21st century Scotland. Unfortunately, however, what Patricia Ferguson outlined earlier is depressingly all too familiar to most of us. In fact, if others were being honest, we could say that it is all too familiar to all of us. We can recount similar tales from colleges across the country, whether it is James Watt College in Greenock, Reid Kerr College in Paisley, Anniesland College and Cardonald College in Glasgow, or colleges in Edinburgh, Dundee or Aberdeen: colleges are telling us that they face real problems in trying to maintain student numbers and, more significant, the quality of what they have to offer. I understand why Bob Doris says that we should put aside party politics on this issue. However, Annabel Goldie is right to say that the Government made pledges that, in effect, it cannot afford. The Government has made decisions to commit money to other areas and has therefore ensured that colleges do not have the money that they need to maintain services. Bob Doris is right to talk about tough choices, but the problem is that the Scottish Government made the choice or decision to cut the colleges’ budgets to such an extent that we are now seeing reductions right across Scotland. Bob Doris said that the FE sector is now stronger than the sector that the Scottish Government inherited. If, by the word “stronger”, he means that more lecturers are now being made redundant, that is fine: the sector is indeed stronger. If he means that there are fewer staff to deliver the courses, or that fewer courses and places are available, the sector is, of course, stronger. However, that would be a completely and utterly perverse definition of the word. I hear in my constituency and from others across Scotland that people are worried. I have received an e-mail from a lecturer at Reid Kerr College, who participated in the recent lobby of the Scottish Parliament. That e-mail said that the staff completely refute what the Scottish Government is saying about its approach to further education. I agree with Bob Doris. Let us put party politics aside by all means. I would have thought that it would be possible to forge consensus across all the political parties on the issue of cuts to colleges, and to say that we will make Scotland’s colleges a priority in the next financial year and find the wherewithal to ensure that they can invest in training a generation that desperately needs our support. If we decide not to do that, that will be a wilful decision on our part. It will be a decision to abandon those people in their moment of need. I hope that we can rise above party politics and do the right thing for Scotland’s young people.

Will the member take an intervention?

The member asked for suggestions. I am happy to give her a suggestion.

By heavens. Thank you. On finding money for Scotland’s colleges, £75 million a year is being spent on providing free university tuition to European Union students because of decisions that the Scottish Government made. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning promised the Parliament that he would solve that problem, but he has still not solved it. If he came to us with the solution, that £75 million could be invested in Scotland’s colleges.

Will the minister confirm that Scottish Government departments are employing people on fixed-term contracts, paying them off, and then replacing them by bringing in new staff, in order to avoid saying that they are making people redundant?

To help with my contribution later, will the member clarify whether the proposal for a Thursday afternoon means that committees will have to finish by 11.40? If so, in effect, committee meetings on those mornings will be curtailed.

The minister has placed great emphasis on holding Government ministers to account and he said that question times are crucial in that regard. Does he agree, though, that it is a matter not just of extending the amount of time for questions, but of ensuring, perhaps through his own good offices, that ministers actually answer the questions that they are asked?

The fact that I have up to five minutes indicates one of the problems with the way in which the Parliament operates. If someone has a contrary view to express, their opportunity to advance that in the Parliament is limited. That is one of the reasons why we need change in the things that actually matter about the way in which we do our business. I have been an advocate of change for some considerable time and I agree with Paul Wheelhouse that change is needed. I support the Presiding Officer’s efforts to bring about change; the issue is just that I do not think that what is on offer is good enough to effect the change that we need. Dave Thompson is right that we should approach the matter with a critical eye. We should look, root and branch, at the way in which we operate and we should be prepared to be radical if that is required. We should not rest on our laurels and say that we are a new Parliament and we do business better than Parliaments elsewhere, including Westminster. If others do things better than we do, we should be prepared to acknowledge that and learn from it. It is in that spirit that I say that, frankly, this is a wasted opportunity. We need fundamental change in the way in which we do our business. One thing that has disappointed me in the debate is that members have spoken about the Parliament sitting only on a Wednesday afternoon and a Thursday. They treat the committees of the Parliament as though they are somehow different. I am sorry but, no, the Parliament meets on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. It is just that the committees of the Parliament meet at certain times and at other times the Parliament meets in plenary. To separate out the committees in that way does a disservice to what was seen as one of the pillars of this new Parliament. I agree entirely with the points that Duncan McNeil made about the committees. If we were truly determined to change for the better, we should have started with the fundamentals of the committees. How do we improve our committees? How do we make them more effective? How can we make their ability to hold the Government to account that bit better than it is just now?

That debate has been going on since time immemorial and, as I have only five minutes, I will not even attempt to go there. We should be looking to strengthen the role of the committees. We should have been thinking about bringing in ministers to the committees more regularly and for longer, in order to allow more detailed debate and scrutiny in the committees, with members having the opportunity to ask the minister question after question until they get some satisfaction. If we wanted to be truly radical, we should have asked why, given that the chair of the Public Audit Committee is always automatically allocated to a member of the Opposition, we do not do likewise with the chairs of the Finance Committee and some of the other important committees in the Parliament. That would help to ensure that committees are doing their job and holding the Government to account. Further, why not think about giving committees more time to do post-legislative work? I am sorry, I know that I am rushing my points. Although I am in favour of having questions that are more topical, we should ensure that, in those precious 15 minutes that have been allocated for topical questions, members can ask not only one follow-up question but two, three or maybe even four follow-up questions, so that they can get to the heart of the problem and ministers are not able to brush them off with a flippant or irrelevant answer. [Interruption.] Brian Adam says that someone of my calibre cannot say whether a question has been answered properly. That might be something that we need to look to the Presiding Officer to do, not just with regard to the detail of the answer but with regard to pointing out when the minister has not bothered to speak about the topic of the question that was asked. We should have thought about taking some of the items of members’ business into committees, so that members of the public could be brought closer to the debate and be made to feel part of the process as it is televised and recorded.

There is much more to say on this matter. I think that, to an extent, we are guilty of participating in a cosmetic exercise. We are tinkering. I worry that we are enfeebling committees and I sometimes think that we are in danger of consolidating irrelevance.

Will the member give way?

Will the cabinet secretary act to guarantee supply teachers a fair day’s pay for a fair day’s work?

I start by referring to a point that Dennis Robertson made. He said that he had hoped that the debate would be more consensual. In fact, it has been a consensual debate, because there has been little disagreement. There are a number of points on which we can agree. We all agree on the need for better parenting and the need to support parents who are struggling, and we all agree on the need to support families that are particularly vulnerable. However, Mr Robertson will recognise that it is understandable that there is a degree of frustration, in that we do not have a strategy to discuss. The headline in the Business Bulletin states that the debate is about the “National Parenting Strategy for Scotland”, but we do not know what that strategy is.

In a minute.

This is not the launch of the consultation, because that has already taken place. The debate is not about the strategy itself, because we do not know what the strategy is. It seems to be about the aspiration to have a strategy, which we are all signed up to. I therefore question the purpose of what we are doing just now.

There are very well laid-out parliamentary procedures for enabling parliamentarians to have that input. Normally, the Government would go back to a parliamentary committee and have a detailed discussion there. Perhaps that is still to come. In addition, if the issue is so significant, why have no significant proposals been produced for us to respond to and debate fully? Maureen Watt congratulated the minister on holding a debate on the strategy. We are frustrated, because we do not know what the strategy is and we are looking for detail. As I said, there are things on which we all agree. There is no doubt about the need for more family centres. I would have liked the opportunity to discuss that and I hope that the minister will still come forward with details of how the Government will expand and develop the role of family centres across Scotland. I agree with what Mark McDonald said about the role of play. I would like a specific reference to be made—one to which we could respond—to the significant contribution that play makes in nursery education and in families, and to changing the nature of how children learn in primary 1. When we were in power, we had that debate, so that the approach is now more about play-based, experiential development than simply talking at children. Play is significant and we know that children develop through play. It would be good if, in her closing speech, the minister could give us some detail on the role that play will have. I also hope that in her closing speech the minister will respond positively to the constructive comments that have been made about kinship care and the need for us to see the promised investment. Will we finally hear today how the money will be spent and how the approach will be developed and spread across Scotland? We also need to hear something specific from the minister in her summing up about the failure not just of the SNP Administration but of the Labour and Liberal Democrat Administration and, at a national level, of the Conservatives to do something about the position of looked-after children. We have all failed looked-after children, and we have all failed in our corporate parenting responsibilities. If only one thing comes out of such debates, it should be that, together, we are all signed up to do something to right a continuing wrong. I hope that in her summing up the minister will say something specific about the problems in the adoption process that have been highlighted. There are still far too many hurdles and delays placed in the way of potential adoptive parents and children who would benefit from adoption. Many of those are down to bureaucracy rather than ill will. Surely by now we should together have learned about some of the problems that exist and should have responded with arrangements that are more caring and more easily understood for children who require adoption and families and parents who want to adopt. There is consensus, and all that we are looking for today is some of the detail. I hope that on the specific issues that I have identified we will hear specific details from the minister so that we can all go forward together. The last thing that we need is warm words and platitudes from all parties in the Parliament. What we need is action. That is why I look forward. Just like the minister, I want to be excited about a parenting strategy, but so far I do not know what there is to be excited about. I look forward to the minister in her closing remarks making us all excited.

I, too, thank Elaine Smith for giving the Parliament the opportunity to put on record our views about two important issues. The first of those is the plight of the Miami five, which is, as other members have said, a gross miscarriage of justice and a grave injustice. There are so many inconsistencies in the way that the United States is dealing with the Miami five that it is hard to go through them all. On one level, I can understand that a country would worry about foreign interference in its domestic affairs. However, the United States can hardly say that its hands are clean when it comes to interference in the domestic affairs of other states. We have witnessed that powerful country using its power and influence to defend what it regards as its justifiable interests; we have seen it operating in Pakistan, in Yemen, in Africa, throughout South America and in Asia. It seems acceptable for the United States to operate outwith its boundaries in defence of its national interests yet, when it comes to others who are doing their best to look after the interests of their citizens, the US can behave in an aggressive and unfair way. Other members outlined more powerfully and eloquently than I can how the trial was conducted and the wide range of people in the US, including former President Carter, who think that the Miami five should be freed. I hope that President Obama, of whom many of us expected so much when he was elected, might use the opportunity when he is re-elected later this year, as I hope that he will be, to reconsider the attitude of the US and to use his power and influence to do the right thing and send a message that the United States will stand on the side of justice and fairness and be seen to be a beacon of hope for others. While President Obama aligns himself with an unjust decision, he demeans not only himself but the United States. It is time to do the right thing. The wider issue, which Elaine Smith and other members identified, is the attitude of the US to Cuba. The US still tries to strangle and stifle a neighbour that has a record of trying to do its best not just for its own people but for many people throughout the world, even though it has little material wealth. When a country that has so little at its disposal tries to do the right thing for people whom it regards as worse off, by exporting education, medical knowledge and so on, we can only admire its people and their efforts. The attitude of the United States to Cuba is mean-spirited, inconsistent and irrational. For the sake of humanity, it is time that the United States dropped its prejudice and extended the hand of friendship to people in Cuba, who would be more than willing to work with the US to make a difference not only to that part of the world and to South America generally but internationally. It is time that the United States lived up to what many of us think should be its role on the world stage. I hope that President Obama will at last see the light.

In Renfrewshire, nursery classes that previously had access to a nursery teacher for five days a week now have access to a teacher for only one day a week. Is that progress?

Will the minister provide me with a list of schools that have, since 2007, been funded by public-private partnerships but opened by a Scottish Government minister?

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to recent reports of reductions in the number of college courses across the country. (S4F-00595)

What is actually happening in Scotland’s colleges is completely different from what the First Minister is saying in the Parliament. Recent figures show that 592 academic staff have been made redundant and at least 23 colleges have cut courses, with more cuts to come. Reid Kerr College, in Paisley, which is an excellent college, is having to cut an additional 800 student places. Does he think that that is acceptable?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Will the cabinet secretary confirm whether he has the powers and competences to use regulation and ministerial guidance to introduce the increase in the number of hours now?

It is hard to know how to start, when the Government is making us an offer to come and talk and be positive while suggesting that the talk would take place in conditions of anger, bile and negativity. If the Government wants to talk, that is no way to frame the terms of the discussion.

Not yet. I heard enough of Mike Russell’s bile a few minutes ago. Let us concentrate on what the motion is about. Mike Russell asked why we have not spent time talking about what the coalition Government has done on welfare benefits. There will be plenty of opportunities to look at other matters; this debate is about a specific issue. We are all guilty sometimes of confusing nursery education and childcare. Mike Russell was right to say that the issues are indivisible to some extent, but there are also significant differences between them. I do not for a moment dispute that working families throughout the country need better access to more flexible, integrated childcare, which wraps around our important core education service. We need to ensure that the educational input can be more flexible and can link into what parents need. We perhaps also need to admit that we sometimes blur the distinctions between childcare and education. I think that there should be more flexibility, but I also argue that we need to ensure that we do not lose the fundamental educational input into early years development.

I am not accusing the SNP Government of doing that. I am talking generally; we all need to ensure that we do not lose that fundamental input. We need to be careful. We also need to be imaginative and flexible, so that we can match what parents need to what can be delivered. Whether or not Mike Russell liked hearing references to the First Minister, the debate has been framed by what the First Minister said. He mentioned childcare, but—

In a second. The First Minister mentioned childcare, but he has laboured significantly on education. That is the bit that we need to look at. Let me remind members what the SNP has said. In its 2007 manifesto it said: “We will increase the provision of free nursery education for 3 and 4 year olds by 50 per cent”. In its 2011 manifesto, the SNP said that it would “ensure ... that the expansion of nursery education continues.” At the party conference, Alex Salmond said that there will be “a statutory guarantee of over 600 hours of free nursery education for every Scottish 3 and 4 year old.”

I will resist the temptation to thank Hepburn for that intervention.

Oh, I am sorry; since he called me “Henry”, I was just making the point—

Thank you, Presiding Officer.

Well, anyway. The member asked whether we would have brought the subject forward for debate if the First Minister had not made those remarks. Well no, the subject would not have been on the agenda because it is about what the First Minister said. What he said—and what the SNP said—is that this is about the delivery of 600 hours of free nursery education. The question is whether we need primary legislation. Maybe in three years’ time, or longer, when the bill takes effect, there will be a need to consider legislation for flexibility, but—

No, thank you. Primary legislation is not needed to deliver the extension to hours. The SNP has already extended the hours by statutory instrument and moved beyond what Labour delivered. I agree with Aileen Campbell that 600 hours should be the starting point for a flexible package of wraparound childcare. We do not need to wait for primary legislation to deliver it.

No, thank you. Section 32 of the Standards in Scotland’s Schools etc Act 2000 allows ministers to effect change through regulation; that is, by statutory instrument. Section 34 allows ministers to give guidance on how that will be delivered. Delivery of the 600 hours does not need to wait for primary legislation. Joan McAlpine says that the commitment to 600 hours is a milestone. Normally, milestones tell us where we have reached in a journey. We have not reached 600 hours, so there is no milestone here. As Dennis Robertson said in a very good speech, this is a complex issue. We do not want to do something that could fail, yet the SNP has already extended provision and has made improvements on the journey, and that has not failed—it has been positive—so why would an extension to 600 hours be a failure?

No, thanks. The question is whether Scotland’s families and children need to wait for three years or more for the 600 hours to be delivered. The answer is no. Ministers have the power, and they have already used it. All that Labour is saying today is that we want to work constructively with the Government. We want the Parliament to send out the powerful message that we can unite on something so important to Scotland’s families. We all agree that 600 hours is a noble aspiration and that 600 hours will make a huge difference, so surely we can also agree that ministers have the power to deliver that now if they wish. [Applause.] There is no bile on my part—[Interruption.]

Why not be positive? Why not say that we can all work together? Why not recognise the powers of this Parliament? Why not recognise the powers of ministers? Why not recognise that Scotland’s families could benefit now from the 600 hours rather than waiting three years or more? The debate is about what we can do as a Parliament and not what we can aspire to as a Parliament. The debate is about whether there is a will to succeed. It is about whether we have the determination and ability to work across parties to do something now. We are offering the Government the opportunity and the mechanism not to delay nursery education provision for three years, but to implement it now and to work together to improve the flexibility of childcare and the integration of the different aspects of childcare. Above all, we are offering the Government the opportunity to make a difference now, not to postpone it to the dim and distant future.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on the need for a further level of scrutiny of expenditure by police and fire services. (S4O-00841)

I refer to the damning report on the Highlands and Islands Fire and Rescue Service that was published by the Accounts Commission. The cabinet secretary might be aware that, previously, the Public Audit Committee, with all-party support, had expressed concern that such reports could not be scrutinised in this Parliament by the Public Audit Committee or any other committee. Given that cross-party support, will the Scottish Government give its support to an attempt to widen the remit of the Public Audit Committee to allow such scrutiny to take place in this Parliament?

I put on record Scottish Labour’s support for curriculum for excellence. We want it to work, and to work well. We think that, once it is embedded, it will make a significant contribution to putting 21st century Scottish education right up there with the best in the world. It is because we want it to be a success that we are speaking up for the thousands of teachers and parents across Scotland who are expressing fears and concerns. I know that this is an unusual thing for a politician to say, but I hope that I am wrong. I hope that I am wrong about the state of readiness for curriculum for excellence, and I hope that Mike Russell is right when he says that the state of preparedness is good. For the sake of all Scotland’s pupils, I genuinely hope that the cabinet secretary will be able to demonstrate that my fears and concerns are misplaced. I support the cabinet secretary when he says that more support will be made available to the teachers and schools that need it, and I would welcome details of exactly what additional support has been given to specific schools. An audit is long overdue, and I welcome the cabinet secretary’s decision this week to conduct one, but I cannot understand why it has taken until now. I took from his comments to the Education and Culture Committee that a delay might be considered if all other efforts had failed at the end of a process of support, but the problem is that we are nearing the end of that process. At the end of April, teachers will be expected to absorb the new details and, in many schools, to start teaching the new courses at the beginning of June. Now is the time, therefore, to listen to the professionals who will have to deliver the new exam courses and, if we truly believe that parents have a role to play in educating their children, we should listen also to the concerns of anxious parents. We need to listen to parents who cannot get answers to reasonable questions put to teachers. We cannot afford to gamble with our children’s future. Teachers across Scotland are saying that they and the materials are not ready so, today, why do we not let the voices of teachers and parents tell the story? Politicians should be listening to them. When teachers say that they are nowhere near ready for implementation, are they wrong? What about the teacher who says, “In my school, at least half of the teachers have had their concerns rejected out of hand by the local authority, who insist that there is no alternative”, or the one who says, “At a meeting of our school, several staff asked to be allowed to continue to offer intermediate courses in the best interests of our pupils. We were told that we must deliver the National 4 and National 5 courses. If only our authority had the courage of East Renfrewshire”? What about the teacher who says “I am a history teacher and I can say with confidence that none of my colleagues have any confidence in the new system”, or the one who says, “I work in a high school. We are nowhere near ready for implementation. We have had no guidelines on how we are going to assess. It will be a complete disaster”? Other teachers say, “I am just concerned that there is not a proper course in place. Mr Russell talks about this additional support. I’ve looked online. I don’t know where it is”, and, “Ask Mike Russell this: can departments be expected to deliver three courses ... for August (or even May if the timetable is changed earlier) if the final versions are only being published in April? Is it good planning to have a four-week window to write these three, two-year courses?” Another has said: “As a teacher, I find the workload of Curriculum for Excellence overwhelming. Unfortunately no one will speak out because, as a teacher, you are in a no win situation. If the Curriculum succeeds then it will be the Government and Education Scotland who get the credit, not the teachers who have made themselves ill to try to make it work. On the other hand, if it fails then it will be the fault of teachers for not implementing it properly. So teachers cannot speak out.” It is not just secondary teachers who are expressing concerns. A relatively new primary teacher said: “I was very excited to start teaching Curriculum for Excellence. After all, it is hard not to like ideas such as collaborative group work, formative assessment and making our kids responsible citizens. We have no new materials and mostly use exactly the same 5-14 material that was in place or resources scavenged from the internet. The National Assessment Resource is a joke—materials have been scanned from old 5-14 resources or look as though they have come from student teachers. No use to man or beast. I am fundamentally committed to Curriculum for Excellence but I now feel that its implementation has been a disaster which really does have the possibility of wrecking the education of our kids.” Those are her words, not mine. Another said: “It is like the Emperor’s new clothes. There is no detail, but everyone is afraid to say so.” It is not just teachers. Why do we not listen to parents such as the one who said: “I have been hitting brick wall after brick wall despite writing several letters to his school. I have now attended Parents’ evening at my son’s school, and am more concerned than ever about my son’s educational future. At parents’ evening, teachers were unable to answer specific questions about the syllabus or assessments. Several teachers told me off the record that Curriculum for Excellence is in shambles, but that they are not allowed to speak out about it. I am afraid that children like my son will be the losers if it is allowed to go ahead this year”? What about the couple who were worried that their son and his classmates were—to use their words, not mine—“guinea pigs” for a change that was unclear to them and, indeed, to teachers? They said: “We are worried that teachers themselves are unsure”. One parent said: “Right now, I have no idea when my son will make his subject choices or if he will be offered the breadth of qualifications needed to enter University. Teachers were unable to tell me much about the qualifications.” I do not underestimate the gravity of the situation or the dilemma that the cabinet secretary faces. The motion was lodged not to try to divide support for curriculum for excellence; rather, it was lodged for a very practical reason. Too many teachers and parents remain unpersuaded that everything is on track, as the cabinet secretary has suggested, and all the teaching unions are reporting concerns from members that delivery cannot be achieved in a consistent manner across Scotland within the current timetable. Indeed, the Educational Institute of Scotland today published a survey of its members in secondary schools that showed that fewer than 5 per cent of the respondents were very confident that their department will be able to deliver the exams on time, and 82 per cent said that the quality and the level of support from the Scottish Government is unsatisfactory. Teachers are saying that they need more time as well as more resources. Why is it acceptable to grant a delay to an authority with an outstanding record of delivery in education, but wrong to do the same for other teachers who say that they are not ready? We cannot afford to have even a small minority of pupils disadvantaged. That could live with them for a long time. Now is the time to examine why there are complaints. Today, we must show that the Parliament is ready to do what is best for our children. We should say that we support the cabinet secretary’s offer of more support where that is required but, equally, we should listen when teachers say that they are not ready and that they need more time. Even at this late stage, I appeal to the cabinet secretary to develop a political consensus to work with teachers and parents to do the right thing. A managed delay is better than disorganised chaos. This is not about politicians; it is not even about parents and teachers. This is about Scotland’s pupils. We should not gamble with their future. I move, That the Parliament reaffirms its support for the Curriculum for Excellence, which it believes can make a significant contribution to Scottish education; notes however the widespread and persistent concerns being expressed by teachers and parents across Scotland about the readiness of preparation for the new examinations associated with the Curriculum for Excellence; further notes that, despite the reassurances offered by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, these concerns have not been allayed; believes that no pupils in Scotland should be disadvantaged if teachers in any school feel ill-equipped to prepare pupils for the new exams; further believes that the current timetable does not give teachers sufficient time to familiarise themselves with the details, and believes that calls for a delay should be heeded and urgent action taken to secure consistent implementation across Scotland of all aspects of the Curriculum for Excellence.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

The cabinet secretary should not misinterpret expressions of concern over the state of readiness as a lack of support for curriculum for excellence. There is still cross-party consensus; we do not need Larry Flanagan or anyone else to try to re-establish it. The consensus is still there; the concerns are over the state of readiness.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. I share the cabinet secretary’s aspirations for learners in Scotland and support the need for improvement and clarification of possible pathways from school. We need to reflect on how we enhance the experience of the senior school years and consider how that fits with the transition to college and university. We should also recognise that increasingly poorer subject choices are being made available to fifth-year and sixth-year pupils, which needs to be addressed. I agree with the cabinet secretary that there is more to do to ensure wider access for all students regardless of their background, and I look forward to seeing details, at some point, of the commitment to a minimum student income of £7,000 per year in higher education. The statement was disappointing. It contained no detail about what is going to be done. It is about aspirations and I am not sure what its purpose is and how it allows questions to be asked. It is full of commitments to say more later and makes promises for new guidance. It asks officials to consider how best to achieve progress on learning pathways. On the SCQF, the cabinet secretary said that he would explore the issues “further over the coming months”, and, on student support, he said that he expects to “announce more details in the summer.” He also said that he has “asked the Scottish funding council to set up a working group”, and that he will have more to say about colleges before the Easter recess. Such statements make me wonder what the point is. Will the cabinet secretary reconsider his decision to force through significant changes to college structures, which already have to cope with large-scale budget cuts? Will he abandon full centralisation and the increase of ministerial control? Will he provide the details of the number of subjects that are being studied in the Scottish baccalaureate and the number of schools that are participating in it? Will he ensure a reversal of the cuts to careers service staff?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. The McCrone review was about improving morale in Scottish education, supporting professionalism among teachers and fairly rewarding experience and expertise. The McCormac review, on the other hand, will, I fear, help to destabilise and demoralise the teaching profession. It is a charter for cost-cutting by managers and is an academic fig leaf to allow the Scottish National Party Government to facilitate budget cuts across Scotland, building on previous education betrayals by the SNP, including the pledge to cut class sizes and the pledge to maintain teacher numbers. I disagree profoundly with the cabinet secretary’s decision to abandon the chartered teacher scheme. I believe that it can be amended and improved, but the concept—that we should find a way of supporting and rewarding excellent teachers who want to remain in the classroom—remains the right one. The cabinet secretary has said nothing about supporting teachers who see that as a preferred career option. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s rejection of the Renfrewshire Council model of replacing teachers with unqualified staff, and I hope that any suggestion of bringing others into our schools will be based on teacher professionalism, with proper safeguards and checks built in. I do not oppose the idea of supporting teachers to improve and develop their skills, but does the cabinet secretary recognise that there are fears that there could be an attempt to introduce reaccreditation, and will he rule that out? The cabinet secretary has said nothing about probationary teachers. Will he rule out any attempts to move away from the current structure on class contact time, and will he guarantee that hours will not be blocked to allow schools to use probationers to cover for absence? I regret that the cabinet secretary has glossed over the key issues around conditions. Teachers should not have to do continuing professional development during school holidays. We should not casualise promoted posts by having temporary promotions based on the lowest salary point. Will he guarantee that he will not ignore the overwhelming response to McCormac from those who want the retention of annex B, the list of teacher duties, and annex E, the list of teacher tasks?

5. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government considers that the introduction of new national exams in 2013-14 is on schedule. (S4F-00459)

The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has assured Parliament that the introduction of curriculum for excellence is on track, but Scotland’s teachers are telling us that the materials—and they—are not ready. Are Scotland’s teachers wrong?

We have heard a lot about encouraging economic growth and stimulating the economy. Ken Macintosh was right to express concern about the proposed levy on supermarkets and other major retailers, because although I do not disagree with the concept of taxing the people who have resources I cannot understand why the levy is being imposed without a full economic impact assessment being done and without consideration of the potential consequences for poorer communities and low-paid workers throughout the country. If the SNP is serious about encouraging jobs and economic growth, surely it should predicate its decisions on fact and not on assertion and prejudice.

Those are two separate issues. What I am saying is that I see no reason for not carrying out a full economic impact assessment. Something that can be seen clearly is the budget’s failure to deal with the human impact and cost of the cuts that the SNP is inflicting, which I see regularly in my area. Renfrewshire Council has cut more teachers from its workforce and made more workers redundant, proportionate to the size of the workforce, than any council in the country has done. That is having an impact.

I will certainly take an intervention from the ex-leader of Renfrewshire Council.

If Derek Mackay cared to go back over the records, he would find that in previous years Labour did not support the cuts that he brought forward while he was leader of the council. The SNP cannot disguise the fact that its cuts are having an effect on how teachers deliver education in our schools. It cannot disguise the fact that our social workers are struggling to cope with the pressures that they face daily. It cannot disguise the fact that the sick, the elderly and the disabled are paying more for their services and that many services are being cut or withdrawn. Those are the human consequences of the budget. I want to dwell on what is happening in our colleges. The cabinet secretary trumpeted the extra money that he is putting into the colleges budget. What he has done is restore the money for student support that the SNP said that it had not cut, to bring us back to the position at the time of the SNP’s pledge before the election, before it indicated that it would cut again. There is no advance on the position that previously pertained. An extra £8 million is going to colleges, but that still leaves a cut of almost £30 million per year. It still means that jobs are being cut in colleges; that courses and places are under pressure; and that colleges’ ability to respond to the economic crisis that we are facing in Scotland will be restricted. If we are serious about giving our young people in the most disadvantaged communities a decent start in life, we have to reverse not just £8 million of cuts, but the full amount of the cuts that this SNP Government is inflicting. We ignore at our peril this generation of young people who are looking for training, jobs and the opportunity to fulfil their potential in life. We need to listen not just to the college principals but to the lecturers who are saying that they are not able to do their job properly and that they are worried and fearful about what will be available to students the length and breadth of Scotland. If this generation is failed in the same way that the generation in the 1980s was failed and if it is unable to reach its full potential, we will pay a higher social and economic price. This is a budget of despair; it is smoke and mirrors; and it does not face up to the real consequences. It tries to make out that we have somehow gained something from the pressure that has been applied by students across Scotland and by articles such as those in today’s Daily Record. In fact, the Government has given very little. It has not reversed the full impact of the cuts that it had previously outlined; it has merely mitigated to a small extent the worst of what it had been proposing. When all is said and done, this is about cuts, cuts, cuts that are being inflicted on our colleges.

Will the member give way?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Labour disagrees with the Tories and the Liberal Democrats on many issues. However, it is arrogant to suggest that people elected to the Parliament who are doing their job and listening to concerns from staff and students across the country have no right to come to the chamber and raise those concerns. What we have heard from the cabinet secretary this morning is another unfortunate example of what has happened since the election. There is an arrogance, an intolerance and a view among those now in government that no one—except them—has the right to speak for anyone in Scotland. That creeping intolerance will at some point lead to their saying that freedom of speech for the Opposition should no longer exist and that everything should be articulated only through them. It is a given fact that Scotland’s colleges have an outstanding record of service delivery and success. No one can quibble with, for example, the 350,000 learners per year and the fact that 55 per cent of attendees are women who want to develop their skills and potential; that 30 per cent of students come from Scotland’s most deprived areas; and that 70 per cent of students who go into FE gain employment. Now, with an unemployment crisis in this country, we need Scotland’s colleges more than ever. We need their expertise, their delivery and their success. Now, more than ever, is the time to invest in Scotland’s colleges. In the past few months, we have heard a lot about preventative spending and the idea that spending now will mean that we will need to spend less on solving problems in the future. If that is the case, what better preventative spending could there be than investment in Scotland’s colleges, given the record that they have demonstrated? In Liz Smith’s motion, which I am happy to support, she clearly outlines some of the issues and, in her excellent speech, she detailed the scale of the problem that is looming. Some 88,000 18 to 24-year olds in Scotland are unemployed. Now, more than ever, we need to give that generation our support, and it is the colleges that will make the difference. If we fail them and do not give them the resources that they need, they will be unable to respond to the crisis that is confronting us. Scotland’s Colleges has said that the cuts will make it increasingly difficult to protect the quality of college education and keep access to courses local and fair. We hear about choices that need to be made, and this is a choice. The SNP Government has chosen to allocate a certain amount to the education budget, and Mike Russell has chosen how to use his money within that budget. He has made the choice to deprive Scotland’s colleges—he and no one else. If he is not prepared to stand up for Scotland’s colleges, who else in the Government can we look to to defend those who have a proven record of success? The Government is prepared to fund redundancy and unemployment, but it is not prepared to invest in creating opportunities for those who need education the most. It is not prepared to support young people from deprived areas, women who want to develop their skills and potential, or people with disabilities. Courses are being cut, choices are being limited, and workload is increasing. The Educational Institute of Scotland has described the reduction in staff numbers as a matter of significant concern. What we are doing as an Opposition in the Parliament is telling the cabinet secretary to listen to the worries and concerns of the people who elected him and us because, frankly, they are the people who matter.

The £75 million per year that the Scottish Government is using to provide free tuition for foreign students could be spent on Scotland’s colleges. Will the First Minister give me a guarantee that such spending will stop?

I thank the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning for the copy of his statement, and I welcome many of the recommendations that he has made. Labour does not dispute the need to look at issues of governance and accountability when scarce public resources are involved; indeed, with my former colleague George Foulkes, I raised concerns about the scandalous way in which remuneration packages for university principals have soared to beyond £200,000 per year. I believe that the old boys’ network needs to be broken, and that more women should be involved not only on university courts, but in senior positions. There are issues around college governance and accountability that were never fully addressed when the colleges were taken away from local authority oversight. However, the cabinet secretary should not confuse accountability with ministerial interference. I welcome and agree with his comments on academic freedom, but I want a clear indication of the boundaries between accountability for use of public funds and the role of ministers. As for colleges, I worry that the agenda for regionalisation and governance is being used as an attempt to move attention away from cuts, job losses, course reductions and reduced student choice. The plans that the cabinet secretary has outlined indicate a shotgun marriage rather than agreement based on consensus. Can the cabinet secretary guarantee that nothing will be done that would risk the loss of charitable status for colleges? Will he reconsider the damaging cuts to college funding that are hindering colleges’ ability to respond to current challenges? Will he fully fund all the costs associated with changes to governance and structures? Will he review the role of the funding council and look at how it can help to improve accountability and governance in Scotland’s universities and colleges?

3. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister for Public Health will next meet the insulin pump awareness group Scotland to discuss the provision of insulin pumps. (S4O-00601)

I am sure that the group looks forward to that. Nicola Sturgeon recently announced a target of 2,000 people in Scotland using insulin pumps by 2014. What is the Scottish Government doing to ensure equality of pump provision across Scotland, given that pump provision by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde falls way below the recommendation in guidelines?

I note what the cabinet secretary says about not pre-empting the review, but will he confirm that there is nothing to prevent him from saying now in response to John Wilson’s question that the board will continue?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I presume that a typographical error has been made. Perhaps the cabinet secretary will help us by putting on the record the rest of the statement.

No, but Mike Russell is.

Can I reply to that, Presiding Officer? Mike Russell was using an electronic device, which is not allowed under the rules of this Parliament.

It has been a somewhat bizarre debate because, at times—despite what Margo MacDonald said about some of the speeches—it has felt as though I was participating in fringe meetings at an SNP conference. There has been plenty rhetoric, emotion, sophistry and semantics but little about some of the facts and detail that we need to resolve. Had the debate been constructed around the terms of reference that Margo MacDonald articulated, we would have spent our time much more productively and fruitfully, because there are significant issues that need to be resolved. Notwithstanding the specific detail that Murdo Fraser and David McLetchie provided on the legal issues, Margo MacDonald and others—including SNP members—have outlined the fact that, irrespective of the legal niceties, if people in Scotland want to determine their future in a different way, they have the right to do so. If they do so, we will need to engage in a detailed and protracted process that will involve negotiation. Whatever happens, people in Scotland need to know what they are voting on. They need to know whether they are voting for Scotland to separate from the United Kingdom and set up completely on our own—

No, thanks. Alternatively, people in Scotland need to know whether we are moving towards a new form of devolution. As Malcolm Chisholm eloquently said, we cannot merge the two issues. We need to decide on our future. If Scotland wants to move to independence and to separate from the United Kingdom, that is fine—let us do that, so that I can get on with the rest of my life. On the other hand, if people in Scotland want to stay part of the United Kingdom and have a different form of devolution, we have the right to do that. Let us get the independence and separation question out of the road. In a sense, the motion is farcical. As Neil Findlay and others said, it asks some parties—the Liberal Democrats and the Labour Party—but not the Conservatives or the SNP to reassert our commitment to the claim of right, as Alex Salmond said. As parties, we cannot reassert that commitment. The SNP cannot reassert the commitment, because the SNP never made it in the first place. It is cynical and does debate no good in the Parliament to consider only part of the claim of right. The claim of right said: “We further declare and pledge that our actions and deliberations shall be directed to the following ends: To agree a scheme for an Assembly or Parliament for Scotland”. When Labour came to power, we delivered that. Another purpose was “To mobilise Scottish opinion and ensure the approval of the Scottish people for that scheme”. Labour delivered that with a referendum. Another purpose was—

Wait until I have finished my point. Another purpose was: “To assert the right of the Scottish people to secure the implementation of that scheme.” Labour facilitated that and delivered not only a referendum but the Parliament.

No—let me finish the points that I want to make. An equally important part of the Scottish Constitutional Convention that we do not refer to when we talk about the convention is that it said, on securing the legislation, that “In order to ensure successive Westminster Parliaments do not attempt to dismantle a Scottish Parliament the Convention expects the Westminster Parliament to move a special Declaration before passing the legislation creating the Scottish Parliament.” The convention said that Westminster should not have the right to remove what was put in place. If the convention expected Westminster to give that commitment, why should we complain when people such as Jim Wallace attempt to recognise that?

Jim Wallace is attempting not to act as a governor-general but to deliver what he has campaigned for all his life. Westminster has a role in the process as outlined by the Scottish Constitutional Convention.

We have heard a number of things today. We heard about motions being “charged with historical resonance”, but there is historical resonance from different political perspectives. In some cases, we heard history being rewritten and misquoted and the law being twisted.

In the motion, we are dealing with a claim of right to which the Labour Party signed up and the SNP did not. We are dealing only with a partial statement of that claim of right. A number of comments have been made to which I do not have time to refer. Linda Fabiani said that this Parliament, not Westminster, speaks for Scotland. On many things, this Parliament and not Westminster speaks for Scotland, but there are many other matters on which Westminster speaks for Scotland, because it remains our Parliament, not their Parliament. That point should never be forgotten. There are words in the constitutional convention document on which the SNP Government should reflect. I will finish with its words: “What this process has proved is that constructive consensus is achievable, even among those steeped in the ritual confrontations of British politics. That lesson is immensely encouraging, not just for the project of designing a Scottish Parliament, but for the much more important question of how the Parliament will work once it is in place. We see the consensus that this report represents as a beacon of hope for a new and better politics in a Scotland running its own affairs. We have been struck by the way argument has generated understanding and respect, rather than acrimony. Every decision has been reached by agreement. None has been taken by majority vote. When the prize is big enough, purpose can overcome obstinacy.” Think about it.

I was fascinated to hear Clare Adamson and John Mason talk about preventative spending as though it is something new—an idea that the present Government thought up that is somehow making a difference. The concept of preventative spending, however, has a long history. At the outset of devolution in 1999 and during the first two Administrations, there was a determination to follow through with preventative spending, which is why so much was spent on early years and education. If we want to prevent the need for further expenditure down the line and avoid getting into problems in that regard, it is not enough to put a token amount into the budget and say that it is preventative spending; we must get to the heart of the services that are crucial for many people across Scotland. One of the problems that we therefore have with the budget is that the cuts across the board are making it more difficult for those who are charged with ensuring that prevention is better than cure. Local government has had a poor settlement again. My area of Renfrewshire is again right at the bottom of the allocations to local authorities, despite the Minister for Local Government and Planning being an ex-leader of Renfrewshire Council. That allocation impacts on the council’s ability to spend preventatively on the things that members have said that they want to see. For example, it is much better to spend money on protecting the elderly, infirm and disabled at an early stage than to have to fund expensive care packages for them further down the line. However, we are seeing significant cuts to services for vulnerable people, which will ultimately lead to much more in the way of expenditure. If we want to prevent further tragedies like that of Declan Hainey from happening—God forbid that they should—we need to invest in social workers. We should not simply turn around and try to blame social workers when things go wrong. We need to ensure that we have more social workers, more support and more and earlier intervention, rather than complain when we see the tragedies unfolding because the problems have not been picked up. If we truly want to make a difference, we need to invest in education. We need to invest not only in early years—and early years investment, in any case, should amount to more than having an early years teacher allegedly visiting a school once a week, or much less than that, in some cases. We need to answer this question: if we are cutting education so badly, how can we prevent the youngsters of today becoming the problems of tomorrow, failing, ending up in trouble, turning to alcohol and drug abuse and ending up in prison? The low numbers of teachers that we have under this Administration will lead, ultimately, to higher costs for society. Teachers complain that they cannot do their jobs properly because they have fewer support staff, which puts further burdens on those teachers and lessens their ability to deliver the results that we expect of them.

That is a fascinating concept. This Government has already said that it believes in preventative spending and what I am articulating to the chamber—which Nigel Don has agreed with—is the fact that, if we do not spend money that way, we will end up spending more money down the line. Ken Macintosh and others have already outlined where the necessary money might come from, but we cannot have parents trying to fundraise for vital supplies in schools. In Renfrewshire, to use it as an example again, pupils have fewer choices for highers and advanced highers, which reduces their ability to pursue the university courses and careers that they want, which in turn builds up a problem of young people not being able to play their full part in contributing to the economic wellbeing of our society. Those are the kinds of problems that we are seeing. I will finish on the issue that many others have discussed: the stupidity of the cuts to the further education budget. If any more money is promised in the coming financial year, I suspect that the Government will be pulling money further forward from years 2 and 3 and there will be a sleight of hand to make it look good. However, if we do not invest in our colleges, we will damn a generation to idleness and to not being able to reach their full potential. While the Government talks about positive things and prevention, the reality of this budget is that it is failing, and it is failing those who need our help most.

Does Patrick Harvie recognise my fundamental point that it is all very well talking about preventative spending, but if we cut vital services, we will end up with greater expenditure further down the line?

Will the First Minister take an intervention?

There is a salutary lesson in that quote not only for me but for others. I believed what the SNP had said and I failed to check the facts, which were that the SNP’s manifesto did not mention the issue. The people of Scotland should be warned never to believe what the SNP says and always to check the facts.

I thank the cabinet secretary for his kind words. There is no doubt that there is much that we can all agree on. We all accept that education plays a fundamental role in developing a young person’s life chances and opportunities, and we know about the significance of education in building a successful and vibrant society. We all take it as a given that our dedicated, professional and well-trained teachers and nursery staff are the foundation on which we build and, of course, we recognise that the vast majority of Scotland’s pupils and students are a credit to themselves and their families. It was for those reasons that, during the first eight years of devolution, the Labour-led Administration placed such significance on education being a priority. That is why we invested in improving teachers’ pay and conditions. We did that so that we would have a highly motivated and committed teaching profession. That is also why we invested so heavily in building new schools throughout Scotland and why, in developing the curriculum for excellence, we decided to create a modern learning environment that was suited to the demands of 21st century Scotland. It is right that the Scottish Government should focus on raising attainment. We owe it to each and every young person to support them to reach their full potential in life. In raising attainment, we enable our young people not only to fulfil their potential, but to contribute to the wellbeing of our society. I fully support the Scottish Government’s aspiration to build on excellence in the early years and fully subscribe to early intervention as a strategy to support and develop individuals and provide a better and more effective use of scarce resources. However, if we truly believe that the early years of a child’s life are critical and if we believe in early intervention when children are vulnerable for whatever reason, we need a comprehensive, integrated and properly funded early years strategy. The Scottish Government has placed great emphasis on single outcome agreements. What has it done when local authorities have targeted for cuts the very early years services that it has said are vital? The Scottish Government said that access to pre-school education would be increased to 15 hours per week. Will the cabinet secretary tell me exactly which authorities, other than Glasgow City Council and East Renfrewshire Council, have met that target? The cabinet secretary has quite rightly made great play of the significance of teachers. They should be especially important in the early years, if we truly mean what we say about the early years. The Scottish Government’s commitment to access to a teacher in the early years has led to confused and erratic staffing arrangements. Just what does access mean? How frequent is it? In some authority areas, there are peripatetic teachers who travel around early years establishments like wandering minstrels. They are unable to support staff properly or establish relationships with pupils that could help to identify problems. We have a stated recognition of the importance of the early years and warm words of support, but there is confusion and a failure to support in an effective and consistent manner. I support the development and implementation of the curriculum for excellence, which has the capacity to transform the way in which education in Scotland is delivered—indeed, it is already in practice in large areas of Scottish education, particularly in the early years and primary schools—but it would be foolish and irresponsible for us to ignore the real concerns that exist in many schools in Scotland. Many teachers feel that they are underprepared. Teachers are already under pressure because of falling teacher numbers, increasing class sizes and budget cuts. Classroom assistants have been cut, and teachers are having to cope with more and more non-professional tasks. Training and continuous professional development are being pared back. To be frank, there has been complacency and a failure to invest properly to make the curriculum for excellence a reality and a success. That needs to be addressed now. The cabinet secretary needs to listen to what classroom teachers are saying. The problem is most obvious in respect of the new exam system. Many teachers are confused, anxious and worried. They are unable to explain clearly to parents what exactly will happen and whether the exams will be delivered with certainty and to acceptable standards. Parents are rightly becoming fearful about the consequences for their children. This week, I spoke to a parent who is an academic; his wife is a healthcare professional. He told me that they are worried that their 13-year-old son and his friends are being treated as guinea pigs for a change that is unclear to them and to teachers. I have spoken to teachers, and they are bewildered and anxious. They understand the concept, but it is far from clear to them what the process is and how it links to exams and qualifications. More worrying, teachers are unsure about whether the exam system can be delivered on time.

If the cabinet secretary had actually listened to my opening remarks, he would have heard me celebrating Scottish education’s positive aspects. Frankly, though, I think that it would be irresponsible of me as an individual MSP, never mind an education spokesperson, to ignore the growing problems in and real concerns about Scottish education. If the cabinet secretary does not address these matters, he will be failing in his duties. We need urgent action to ensure that the new exams will be delivered as promised, with all schools fully ready for implementation. If that cannot be guaranteed, there should be a delay to ensure that no pupil is disadvantaged by confusion and chaos. Any damage to a pupil at this stage could have consequences for the rest of their life. We have seen examples of that in the past and we should not subject another generation of children to it.

No. Equally, we need to address the increasing lack of subject choice available to senior pupils in schools. That is becoming a problem and it is denying pupils access to proper career choices and university courses. Indeed, the most acute impact is being felt by those in lower-income communities whose life chances are already limited. Earlier, I outlined why the previous Labour-led administration had invested in teachers. The fact is that teachers are becoming disillusioned and demoralised by falling teacher numbers, increasing class sizes and budget cuts, and the investment in improving teacher morale is being frittered away. The anger that is being expressed relates most frequently to the current situation with supply teachers, which is unsustainable, and no doubt the cabinet secretary has received the same complaints that I have received about supply teachers being employed on the cheap. The attempt to dilute pay in the teaching profession is a throwback to the 1930s. A recent Times article suggested supply teachers were earning half of what permanent staff were being paid and the Times Educational Supplement Scotland reported on a case of a qualified Scottish teacher who is now having to work as a bus driver in Birmingham.

No. TESS also reported that 92 per cent of short-term supply requests in West Lothian were not being filled. The situation cannot go on: it is fair neither to pupils who have to face a succession of different faces nor to teachers who worked hard for their qualification and deserve a fair day’s pay for a fair day’s work. This unfair and unjust pay agreement needs to be scrapped now. In his motion, the cabinet secretary refers—quite rightly—to “post-16 education”. We all recognise the outstanding contribution being made by Scotland’s colleges, and they will be crucial if we are to avoid the same waste of a generation that we had in the 1980s. However, although I understand the need to ensure that 16 to 19-year-olds are not abandoned by society, what about the 20 to 24-year-olds? After all, youth unemployment, which is rising, is measured from 18 to 24. We need to address that issue. Moreover, colleges are being hit hard by budget cuts. This is not just about staffing levels and jobs for lecturers, but about colleges’ ability to deliver for a section of our society that otherwise will have no opportunity to develop its skills and potential. We cannot expect colleges to raise attainment if they are being deprived of the means to achieve that aim. None of us will argue against the desirability of raising attainment for all young people. However, we must also recognise that the positive improvements that have previously been made in Scottish education are being put at real risk, and warm words will not change the reality for pupils, parents or teachers. I move amendment S4M-01677.3, to leave out from “believes” to end and insert: “notes the concerns being expressed by teachers about the implementation of the Curriculum for Excellence and believes that these concerns must be addressed; believes that urgent action is needed to address problems in the availability of supply teachers caused by the changes to pay and conditions; believes that a high-performing early years and schools system is the single greatest tool in improving the employability and life chances of young people; commits to support efforts that increase attainment for all young people from nursery through to post-16 education, and believes that budget cuts to Scotland’s colleges are hindering their ability to raise attainment in post-16 education.”

Will the member give way?

Given that the theme of this debate is education, learning and improvement, if the minister can help me to learn, improve and change, I am more than willing to listen to him. Therefore, so that I may change, can he explain why it is negative to express concerns about the unfairness and injustice of what is happening to supply teachers; why it is negative to explain the worries and fears of parents and teachers in relation to exams; and why it is negative to express the concerns of lecturers and students in colleges across Scotland?

Could I clarify what the minister accused me of saying?

We have heard talk of consensus and working together. I understand why Jackie Baillie made the point that much of what is being looked at came from recommendations that were made in work that the Labour Party asked for, and why the cabinet secretary wants to take credit for what she proposes. However, fundamentally, the issue is how we can work together to make a lasting change that will benefit the people whom we represent. We all want to get in our own particular points about who said what, but I was disappointed by James Dornan’s conclusion, as he distorted what Jackie Baillie said. He said that the SNP would not support the Labour Party’s amendment because it looks for a statutory national service. I suggest that James Dornan should read Jackie Baillie’s amendment again, as that is not what it says. One of the problems that we have with how the public sector works in Scotland is the length of time that it takes to change anything. In the Public Audit Committee, I have seen some of the problems that relate to entrenched attitudes and the difficulty of getting change. In listening to some of the speeches in the debate, I have reflected on the fact that it was 10 years ago that Malcolm Chisholm and I were appointed as health ministers, and one of the first things that we had to look at in our portfolio was how to get health and social work budgets to work together to bring forward a common agenda. We are still talking about the same problem 10 years later. That is not because the ministers in the previous Labour-led Administration had a lack of political will, and it is not a reflection of a lack of will by the ministers who have served since 2007; rather, it is a fact that there is a bureaucracy and there are vested interests that are very often resistant to change. We need to think about how we can think outside the box and beyond our own safety and comfort zones about how we will force change. We can talk about delayed discharge statistics and statistics on how much things cost, but at the end of the day, it is human stories that count: the distress and anxiety that families feel when they see a loved one kept in hospital for longer than they have to be; families’ worries when they know that someone is relying on a vital care service and costs are shooting through the roof; and families’ worries about what will happen when the length of time for carers is cut.

By all means. They are among a number of factors that have to be taken into account, but at the end of the day, we need to force the pace of change. That is why I support what the cabinet secretary said. Legislative underpinning is vital in achieving that. Bob Doris referred to the Princess Royal Trust for Carers. It is not only the trust that has talked about what needs to be done—Macmillan Cancer Support and others have also done so. The change fund is to be welcomed, and I seek a guarantee that it will be protected and will not be sliced in other directions as other pressures emerge. Bob Doris mentioned that 20 per cent of the fund is for carers, and I seek a guarantee that that element will be protected and will not be taken in other directions. Change comes slowly—

No, thank you—I have a couple of points to make before I finish. The cabinet secretary made her announcement at the magnificent new Barrhead health and care centre in my constituency, which leads me to reflect on how long that welcome project has taken. The money for it was signed off in 2006, when Andy Kerr—who is no longer in the Parliament—was a minister. It was driven by local councillors Roy Garscadden and Danny Collins, who are no longer councillors in East Renfrewshire. That is how long it takes to deliver vital services, and we must find a way to change that and make things happen more quickly. What we have discussed today is welcome, and it would be petty of the SNP to reject Jackie Baillie’s amendment at this stage. Strathclyde Regional Council was much derided, but it delivered fantastic initiatives in health and social care and education. That Labour-dominated authority had officer/member working groups that brought together politicians from all parties with council officers and outside experts to come up with a range of reports on poverty, education, early years, social care and so on. We could consider replicating that model if we want change that everyone will buy into over the longer term: change that does not just come from the Government, but which has the support of every member in the Parliament.

I acknowledge the minister’s point. Will he consider setting up a group—as I suggested—along the lines of the Strathclyde Regional Council officer/member working groups, so that we can embed joint co-operation between every member in the Parliament?

Will the minister guarantee to protect the change fund and the carers element of it?

Will Christine Grahame give way?

As others have done, I welcome the report. We take great pride in our Scottish legal system and the way in which it has operated for many years, but we all need to be big enough to admit that improvements can be made and that there are areas that we should seek to improve. Lord Carloway has identified a number of areas that are certainly ripe for improvement. It is right to make our justice system compliant with the European convention on human rights. As others have said, article 5 on the right to liberty and article 6 on the right to a fair trial should be fundamental to everything that we do. The report makes a number of sensible suggestions for modernising operation of the Scottish criminal justice system. I welcome the concept that an arrest will trigger a set of rights for the suspect in order to ensure that proceedings against the accused constitute a fair trial. I also support the idea that the period for which a person is under arrest before a charge is made be limited to 12 hours. However, if we are going in that direction, we need to face up to some of the practical consequences and the costs of it at a time when budgets are being cut in real terms. The cabinet secretary referred quite rightly to the prospect of weekend courts—there would not be only weekend courts, but bank holiday courts. He suggested that they might be the exception because of other changes that will be made, but I am not so sanguine because we know just how difficult it can be to make changes. As others have said with regard to other aspects of what is suggested, there can be unintended consequences. I argue that weekend and bank holiday courts would become a matter of routine, with extra court staff, extra fiscals and all the other associated staff. What about the extra defence costs that would be involved at a time when the legal aid budget is being cut? Defence lawyers would have extra expenditure from such activities at those times. Other members spoke in detail about issues around vulnerable adults and children. I generally welcome the proposals that have been made in that regard. I want to concentrate, as others have done, on corroboration. I understand the anxiety about cases failing simply because of a lack of corroboration. I accept that we have to look at problems with convictions in sexual offences cases, including rape. It is a stain on our society that so many victims do not see justice done, but I am not persuaded that, even if we make changes in relation to corroboration, the benchmark should be sexual offences and rape cases and that everything should be predicated on that. Stewart Maxwell and others made the argument that the issue is broader. If there are problems in relation to such offences, we should deal with them, rather than predicate the whole criminal justice system on that very narrow aspect. I accept some of what Lord Carloway and others have said about the need for corroboration being archaic, but I also want to sound a note of caution. I share some of the concerns that David McLetchie, Christine Grahame and others have raised. Leaving aside the principles, I say that there are cost and price implications. There will be a large increase in the number of cases that are reported by the police to the fiscal’s office, and fiscals will raise more cases. There will therefore be more pressure on courts and more delay in cases coming to court. We have to ask ourselves who will pay for that, how much it will cost and whether the money will be made available. Lord Carloway said that the Crown should be making decisions based on the quality of evidence. I argue that that would require a medium to long-term change and that it would require a massive change of the culture of how decisions are made, given that sufficiency and quality of evidence are currently matters for the sheriff or jury. I do not have time to go into summary-level decisions being made on the basis of police reports and statements, but the fact that there is often a huge difference between such reports and statements needs to be considered carefully. Corroboration may be archaic and other systems operate without it, but in the way our system operates, corroboration is an important safeguard. It helps to protect against malicious or vindictive complaints and it forces a more thorough investigation by the police, which I argue is a good thing. If we move away from corroboration—other members are right to say that we should ca canny, take our time and do it properly rather than legislate in haste and repent at leisure—as Stewart Maxwell and others have said, we must look closely at the whole concept of not only the balance of majority verdicts but whether we should have majority verdicts at all or how that system would operate, because we could not leave the present system in place if we were to do away with corroboration. We must reflect on the words of the Law Society of Scotland, which said that if we are to do away with some fundamental tenets of the system, there will need to be a “wider and broader based review of the law of evidence and criminal procedure” That is not to say that we should not look at the matter, but that we should take our time and do it properly.

Like other members, I have constituents who have been affected by the tests, and I thank Christina McKelvie for giving us the opportunity to put on record our feelings about what happened. Mention has been made of Ken McGinley, who is a constituent of mine and who is here today. I have also been contacted by Archie Morris of Johnstone and Agnes Rettie, whose late husband witnessed the nuclear explosions as a serviceman. When we see what happened, it is hard to articulate our feelings, but when we listen to the words of some of those who were involved in the tests, it gives a sense of the awe that they felt and, perhaps, of their naivety. At the time, one young soldier said: “It was an amazing sight, a cauldron of fire—like seeing a mini-sun being born.” As Christina McKelvie said, the men concerned were largely young conscripts, many of whom had probably never left these shores before and who probably thought that they were engaged in a great adventure, little knowing what was before them. These words describe that naivety and their sense of trust: “We had complete faith in our masters. We were trained not to ask questions. We knew what had happened in Japan. I thought it could not happen here. They would not do it to us.” That reflects not just their naivety, but the faith that they had in the powers that be that they would be protected. In 1983, as a result of the information that was beginning to come through, Ken McGinley formed the British Nuclear Test Veterans Association. When I spoke to him this afternoon, he told me that of the test veterans whom he knew in Johnstone, of whom there were probably about 20, 10 have died and four are bedridden. I am not too sure what the status of the others is. Why should the mortality rate among such a small group of people known to one man be so high? It is not because knowing Ken McGinley has somehow visited misfortune on them, but because all of them were exposed to the same dangers in the same areas at the same time. That is a remarkable and tragic statistic. When we send young conscripts to do their duty, the Government and the state have an obligation and a duty to protect them. Kenneth Gibson quoted Ken McGinley, who said: “I witnessed five bomb tests. Basically we had no protection and warnings at all. All we were told to do was to stand and look at the bomb and cover our eyes up in case we got blinded by the flash.” Such was the compassion and care for those who served for us. Others have described themselves as being human X-rays. One also said something that reflects the realism and, to some extent, the cynicism that those who were involved now feel about how they were treated: “I would be amazed that the so-called experts did not know the guinea pig status that we were being subjected to.”

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. The clock is not working.

I will finish on this point. Other Governments have realised that they have a duty to their service personnel—America, France and others. The very least that we could do is show the diminishing band of veterans that we recognise that they did something over which they had no control. They were conscripted and sent to do their duty. We owe it to them to do the right thing. They are suffering and, as Christina McKelvie said, there is a diminishing band of them. It is disappointing that they are having to battle their way through the courts. We owe them that, and I hope that they succeed.

I thank Jim Eadie for giving us the opportunity to discuss this significant and fundamental issue, and I echo the comments that he made at the end of his speech. There should be no position in modern British society that prevents anyone from participating in it. Institutional barriers to any religion should have no place in 21st century Britain. Jim Eadie criticised David Cameron, but I will give credit where credit is due: David Cameron has made at least some progress on what has been a centuries-old problem. As Jim Eadie said, it is time that we eliminated all forms of discrimination and prejudice, irrespective of who is affected or the positions to which someone may aspire. It is interesting for us in Scotland, when we are having a topical debate about sectarianism, to see that we still have this remnant from history. A symbolic and potent aspect of anti-Catholic bigotry and prejudice still remains. It is important to ensure that no institution is associated with discrimination against any citizen. Jim Eadie referred to some of the history behind the act and to the influence of the Church of England. It is absurd that the Church of England still feels it necessary to have the monarch of the country as its head. I cannot understand why it does not have the confidence to be a proper church, like other religions, and to have its own form of worship with its own religious individual as head of the church. It is an absurd historical relic that the monarch or the head of state of this country should be the head of the Church of England. There is an argument—whether or not we call it disestablishment—for removing the monarch from their position as head of the Church of England. The debate is not about whether we are for or against the monarchy, which is a moot point. It is about the specific issue of anti-Catholic discrimination, which still exists whether or not there is a monarchy. Alex Salmond has said that he still wants the Queen and her successors to be monarch in an independent Scotland. He has spoken eloquently—and correctly, as I support him on this—about removing this aspect of anti-Catholic prejudice. However, what would happen in an independent Scotland if this relic still remained and the Queen remained as head of the Church of England? Would Alex Salmond still want the Queen to be monarch of an independent Scotland? However, that is a debate for another day. I do not think that there is any convincing argument for this historical relic or for institutional discrimination to remain. Its removal is long overdue. We have made a slow, small step towards that, but we have not fundamentally changed the situation. I will finish on one other aspect of it. If, under the changes that have been made, the monarch is allowed to marry a Roman Catholic and that person wishes to bring their children up as Roman Catholics, what will happen when the oldest child—now that either a male or a female can ascend the throne—comes of age and ascends the throne? Will that child have to abandon their religion simply to become the monarch, or will the Roman Catholic person whom the monarch marries be forced not to bring their children up as Catholics? As Jim Eadie says, the law is absurd and change is long overdue.

I agree with Roderick Campbell that the matter is largely the UK Government’s responsibility. I could not disagree with much of what John Swinney said, nor could I disagree with much of what is in his amendment. However, I urge him to face up to his responsibilities, listen to the trade unions and engage with them in a constructive discussion to determine what more can be done within his remit.

No. As John Swinney said, the debate is disappointing and the Tories have reverted to type. When they talk about the public sector, they want to focus on one narrow aspect. It is a shame that Mary Scanlon, who is a decent human being, comes to the Parliament to portray the Tory party in its usual form. Jamie McGrigor said that the Conservatives are confronting the matter head on. Yes, they are. They are confronting the cleaners, nurses, teachers, local government workers and other public sector workers head on and making them pay dearly. They are making them work longer, pay more and receive less.

No. However, the Tory party is not confronting head on the bankers, financiers and hedge fund managers who funded it generously in the run-up to the previous election. It is not dealing with the bonuses, obscene pensions and obscene pay for those at the top. It has double standards. Mary Scanlon was right in one respect. She said that the pension reforms are coalition policy. It is telling that there is not a single Liberal Democrat present in the chamber to participate in a debate about a policy for which they have direct responsibility. That is an abrogation of responsibility and cowardice of the worst type. The Liberal Democrats provide a human shield for the Tories’ crude and cruel policies. The hapless Nick Clegg is, in fact, the General Haig of this political generation, leading his troops to slaughter. They are heading into oblivion and disaster while providing cover for the Conservatives. It is about time that they showed a bit of gumption and courage and took full responsibility for their actions. We have heard a lot today about what should or should not happen on 30 November. Neil Findlay eloquently set out the ethos of the trade union movement. Trade unionists whose pay has been frozen, who face heavier workloads and who face paying more for pensions that will pay less do not take the decision to go on strike lightly. They do so on account of desperation because the Conservative-Lib Dem coalition Government will not listen to them. They do it reluctantly. When so many workers across so many trade unions stand together to say that something must be done, we should not demean or demonise them but should listen sympathetically to what they have to say. The Parliament should send a much clearer message to those workers that it will support them in their justified action for fairness, decency and dignity in their retirement.

4. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that drug dealers are dealt with adequately by the justice system. (S4O-00371)

Two families in Elderslie in my constituency were burned out of their homes for 16 months because a convicted criminal caused a fire by tapping into street electricity to cultivate cannabis in his flat. He recklessly endangered lives, including the life of his own son, who was in the flat at the time. The police said that they had a great deal of evidence, but the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service dropped a number of charges and the drug dealer was fined £500. Does the cabinet secretary think that that is acceptable? Will he order an inquiry? Will he meet my constituents?

I congratulate Siobhan McMahon on bringing this debate to the Parliament. She articulated very well and eloquently the continuing problems that we have with heart disease in Scotland. It is a stain on our society that so many people die prematurely from heart disease. We accept that there are long-term issues such as those of diet, health and fitness that need to be addressed, but Siobhan McMahon clearly outlined practical measures that can be taken to mitigate the problem when someone has a heart attack. She is right to underline the contribution that defibrillators make in helping to save lives. She eloquently outlined the sterling work throughout Scotland of organisations such as the British Heart Foundation Scotland and Chest Heart & Stroke Scotland. I want to put on record some thoughts about the availability of and access to defibrillators. There has recently been publicity about defibrillators being provided in ex-phone boxes in rural areas. In the central belt, credit must be given to the co-operative movement, which has again taken the lead. Scotmid has decided to introduce defibrillators in some of its stores and to train staff to use them. Not for the first time, the co-operative movement has been at the forefront of doing something that makes a real difference to people’s lives. I hope that other retailers will copy the Scotmid model, as it definitely has value. I signed Siobhan McMahon’s motion and I believe that the sentiments that are contained therein are worthy, but I have one slight area of concern, which is about what goes on in schools. I accept that the curriculum for excellence can help to facilitate better training and more awareness and the teaching of young people to deal with emergencies. The curriculum for excellence has been designed to allow teachers flexibility in how they teach their subjects. In Scotland, ministers or education authorities have never prescribed a curriculum. Therefore, we must be cautious about wanting to add things to the curriculum. When I was a minister, I had approaches from the British Red Cross to do something similar in relation to first aid. I was also approached by organisations that were involved in financial inclusion and dealing with bullying and homophobia and which wanted something to be introduced into the curriculum. However, that is not how we do it in Scotland. The curriculum for excellence gives us a significant opportunity, but we should be careful about trying to prescribe something and to change significantly the way in which we deliver education in schools. Our current model, which allows flexibility and imagination, is the way forward. I hope that many teachers will take advantage of the fantastic resources that organisations have produced.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Presiding Officer—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I do not seek to respond to the detailed response that you have given to Patrick Harvie, for which I thank you. However, I ask you to clarify the rules of Parliament, according to the standing orders, when a member raises a point of order. Does that member have a specific amount of time in which to raise the point of order? If the member chooses to use that time to make the point of order, will they be allowed to do so?

On a further point of order, Presiding Officer. That is an interesting clarification. Will you enlighten the Parliament on whether the interpretation of that standing order will mean that, in the future, you will decide when a member is finished, and that a member will no longer be entitled to assume that they have the allocated time?

Let me start by picking up on a point that the cabinet secretary made. It is both outrageous and offensive to say that if anybody in this chamber tries to point out some of the inadequacies of the present Administration they are, as Nicola Sturgeon asserted about Jackie Baillie, trying to talk down the NHS. We are not trying to talk down the NHS or those who work for it if we express genuinely felt concerns. If we try to express the concerns articulated to us by our constituents who work in the NHS, how can we possibly be trying to talk it down? We are simply repeating what they are telling us. Surely those SNP members who represent constituencies must have some constituents expressing concerns to them—it cannot be the case that they are not receiving any complaints about what is going on in the NHS. Nurses are probably the biggest source of complaints to me about the NHS. I cannot be talking down the NHS if I say what nurses are telling me.

There may be a specific issue in Glasgow, but across Scotland, nurses, who are overworked, stretched and concerned, are the biggest source of complaints about the NHS. They are caring professionals who are concerned about impacts on their patients. They are worried and scared about what will happen not only to their jobs, but to the future of the NHS. We have heard a lot of talk about the SNP wanting honesty. Bob Doris and the cabinet secretary mentioned that. The SNP’s manifesto said: “We have increased the number of ... nurses”. Fair enough. It went on to say: “In the next Parliament”— that is, in this session— “an SNP Government will ensure that we continue the progress that has been made.” Fair enough. From September 2009 to January 2011, nearly 2,000 nurses lost their jobs. That is 2,000 fewer nurses. How is the SNP ensuring progress and maintaining the increase in the number of nurses? Something does not stack up. If we are going to have some honesty, let us forget the rhetoric from all the parties in the run-up to the election, and the SNP should tell us whether there are fewer nurses now than there were in September 2009 and how that squares with the promise that it made. The SNP owes it not to members who support the motion or to other MSPs, but to the nurses and doctors who deliver the services and, more than that, to patients to say that they will be safe and secure in a health service in which there is an adequate number of nurses. It is surely not beyond the wit and capacity of members to have a debate at some point about what is happening. Surely we can reach an agreement, leave aside election rhetoric and all the posturing, do the right thing, and ensure that we have nurses who can deliver.

Will the member give way?

No, it is not.

Christine Grahame talked about regulated football matches. Will she confirm that, under the bill, it would be an offence to sing certain songs in a pub on the day of a regulated football match, but it would not be an offence to sing those songs one week later when no football match was on?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Humza Yousaf seems to suggest that he does not want to listen to offensive chants and songs. However, he has written to a number of members of the public to say that he does not have a problem with offensive songs being sung at football matches. Is that still his view? Will the legislation still allow offensive songs to be sung at football matches?

There is no doubt that sectarianism is a pernicious evil. As someone who was at the receiving end of sectarian behaviour when I was growing up, I understand what it must be like to be at the receiving end of racist or homophobic behaviour or other behaviour that results from prejudice and discrimination. It is not pleasant and we should tackle it. To put the debate into context, the Scotland that my children have grown up in is different from the Scotland that I grew up in, so we have to keep a sense of proportion when we seek to address such problems. When I look at the bill, I am not quite sure whether we are tackling sectarianism or offensive behaviour at football matches. Bob Doris ended his contribution by saying that we should be tackling discrimination and bigotry wherever it arises, but much of the discussion has been about tackling offensive behaviour. I do not know whether it was Christine Grahame or one of the other SNP members who said that the issue is about two football clubs. No, I am sorry: sectarianism is not about two clubs—[Interruption.] Members should check the record; it will be on the record.

I am sorry; it might have been Margo MacDonald. I apologise if that is the case.

No, I am sorry. Sectarianism is not just about football and it is not just about two clubs. It is about the accountancy firm that asked me what religion I was when I went there for a job. Sectarianism is about the middle-class golf clubs and bowling clubs that will not allow people of certain religious persuasions to become members. That is the type of sectarianism that we need to root out across Scotland. It is not just about football fans. Much of what we are addressing today has been predicated on the so-called game of shame. I was at football matches in the 1970s when there was real shame, fear and violence, when hundreds of people were throwing bottles, cans and other implements at the so-called opposition and they were landing on their own team’s fans. People were being led out with their heads split open and blood streaming down their faces. Hundreds of arrests were made at football matches in those days. That was a real problem and we dealt with it. At this game of shame that we hear about, three people were sent off for bad behaviour on the field. When we look at their names, we see that two of them had no relationship to sectarian backgrounds in the west of Scotland; they would probably not know what we are talking about.

No, thank you. Two people on the touchline—a manager and an assistant manager—squared up to each other. Somehow that contributed to the game of shame but, just a few weeks earlier, when Craig Brown confronted another official, that was nothing to do with sectarianism; it was just bad behaviour. Half of the arrests made at the game of shame were for smoking in the toilet. Where is the sectarian game of shame that we talk about? It was bad behaviour by well-paid professionals.

I will quote Humza Yousaf and then I will let him in. He criticised me for being partial. I am sorry, because I should have quoted more of what Humza Yousaf said. He said: “football fans can be as unsavoury and offensive as they like to each other - as unpleasant as that may be - without fear of arrest.”

Humza Yousaf talked about whether chants and slogans will cause disorder. Will those who sing a verse of a song that talks about “rebellious Scots to crush”, which is offensive to many people, incite disorder? Will people who sing “The Boys of the Old Brigade” be arrested for singing that song? If an imaginative songwriter comes up with a song to praise the British head of state laying a wreath to commemorate the boys of the old brigade, will that be offensive and will it render people liable to arrest for singing such a song? The bill is full of inconsistencies. It is flawed. It is wrong. It will not help to solve the problem; it will add to the problem. It will not help to tackle sectarianism. The Government is going to create further problems. Ultimately, there will be issues of freedom of speech. The Government is being inconsistent and illogical and, unfortunately, it is not helping address the problem.

It is hard to conclude that the Scottish Government is, as John Finnie suggested, outward looking on the issue that we are discussing, because everything that Government ministers have said has been not only inward looking, but intemperate and narrow-minded. In fact, many of their comments have been misplaced. James Kelly referred to comments that the First Minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice have made. They have said a range of things that I hoped they would have reflected on and come to the Parliament to apologise for. Earlier, Murdo Fraser raised a point of order about the First Minister misinterpreting or misstating someone else’s comments and misleading the Parliament. On this issue, the ministers also have form. On 27 May, Lord Hope said that the First Minister “misunderstood the law and the facts”. That has been evident in what ministers have said throughout the process. I was interested in Kenny MacAskill’s somewhat pompous reply to Johann Lamont. His protestations were both hilarious and pathetic. He spent some time saying how delighted he was to welcome the report from Lord McCluskey, although I thought that perhaps he would take time to apologise to Lord McCluskey for some of the things that he has said. Lord McCluskey has been quoted in The Telegraph as saying that Mr MacAskill ought to be “ashamed of his comments” and that his comments were “unsuitable” for a man holding his office. We have heard nothing since to suggest that Mr MacAskill is in any way ashamed of or apologetic for anything that he has said, even though he has now accepted a report that fundamentally goes against everything that he and the First Minister had argued. Mr MacAskill’s attempt to get Lord McCluskey to come up with something that suited him was the latest in a series of such attempts. There was also the Walker report, which was shelved because it did not come up with the recommendations that suited the Government. Sometimes in the Parliament, we use words loosely and out of context. I wanted to use the word “hubris” because the cabinet secretary, the First Minister and others in the Administration have shown a degree of it, but I thought that I had better check exactly what the word means. I found that it means extreme haughtiness—well, we have heard that today from the cabinet secretary. It means pride or arrogance, which we have certainly seen throughout the debate. The definition goes on to suggest that hubris often indicates a loss of contact with reality. We can clearly see a loss of contact with reality in the cabinet secretary’s behaviour on the issue, all the way up to now, including accepting a report that contradicts what he wanted. The definition also describes hubris as an overestimation of one’s competence or capabilities—that is certainly true—especially when the person exhibiting the behaviour is in a position of power. That definition was written specifically with Kenny MacAskill in mind. When are we likely to hear from the Government an admission that it was wrong and that—

Certainly.

Other members in my group have outlined their specific points on that, but we must take notice of the general context. Earlier this year intemperate and disgraceful remarks were made about ambulance chasing and Mr MacAskill said that he no longer intended to fund the Supreme Court to look at cases that we did not think should be going there. In fact, he is now proposing to do that, because the McCluskey review did not come up with what he intended. When I reflect on the matter I thank God that, although we have a majority Government that is predicated on a minority vote and no revising chamber, we have another body that is capable of putting in checks and balances. Had it been left to the Government, changes would have been railroaded through if they had had the power to do it. Now we have a conclusion that is completely at odds with what the Government wants. I welcome the fact that the recommendation is for the Supreme Court to have a role. I do not agree with certification, and other members have ably outlined why that is not the right thing to do. I hope that, on reflection and at the end of the debate, we might hear some words of apology for the way in which the issue was handled and the debate was conducted.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer—

Yes, Presiding Officer. Thank you for allowing me in. I welcome the comments from the First Minister, but that is not what I wish to consider. I recognise the right of members to raise points of order during debates, and I understand that you, Presiding Officer, are constrained in that you have to accept them and listen to them. This is not a criticism of the First Minister, because circumstances just developed, but I would argue—I hope that you will reflect on this—that it would have been better to take the First Minister’s reply after the conclusion of what is a significant and important debate. What we have done is interrupt the flow of the debate. That is maybe something that we could look at for future reference.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Will the minister confirm his party’s manifesto pledge to deliver 6,000 homes for social rent per year? Will that target be met?

Does Mike MacKenzie acknowledge that, so far in the debate, ministers have been asked not for more money but for an explanation of why a specific commitment in the SNP’s manifesto is not being delivered and will he explain why it is not being delivered?

That was a rather strange contribution from Mike MacKenzie. If we were to accept his approach, no one in here should have the right to talk about education unless they have taught a child in a school and no one in here should have the right to talk about social care unless they have worked as a carer. The member may parade a huge list of documents that he has read, but what he actually demonstrated was a complete lack of understanding of the relevance of many of the points that have been made in the debate today. Mike MacKenzie and ministers have asked what the Opposition would suggest for the use of budgets. Members of the Government party may want to reflect on exactly the same question. Let us think about the period from when the SNP came to power to now. What budgets will it cut to deliver the promise to cut class sizes in early years? What budgets will it cut to write off student debt? What budgets will it cut to give a grant to first-time home owners? We have heard nothing so far about how the SNP intends to deliver those promises. The SNP has done exactly what it is accusing others of doing: offering to spend money without the wherewithal to deliver in the hope that it will prove attractive to the voters. What we are discussing is but the latest example of a series of disingenuous and frankly dishonest promises that have been made. The language and terminology have changed from a specific promise in the manifesto—asking people to vote on the basis of social rented housing being delivered—to something completely different, which is affordable housing. That is disingenuous and dishonest because those are two different things. There is no way that the SNP will meet its target for social rented housing. [Interruption.] I hear someone say “rubbish” from a sedentary position, but we will wait and see. Lewis Macdonald was very specific in the questions that he asked. We will wait and see whether the SNP delivers on its promise of social rented housing over the lifetime of the Parliament. Frankly, it will not meet its target even in the first and second years. We are beginning to see double counting, and the Government is changing its announcements from units approved to units completed to cover up the fact that the number of units approved this year is nowhere near the 6,000 target. That will also allow the Government to claim credit for a second time for schemes that were approved in previous years. There is dishonest counting, never mind failure to meet targets. The practical reality is that housing associations up and down the country—particularly locally based housing associations—are struggling. The £40,000 grant will not provide what they need to deliver housing, and they are having to borrow up to £70,000.

How many times do we need to come back to dishonesty and disingenuousness in relation to a specific manifesto promise that the SNP, not the Conservatives or Labour, made? The SNP won the election and now it has to deliver on the promises that it made. It is absolutely farcical of the minister to ask others what they would do. If he and his colleagues are so bereft of ideas that they cannot deliver their manifesto, they should move over and let others govern. They should not ask us, in opposition, without the full facts available to us, to do their job for them. They are the ones who made the promises and they are the ones who must be held accountable. Good, honest practitioners up and down Scotland—many of whom were taken in through their enthusiasm for the SNP in 2007—now face the harsh reality that their enthusiasm and trust were misplaced.

No, thank you. They are telling me clearly that they cannot deliver the figures that the SNP proposes. In Glasgow, the number of units approved has gone down by 42 per cent over the past year—a 60 per cent cut in approvals of social rented housing. Local community-controlled housing associations are suffering and there is huge scepticism about whether the 21,000 homes for social rental will be completed with the £40,000 subsidy. Even COSLA says that council house building is unlikely to be sustainable at the current levels. The fact that the Government is now changing its announcements from units approved to units completed is yet another sleight of hand to cover an abject failure, a dishonesty and the fact that the SNP says one thing when seeking votes but another thing when it is in office. The worst thing about this is the human cost. The Government is pushing more people, including homeless people, into the private rented sector at a time of housing benefit cuts and it is placing increased demands on housing associations. Housing association professionals tell me that they are awash with consultation documents, medical adaptations, a Scottish social housing charter with 71 commitments so far, the Scottish Housing Regulator’s new role, the review of housing benefit and service charges for support, the threatened loss of the supporting people fund and the national strategy for older people. They are having to cope with all that as well as having insufficient funds with which to deliver the houses that the SNP promised would be delivered. We are facing a crisis in social rented housing and among the poorer sections of our community, and we are seeing a glib response from the SNP. There must be thinking and well-meaning people in the SNP who are prepared to put aside their fundamental desire for unity in order to drive forward an independence referendum and they must surely be starting to say, “What are we doing? This is not working. This is wrong. It is frankly dishonest.” Now is the time for them to answer the questions from Lewis Macdonald and others and say specifically where and when they will deliver the manifesto promise that they made.

Will the member take an intervention?

That is beneath you.

I share the sentiments that Liz Smith expressed and I concur with her view that Scotland’s colleges have an outstanding record. It is, therefore, not to put too fine a point on it, a disaster that they are being asked to bear the brunt of spending cuts. I regret that she allowed the focus of the debate to shift away from Scotland’s colleges and on to issues that can be addressed at other times. The debate should focus on the contribution that Scotland’s colleges can make to education in Scotland. Their contribution is more flexible and more effective in many regards than that of any other institutions in this country. In my area in Renfrewshire, I see Reid Kerr College’s contribution to communities such as Barrhead, Neilston, Johnstone and Linwood and to many young people who would otherwise be alienated and disengaged from the education process. The colleges are a lifeline for such young people and they provide imagination and innovation. I accept what Mike Russell said about college principals being up for reform; nevertheless it was incumbent upon him to articulate the concerns that Liam McArthur and others indicated that the colleges have. As Jenny Marra said, colleges committed last year to avoid compulsory redundancies and maintain the same level of activity. However, they are clearly saying that that cannot be repeated this year if they must absorb further cuts to their core funding. We know the social improvements that good colleges can make. It is not just about education. For example, in the east end of Glasgow we have seen an 84 per cent reduction in criminality and youth disorder over the past three years, which is a result of joint efforts by the local authority, the police and colleges, such as John Wheatley College, which manage to give many young people a positive aspect to their life.

No, thank you. Are we prepared to pay for the other costs that will come when young people are denied opportunities at colleges? Liam McArthur is right to say that it is a shame that this subject has been shoe-horned into a short Opposition debate, because there are issues that are worthy of further exploration. I agree with some of what the cabinet secretary said about having to think outside the box. We must ask ourselves why it is that in places such as Glasgow, Edinburgh, Dundee and, I think, Aberdeen, we probably have more universities than colleges. Why do we not start to look at a model that goes back to the old polytechnics? In Glasgow, Forth Valley, Dundee, Fife and Aberdeen, such polytechnics could build on the good work that the colleges are doing in relation to HNCs and HNDs and provide a more effective, efficient and cost-effective way of delivering degrees. Why is it that some of the elitist institutions that Ken Macintosh mentioned are refusing to accept the HNDs and HNCs as progression towards degrees? I say to the cabinet secretary that he should use his influence to challenge that elitism and that attitude, which is fundamentally wasting money in this country.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Finally, we should challenge whether we need four-year degrees. We should look at the contribution that sandwich courses make. Above all, we should not underestimate the contribution that Scotland’s colleges can make to the wellbeing of this country.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

3. To ask the Scottish Executive how it determines the allocation of its advertising budget. (S4O-00206)

I know that Scottish Government ministers are generally supportive of community radio stations, such as Celtic Music Radio. Can the minister tell me why such stations receive no advertising from the Scottish Government? Will he consider placing advertisements with Celtic Music Radio and other community radio stations? Will he agree to meet me and representatives of Celtic Music Radio to discuss the matter?

Will the minister provide details of where modern apprenticeships have been created in each of the past two financial years?

I commend Jamie Hepburn for giving the Parliament the opportunity to debate a significant report. We all tend to accept as a given the importance of a positive early-years life experience. However, what happens in practice belies the commitment to supporting early intervention and early years services. We know, and it is well stated, that families that have work opportunities and work experience help to create more stable and more positive children, who are better able to take advantage of the education system. We know that family stability is fundamental to a good start in life and we know that the quality of services is critical, as Bob Doris mentioned. Malcolm Chisholm, Jamie Hepburn and Bob Doris mentioned the working families tax credit. It is quite bizarre that a Conservative-led Government that places great emphasis on work and families is making it exceedingly difficult for many families to work in the way that they now need to work. Families either need two incomes to survive or, when a parent is bringing up a child on his or her own, they need childcare so that they can work as well as raise their children. If the coalition values working families, it should rethink what it is doing with the working families tax credit. Malcolm Chisholm referred to the 1990s and a debate that he attended in the House of Commons. I do not want to get into party politics, but in 1997 the Labour Government, followed up by the Labour-led Executive in Scotland, fundamentally changed the quality and nature of the debate around early intervention and early years services. The sure start fund, the working families tax credit, getting it right for every child, the workforce development fund and the changing children’s services fund all helped to create a more structured and well-supported environment. When we debate the budget, we need to watch that we do not shift the priorities away from those critical services that people might think are of greater value. We ignore and abandon such initiatives at our peril. I have one more thing to put on the record; I will end on it. We often look beyond Scotland for examples of good practice in how we should support children and families. Perhaps we need to pause and reflect on the good practice that happens here in Scotland. Why not look at that good work and build on it? Liz Mercer and her team in the Cathkin community nursery in Rutherglen achieved the highest possible gradings in a recent inspection. Lynn McCafferty and her team at Brucehill nursery in Jackie Baillie’s constituency are leading the field in children’s emergent literacy. In my constituency are Doris Robertson and her team in the West Johnstone family centre, where the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care and Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Education reports noted the very good quality of care and learning that are being made available to children. We do have good practice in Scotland—we have fine examples, but they need to be well supported and financed so that families, parents and the children get the best possible start. My final plea to the minister is that by all means we should learn about good practice elsewhere, but let us concentrate on establishing a Scottish model and sing the praises of what is happening here in Scotland.

I thank Bill Kidd for giving us the opportunity to debate the UN international day of peace. Like Jamie Hepburn, I apologise. I have an appointment at 5.30, so I need to leave early. In one respect, this debate is completely pointless—talking about the matter is a complete waste of our time. What can we do about peace in this country, never mind world peace? Bill Kidd highlighted some of the big issues that affect the world. However, if we as individuals or ordinary citizens do not talk about peace and the issue of peace does not affect our mentality and how we view our role in life, what chance is there that anyone at any level will do something about it? The notion of the type of world and society that we want to see surely must start with the individual. Surely it is about individual buy-in to what is right and what is wrong, and to the fact that the notion of a peaceful society and a peaceful world is entirely achievable; in fact, it is not achieved purely because of the actions of individual humans, wherever they may be on the planet. There are a number of absurdities. I will not go into all the debates around unilateral nuclear disarmament, but I will say that we live in a country that we are told is heading for a double-dip recession and in which people are being asked to make financial sacrifices, yet we are also told that we can afford to replace the nuclear weapons that are supposedly needed to defend us. Even if we were to accept the principle of nuclear weapons, how—when we are nearly bankrupt—can we justify spending money on a new generation of weapons when we already have something that can destroy the world 10 times over? The notion of the sort of world that we want to live in must start with us and the messages that we give to our children and grandchildren. It must affect and influence the way in which we communicate with and respond to our neighbours and others in our community. Jamie Hepburn was right to raise the issue of extreme poverty. It is true that such poverty exists throughout the world, but we must also speak up about issues that affect us in this country—the human rights abuses in the United Kingdom, never mind the human rights abuses that take place elsewhere. I cannot understand how we can justify selling arms to some of the worst dictators in the world because doing so creates jobs. If we can use job creation as a justification for doing anything, we would be as well setting up cyanide factories all over the central belt of Scotland so that we can export cyanide to enable people to kill as many other people as they can at one fell swoop. The fact that something creates jobs is not, in and of itself, a justification for allowing it. Surely our starting point should be to ask what the purpose of something is. We should take a stand against some of the abuses that we see elsewhere across the world, but I sometimes wonder whether we have any right to lecture anyone about what happens in their country. Maybe it is time to put our own house in order at a Government, council and community level, as well as a personal level. In a sense, although this debate might be pointless, it is unavoidable. We need to have it. If we cannot individually sign up to the notion of living in a better and more peaceful world, what chance does anyone have?

It is a testament to the impact of the Upper Clyde Shipbuilders work-in that so many members have chosen to stay for the debate. The debate gives the Scottish Parliament an opportunity to put on record our appreciation of the significance of the work-in, which started 40 years ago. UCS was created in 1968 by a Labour Government through the amalgamation of Fairfield’s, Stephen’s, Connell’s, Yarrow’s and John Brown’s. The wider circumstances then were similar to those that prevail now: a newly elected Tory Government decided that its economic problems could be resolved only by asking working people to tighten their belts and accept unemployment as a price worth paying. Unemployment was allowed to rise above 1 million for the first time since 1945, although that is a figure that we can only dream about today. The Conservative Government decided that it would not save UCS from bankruptcy, despite its healthy order book and positive prospects for the future. The provost of Clydebank at the time, Bob Fleming, protested that the Government was trying to do to Clydebank what the Germans had failed to do in the second world war. Feelings were running high, not just in the yards, but across the Labour movement in Scotland. The Conservative Government had badly miscalculated. The Clydeside shipyard workers were aware of their history and heritage. They knew what shipbuilding meant to the Clyde and, equally, they knew the social and economic consequences of the closure of the Clydeside yards. They were determined to fight to protect their jobs and living standards, but they knew that they were also fighting for the jobs of future generations. The young apprentices from the Clydeside yards who are in the public gallery today owe their jobs to the courage and determination of that generation, which saved Clydeside shipbuilding. The workers in UCS were lucky to have a large number of intelligent and astute shop stewards. They were led by men such as Jimmy Reid, Jimmy Airlie and Sammy Barr, but they were not alone. The decision to adopt a work-in rather than a traditional strike caught the imagination of the Labour and trade union movement and the wider public. The clash of views was stark. John Davies, the Government minister who was responsible for shipbuilding, said: “I don’t see a future for Upper Clyde Shipbuilders”. He reflected the traditional view of the powerful and rich that, in an economic crisis, those who work for a living have to shoulder the responsibility. Many things have changed since 1971, but that attitude prevails today. In contrast, Jimmy Airlie articulated a view that still has resonance when he said: “The right to work is our birthright”. He also memorably said: “We don’t only build ships, we build men.” Jimmy Reid, with remarkable perception, in talking about the Government of the day said: “we’re dealing with a bunch of political cavemen.” Some things do not change. So the battle for the right to work started. Most people remember Jimmy Reid’s pithy warning to the workers: “There will be no hooliganism. There will be no vandalism. There will be no bevvying”. More significantly, he set out the values of the workers, when he said: “We are not strikers. We are responsible people and we will conduct ourselves with dignity and discipline.” The work-in quickly gained trade union and community support. Church and business leaders spoke out for the workers. John Lennon and Yoko Ono weighed in with financial backing. On 18 August 1971, more than 80,000 people marched and more than 200,000 workers stopped work to support UCS. Poor Ted Heath had to miss his yacht race at Cowes to deal with the unwanted nuisance on Clydeside. Let us not forget the wider politics. In February 1972, a Scottish assembly on unemployment was held to support the UCS. That assembly called for the devolution of powers to defend jobs and employment, and it could be argued that it started a process that led to the creation of the Scottish Parliament. We should acknowledge the contribution of the trade unionists who were involved. The Conservative Government faced well-organised and disciplined resistance, realised the huge public support for the shipbuilders, and finally gave in. All the yards were saved and jobs were protected. We should acknowledge several things about that magnificent action. It saved shipbuilding on the Clyde, gave our young apprentices the opportunity to have a decent start in life, and set standards and values that are as relevant now as they were 40 years ago. The workers demanded the right to work. Millions in this country—particularly our young people—are currently being denied that right. The workers showed how organisation, determination, vision and political acumen can lead to success, and that they were not scared of the wealthy and powerful; rather, they proved that they were their equals. We should therefore acknowledge their victory and express our gratitude for the legacy that they left us. However, it is not enough simply to pay an academic or emotional tribute. The UCS struggle has resonance today. Workers are losing their jobs and facing cuts in living standards and savage cuts to their pension entitlements. The workers then showed that political leadership is vital, that courage is a necessity, and that principles and solidarity are fundamental. What happened is an object lesson for today’s trade union leaders, shop stewards and politicians. We owe it to those workers to show the same resolve to provide a future for working people, particularly our young. We need to preserve the dignity that employment brings. Our current generation of trade unionists and politicians needs to decide whose side they are on. Will they stand with those who are being asked to make the sacrifice or with the powerful and wealthy, who are demanding sacrifice? A new Tory Government is laying down new challenges, and the best tribute that we can pay the workers who participated in the magnificent work-in is to show the same imagination, determination and vision, and say that working people deserve to be treated with respect.

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments that she is trying to be consensual and to take all parties with her on the issue. She said that that is indicated by the fact that the motion is different from the one that was originally intended. It is just a pity that the bulk of her speech seemed to be predicated on the original motion and that she sought to advance the arguments and sentiments that were outlined in it. I would have welcomed a slightly different approach from her that involved taking other parties in the Parliament with her. We must be honest and recognise that, on many issues and not just European ones, some people at Westminster, under the previous Labour Government and probably the present Government, have not woken up to the reality of devolution. Frankly, their attitude towards the Parliament and its representatives needs to change for the better. Those people need to acknowledge our legitimate role in representing people in Scotland and the interests that are the Parliament’s responsibility. The debate has been influenced by that failure to recognise our proper role in advancing policy issues, but if we are to make progress, the Scottish Government has a responsibility to enter into the debate more positively and constructively. If the Government seeks to advance the debate by trying to argue about independence by whatever means, it will not get consensus and it will not bring people on board. If the Government wants agreement, it must recognise that we are talking about how to advance our case within the specific terms that we are part of the United Kingdom. The Government must accept that we are considering how best to argue for Scotland’s interests within the United Kingdom in the European sphere—specifically, the sphere of the European Commission and, to a lesser extent, the European Parliament.

And yet, the tone and sentiment of the cabinet secretary’s speech seemed to be somewhat different. Perhaps she will reflect on how she can take people with her to advance the debate. The Government must advance its case if it is to persuade us that there is a problem and that, in the context of the United Kingdom, something needs to change at Westminster in its attitude to the Scottish Parliament and Government. So far, to an extent, we have heard sentiment and emotion and one or two examples thrown in here and there, but no specific case has been made and no evidence advanced. We do not have a paper that indicates the full extent of the problem and which argues, line by line and case by case, that, in those examples, a change should have been made. If the Government is to persuade us, it needs to have the confidence of its argument and show us the evidence and statistics that back it up. If it does so, it will get a positive approach. As Patricia Ferguson and James Kelly on the Labour side have said, we accept that there are times when the Scottish Government should, as Scotland’s representatives, be more engaged and have a greater role to play. I know that some tend to concentrate on fisheries issues but as Maureen Watt and others have pointed out there are certain significant aspects of the justice debate that only Scottish representatives can fully understand and articulate and which cannot be addressed by representatives from another place who have little understanding of or empathy with our legal system. If the Government wants to win its case and the argument and if it is trying to say that this is all about being positive and responsible, it should bring us the evidence and make the case. Whether that happens through the Scotland Bill Committee, other committees of this Parliament or indeed the full chamber, we should all soberly and responsibly reflect on these issues. We will stand beside the Government if it can demonstrate that there is something to be gained and an argument to be proven.

Will the member take an intervention?

I welcome much of what I have heard this afternoon and think that it should be supported. I do not think that anyone could argue against there being better and more opportunities for young people. If we waste this young generation, there will be a heavy price for society to pay. I welcome the reform of police and fire services. I have long been an advocate of a single fire service for Scotland and I have argued in favour of fewer police forces. I am not intrinsically opposed to a single police force. I have argued that the idea has merits. The one caveat that I would make is that we need to be careful that we do not create one powerful police figure in Scotland who would be a counterweight to the Cabinet Secretary for Justice. There is an argument that having three forces might provide a better balance, but I would not rule out having one police service, and I think that the idea is worth considering. Whatever happens, we should be arguing for a community safety committee in every local authority in Scotland. In those committees, the police, the fire service, the ambulance service and the health service would report to councillors, which could enhance local accountability. There is much that I agree with when I hear ministers talk about the need to tackle the scourge of alcohol in Scotland. I despair when I think of the way in which we have divided the issue and focused the arguments on the issue of minimum pricing. Murdo Fraser has articulated many of the concerns that I still have about minimum pricing, so I will not go over them again. However, we should not let that issue divert our attention from the need to do something about a problem that is affecting far too many families and communities in Scotland. I support the Government’s intention to tackle the scourge of sectarianism in Scotland, which is something that has long afflicted many individuals in many communities. To our shame, we ducked the issue and hid away from tackling it. However, we should admit that sectarianism is not just about football. There is sectarianism in professional classes and in certain jobs, certain industries and certain professions. We have to face up to that and confront it. I welcome Christine Grahame’s comments about the dangers that are associated with a crude and simplistic drive towards imposing lengthy jail sentences for something that we might not fully understand or be able fully to articulate. It would be wrong to attempt to send someone to jail for five years and yet not tell them what the crime is that they are guilty of or have been accused of. We will not tell them which slogans or songs are enough to drive them into jail, yet we are prepared to prosecute and jail them for that. We need to be concerned about that. We should be much more determined to use the existing substantial powers to penalise those who are behaving wrongly.

Football clubs absolutely have a contribution to make, but I repeat my point: sectarianism is not just about football, and the solution should not be left to football clubs. I welcome the Government’s intentions on public sector reform, but I am puzzled that the issue has been considered for so long and yet there is no detail on how reform will be implemented. It is not good enough for the Government to say that it is still considering the Christie commission’s work: we should know by now what it intends to do. I welcome the talk of housing as a priority, but I and other members of the Public Audit Committee heard this morning from Audit Scotland that one of the biggest cuts in the next few years will be in the housing budget. The Government cannot say that a few extra council houses here and there will be enough to overcome those cuts, which will damage many communities throughout Scotland. We need consistency on that. What is more important is what I would have liked to have seen. Why was there no talk about protection for workers? We heard before that the powers are already in place and that we do not need additional laws, yet on sectarianism, existing powers are not being used but we somehow need additional laws. There is an inconsistency and a contradiction there, and I would still argue for more protection for workers who face violence in the course of their work. Why is there no regulation of bus services to protect the communities that we represent up and down the country? Why is there no legislation to stop councils taking qualified teachers out of the classroom and replacing them with unqualified staff? Why is there no protection for care services—not just action on self-directed support, but action to protect the carers and the care services that have been badly damaged throughout Scotland?

I share Mary Scanlon’s observation about Jackie Baillie’s speech, which was measured, thoughtful and constructive. I hope that the cabinet secretary, who is not here at the moment, will take time to reflect on her comment about the tone of Jackie Baillie’s speech. If we cannot make robust, sturdy comments about something as fundamental as the care of the elderly in our country, we are failing ourselves and the people whom we represent. It is undoubtedly the case that, in recent years, we have seen a significant improvement in the quality of care that is provided. I can reflect back on the early 1980s, when my late aunt—God rest her—was a resident in what was euphemistically termed a care home in Shettleston. Two or three elderly women were living in the same room, with no en suite facilities, up the stairs, with no disabled access. Frankly, the place was totally inadequate. It was also a bit of a death trap, if we consider what modern fire regulations require. There is no doubt but that we have seen improvements. There is a dilemma with regard to how we get the investment that is needed to modernise this country’s care home infrastructure. Alex Johnstone and Bill Walker reflected on that to some extent in their comments. Equally, we should take a bit of time to reflect on and, perhaps, worry about what the current system means. Bill Walker took a sideswipe at what happened in the financial crisis. Actually, the collapse of financial markets both in this country and across the world happened as a result of corporate greed and reckless decision making, not by the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom but by bankers in America, here and elsewhere. When we look at the pattern of development of care homes, we see private equity companies buying in, selling on, taking over other concerns and playing with profits, money and people’s lives. John Finnie was right to reflect and comment on some of the dangers that are associated with that type of behaviour. It is farcical for us to be told that private business is the driver of wealth creation and wellbeing in this country but for the taxpayer to have to bail it out when it collapses, as we have seen with the banks. We are in danger of seeing a similar pattern develop with care homes. Speculation may drive them in a direction that requires taxpayers to step in to bail them out. That is why the issue of regulation, planning and standards is fundamental to everything that we require. In her excellent speech, Mary Scanlon spoke about some of the issues that arise in both hospitals and care homes, including issues relating to the feeding of elderly residents. It quite upset me to listen to some of her speech, because it took me back to the time when both my mother and my father were in hospital and some of the things that I saw then. To some extent, it makes me ashamed that I may not have shouted loudly enough at that time, although my family and I did complain. Things that I saw and which my family experienced are still happening. My mother and father were not fed properly and had to rely on family members going up to feed them. Such things are still happening. People who are slumped in their beds are told that it is not the job of the staff to move them up into a more comfortable position. We cannot allow people who have done so much for us personally, and who have done so much for us as a society, to suffer the indignity of the treatment that many of them still face. This is a cross-party crusade—or initiative, or however we want to describe it—and we need to put aside our differences, because if we fail those people who have done so much for us, it will be to our lasting shame. There is a need to consider what reductions in services and higher charges mean. I am not alone in having received some very upsetting examples of what is happening to many people in their homes. We need to reflect on the integration and sharing of services. I recall from when I became Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care in 2001—Malcolm Chisholm might reflect on this, too—that those were among the issues that we were talking about 10 years ago, when we were considering the development of care in the community. We discussed the integration of budgets and the sharing of services then, and it is still not happening. In the health service, and indeed in public services generally, we have a bureaucracy the like of which would scare us, yet we are still failing individual people in their time of need. That is not acceptable; it cannot go on. We need to work together to rectify that.

I commend Elaine Murray for giving the Parliament the opportunity to debate the issue. Like Kevin Stewart, I had childhood experiences of going to circuses, which might go back a few years before his experiences. I remember the excitement of going to a circus and seeing wild animals. In those days, television was in its infancy, the internet did not exist and people had little opportunity for domestic travel and certainly for foreign travel. Given that, a circus was a huge and exciting opportunity for young children to see something exotic and different. However, we have moved on in life. The issues that Elaine Murray raised should make us ask fundamental questions. What is the purpose of travelling circuses and of keeping animals to perform in circuses? Is it to educate the wider public? To be frank, the wider public no longer need such a facility to educate them about what animals do, how they operate and what their environment is. Is the purpose to protect species and to develop species that are in danger of extinction? Clearly, it is not, because much better ways to look after animals’ interests exist. Is the purpose purely to entertain the public and nothing else? If so, where do we draw the line? Do we return to having performing bears in the high street, which the public pay to enrage by poking them with sticks? Do we think simply that the animals enjoy entertaining the public? What is happening is perverse. Elaine Murray outlined some of the appalling conditions in which the animals are kept. From reports about the behavioural characteristics that the animals manifest, we can only conclude that they live under huge stress. They live in extreme confinement and are subjected to frequent transport, relocation and—not least—the efforts to train them to perform. From the pacing of the animals and some of the behaviour that they manifest, we can say that they genuinely and definitely live in distress. If society has moved on from where it was and if we no longer need circuses—if we ever needed them—to educate or entertain, why are we still allowing this to happen? If we accept that the animals are living in unacceptable conditions, are in distress and are suffering, what are we doing to remedy the situation? What I cannot understand is why, if the will to do something about all this existed four or five years ago, nothing was done. I accept that it is not a priority compared with some of the other things that are going on in the world, but it is a small thing that can be easily remedied without impacting on other legislation. Moreover, it is the right thing to do. As a result, I appeal to the minister to use his influence and try to expedite legislation that was obviously being considered and that it was intended would be introduced. After all, there is no longer any justification for any of us, either individually or collectively, to be associated with something so abhorrent.

I am delighted to open the first ever debate sponsored by the Public Audit Committee of the Scottish Parliament. Since 1999, and particularly over the past four years, the committee and its predecessors have played a vital role in holding to account those who are charged with spending taxpayers’ money. Indeed, the role that the committee plays has been recognised by others outside the Parliament. We have been supported in that work by a tremendous clerking team present and past. On behalf of committee members, I thank the clerks for doing so much to enable us to do our job. I also pay particular tribute to Audit Scotland and the Auditor General for Scotland for the outstanding reports that they prepare. The quality of those reports has enabled the committee to carry out its work much more effectively and robustly. Over the past four years, a number of issues have arisen time and again. I will focus on those in my speech but, before I do so, I will highlight two areas of frustration for the committee, which I hope the Parliament will reflect on. The committee is unable to consider any matter unless it is the subject of a report that the Auditor General or, occasionally and exceptionally, the Parliamentary Bureau lays before the Parliament. Many people believe that we have the power to initiate debates or inquiries, but we do not. To be frank, neither the committee nor Audit Scotland could cope with an unending stream of demands via the committee, but some thought needs to be given to matters of significant public concern that may be worthy of investigation. The second frustration pertains to local authority-related expenditure. The committee is unable to investigate reports from Audit Scotland or the Accounts Commission that relate to local government issues and cannot investigate situations in which auditors have qualified the accounts of a local authority for a number of years. That is an issue of significant concern involving substantial amounts of money. Given the significance of local government expenditure, which ministers authorise, should a committee of the Parliament not be allowed to investigate publicly stated concerns about the use of public money when auditors have articulated worries? Similarly, the committee was unable to investigate the recent controversy over Strathclyde partnership for transport’s use of funds, because SPT is sponsored by local authorities. Despite significant reporting and worries, we were unable to consider the matter. The first of the key themes that I want to address is governance or, more to the point, poor governance that has resulted in poor decision taking. The committee conducted an inquiry into the 2006-07 audit of the Western Isles NHS Board. Our report highlighted a number of issues in relation to governance. At the time of the 2006-07 audit, the board had reported deficits for the previous four years. The committee learned that the board did not have a fully costed clinical strategy, which had a detrimental impact on the board’s finances. We were shocked to discover that the health board, which was short of cash, was paying for three chief executives at one time. The committee was concerned that there was some evidence in the health service—and possibly the wider civil service—of a culture where poor performance is not addressed. It would appear that, rather than address the problem, the health service can move staff who underperform to other posts at a similarly senior level. The avoidance of hard decisions should not be tolerated. The committee has therefore called for a strengthening of the procedures for tackling poor staff performance. Failure should not be rewarded. Another example of poor financial forecasting was the introduction of the national concessionary travel scheme, where the cost of electronic ticketing machines rose from £9 million to £42 million. In that case, there was a complete absence of detail as to how the initial £9 million was calculated, which the committee finds worrying and unacceptable. The need for early intervention by the Scottish Government, particularly where nationally significant projects or policies appear to be going wrong, was also echoed in the committee’s report “Major Capital Projects”. The committee learned that the Government’s chief civil servant was not routinely made aware of developing problems across Government departments. The committee regards that as inadequate and has called on the Scottish Government to consider adopting formal reporting and audit trails based on systematic time and cost reporting. It is astonishing that the Government’s chief civil servant should be unaware of developing financial problems across Government departments. The committee is not able to issue a formal report on the Edinburgh trams project. We hope that our successor committee will have the opportunity to consider Audit Scotland’s recommendation about Transport Scotland playing a more significant role in the project. Generally, the committee welcomes the infrastructure projects database, which should help with monitoring the progress of projects with a capital value of more than £5 million. However, the committee has concerns about how difficulties that public bodies or policies run into are communicated to and between senior Scottish Government staff. The committee believes that governance and accountability relationships between the Scottish Government and public sector partners need to be strengthened to engender a more collaborative approach. With less money available, the Scottish Government and the wider public sector need to work together. That issue was highlighted in the Auditor General’s report “Maintaining Scotland’s roads”. I turn to the issue of transparency or, often more accurately, the lack of transparency. During the past four years, the committee has not always been able to assure itself that taxpayers’ money has been used wisely and appropriately. Similarly, there have been occasions when the committee has been unable to determine why and how decisions were made. I have already outlined the inability of civil servants to explain how the original estimate of £9 million for the introduction of ticketing machines was calculated. In our report “The First ScotRail passenger rail franchise”, we said that we were not able to determine what payments had been made to a departing member of staff because of a compromise agreement that had been signed. The committee believed that it was important to be able to investigate the circumstances of that person leaving and how it related to the extension of the franchise, but we could not get to the bottom of that matter. The committee has welcomed the steps taken at United Kingdom level to publish the names and job titles of senior civil servants with a salary of more than £150,000 a year, but we believe that more should be done, especially in relation to payments to departing staff. There needs to be greater transparency and openness. The issue of transparency featured in the committee’s recently published report “The Gathering 2009”, which highlighted a failure by the Government to alert partners to a significant loan. There was also a failure by the Government’s chief civil servant to keep a record of discussions with a senior staff member from the City of Edinburgh Council, and the committee heard differing accounts of that meeting. Those issues were part of a wider report that highlighted major concerns about the way in which senior representatives of the City of Edinburgh Council operated. That is something that both Government officials and the City of Edinburgh Council should address. I turn to data collection and the measuring of quality. The collection of robust and verifiable data is vital to enable the Scottish Government and public bodies to identify where productivity and efficiency savings can be made. The committee is concerned that it has not always been able to determine whether services have been delivered as efficiently and effectively as possible because the data that are collected nationally have not been sufficiently robust. One such example is highlighted in the committee’s report “Overview of mental health services”. A target for reducing the rate of increase in antidepressant prescribing had been set by the Scottish Government, but the committee learned that information on the number of people on antidepressants was not being collected. As a result, the factors that led to the quadrupling of antidepressant prescribing could not be clearly identified, which meant that it was more difficult to identify how to tackle the issue effectively. The committee welcomes the Scottish Government’s change in focus from tackling prescribing to targeting access to psychological therapies, but we question why a target was set without corresponding work being undertaken to identify how best to measure progress against it. The committee also welcomes the statistics on outcomes and outputs that have been provided on the Scotland performs website. However, until that information can be linked to expenditure, it will be more difficult for service providers to make informed decisions on how best to provide services cost effectively while maintaining service quality. The next session of the Parliament will bring with it a whole series of financial challenges both for the Parliament and for the Government, irrespective of who is in government and who is elected to the Parliament. The Public Audit Committee is now well established and I hope that the next committee will continue to rigorously seek out and identify areas where savings and efficiencies can be made to ensure that public funds are used properly to deliver high-quality services. In its key themes report, the committee lays down a challenge to the next Government, suggesting ways in which it can assist in ensuring that public funds are used effectively, economically and efficiently. I thank the Presiding Officer and the Parliament for allowing our committee to do the work that it has done over the past four years. I hope that we have discharged the function that was given to us and that the next committee in the forthcoming session will be able to continue that work. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Public Audit Committee’s 1st Report, 2011 (Session 3): Session 3 reports of the Public Audit Committee – key themes (SP Paper 559).

I was puzzled by John Wilson’s curious speech because I was unsure what he was trying to portray to us about the better way campaign. I have respect for him and the work that he has done over many years. He has deeply held and sincere views. However, if he wants to question credentials on a party-political basis, I would be interested to know what some of the major supporters of his party would say about a campaign such as the there is a better way campaign. What has Sir George Mathewson, the financier, banker and would-be Tory—now finding respite with the Scottish National Party—got to say about the better way campaign? What would Sir Tom Farmer’s view be of the better way campaign? What would Sir David Murray think about the attitude of trade unions in standing up to protect ordinary working people? We should be careful before we start to level criticisms. If there was ever any doubt among ordinary working people about the need for an organisation such as the STUC or about the need for trade unions, what is beginning to happen in this country should ram it home to them. I cannot understand the philosophy in this country that says that someone who is rich and powerful needs to be incentivised to work—they need bonuses and high pay—but that the way to get the economy going again is to cut the wages and terms and conditions of ordinary working people and impoverish them. That approach is inconsistent. Elaine Smith pointed to the people who caused the crisis: the bankers. They are now doing very well, thank you, and are back to the extreme and excessive bonuses that they previously enjoyed. Why do some in society try to defend the excesses of the City of London? I thought that the previous United Kingdom Government was wrong in its approach of light-touch regulation of the City. It made a major mistake, and to some extent we are paying for that mistake. However, we should learn from our mistakes. The First Minister of this country was profoundly mistaken when he said that what we need in relation to bankers is lighter regulation.

Jim Mather may wish to reflect on the fact that the First Minister wanted an even lighter touch taken to what was, at the time, no regulation. That is bizarre. We need a proper set of regulations so that bankers in this country face up to their responsibilities. The issues are not just in the public sector. Marlyn Glen is right to point to the threats to the universal postal service from some of the cuts, but there are issues in the private sector, too. The First Minister today praised the jobs that Amazon is bringing to Scotland. I welcome jobs coming to Scotland, but I read that, just before Christmas, Amazon took on temporary workers at one of its depots in Scotland and, in the middle of the night in the run-up to Christmas when it no longer had work for them, Amazon told them, “You’re off the clock—you’re not getting paid, so you can go home.” Many of those temporary workers on low pay could not afford a car, so they either had to find taxi fares to go home or stay in the depot until the buses came back on in the morning. That is happening in 21st century Scotland. Some people seem to think that impoverishing workers is the way forward. The trade unions, with a measured, sensible and hard-hitting campaign, are doing a favour to all of us who say that ordinary working people deserve respect. I wish the trade unions well with their campaign.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I apologise in advance because I have a meeting to attend and so need to leave imminently. I commend Des McNulty for his persistence and tenacity, and for his determination to ensure that the issue is resolved successfully. I have a long-standing awareness and knowledge of the affection in which St Margaret of Scotland Hospice is held in the local area. As someone who grew up in the grounds of Erskine hospital, it was one of the highlights of my summer to go across on the Erskine ferry to the annual fundraising day in Clydebank to participate in the activities there. I know what a significant contribution the hospice makes to the local community. Des McNulty highlighted two issues in the wider debate that we need to have. We need to consider, first, the role and contribution of hospices and, secondly, the services that we provide for older people in our hospitals. On the first issue, I am acutely aware of the important contribution that hospices make. In Renfrewshire, we are privileged to have two of the most outstanding hospices in the country—Accord Hospice and St Vincent’s Hospice. I know from talking to staff and people who have friends and relatives in the hospices how much people value the contribution that hospices make. Reflection on and a review by the Government and the Parliament of the support that is given to hospices—in specific and general terms—are long overdue, because hospices make an immense contribution and often have to rely on tight budgets. What they can do with a fraction of the total NHS budget to transform the lives of people in our communities is considerable. The second issue relates not just to Des McNulty’s specific point about care in the St Margaret of Scotland Hospice but to a more general point about the NHS. Although I admire, and will defend to my last breath, the contribution that the health service in Scotland makes to the wellbeing of our citizens, and although I know from my family’s experience how well the NHS does when there is an emergency or an acute issue that needs to be addressed, I think that we should be big enough to reflect on what we do for older people. Des McNulty highlighted the quality of care that is given to older people in a facility where there is a caring, loving and highly professional ethos. Both my elderly parents—God rest them—had to be hospitalised for lengthy periods. I witnessed dedication from staff, the like of which I could never hope to match, but I also witnessed examples of dubious care, in which elderly people were left unfed or slumped in bed without being picked up, and their quality of life left a lot to be desired. Indeed, we had to remove my father from hospital before we could see an improvement in the quality of his life. Hospitals are not really geared to the long-term wellbeing of elderly people who need treatment and care. That is why facilities such as St Margaret’s are so important. They make a difference and provide something that the NHS is failing to provide. If we allow a facility such as St Margaret’s to disappear, not only will the people who are currently supported and served by the hospice be affected, but society as a whole will be the loser, because St Margaret’s is a model for what can be delivered throughout Scotland. I wish Des McNulty and the campaigners every success. If they win, they will have done us all a service.

I well understand Patrick Harvie’s frustration and anger about what he has heard today—about the lack of aspiration and clear intention in dealing with disadvantage throughout Scotland. I am sure that his anger has been made even worse by the fact that he helped to put the Government in place, and it is now badly letting down him and the people whom he represents. Like Wendy Alexander, I could not argue against many of the cabinet secretary’s proposals. I welcome the £2 million for the freight facilities grant, the additional supporting people funding and the £400,000 for the capital city fund. Previously, the First Minister and the permanent secretary refused Edinburgh capital city fund money to help creditors who were affected by the gathering 2009. That money might go some way towards allowing those people to do what they suggested to the permanent secretary they would do. I also welcome the money for the urban regeneration fund and modern apprenticeships, for example. However, what marks the budget out is a clear lack of ambition and a clear unwillingness to deal with the deep-rooted problems that we face. It marks an unwillingness to tackle disadvantage and is a refusal to undo what the Government has done in the past few years in shifting money and resources to better-off people at the expense of those who are most disadvantaged. That is why I cannot support the budget. It fails to measure up to addressing the needs of Scotland. Andy Kerr highlighted issues that have been brought about by rising unemployment. He spoke about wrong choices and pointed out that the budget has moved only 0.1 per cent for a series of half measures.

It is clear that I do not think that the money is enough, and that I think that we are suffering because of the disastrous policies of the Conservatives and the Lib Dems, who are cutting too far and too fast through the recession that is now starting to develop. However, the money that we are squabbling and arguing about today is a pittance compared with the overall budget. Much more can be done. James Kelly was right to highlight issues that we considered in the Public Audit Committee. On good accounting practice, the Auditor General has said that he cannot say where the money was allocated to and whether it was put aside to help the cabinet secretary to offer the sweeteners that he has offered to Opposition parties today. The reality is that we are now seeing real cuts in services that are affecting the unemployed, social work and the voluntary sector. On housing, there is a mere pittance to try to undo some of the damage that has been caused by the SNP’s failure in the past three or four years. The money for the colleges is but a drop compared to what is needed. If the Lib Dems think that their justification for supporting the budget will undo the untold damage that they have done to students, they are kidding themselves. Students will not forget their betrayal in a hurry. In councils, we are seeing the disastrous effect of the SNP budget and Government. In Renfrewshire Council, 10 per cent of the school week is being removed from teachers and the council proposes to bring in the long-term unemployed, put them through a European social fund training course and then to deliver the curriculum for excellence. That is a dilution of quality education simply to save money, as that council has admitted. The effect of the budget is to reduce services, standards and quality and it shows complete poverty of ambition and complete lack of aspiration. Andy Kerr has outlined some of the priorities that a decent Government should pursue, and I look forward to that happening after May.

It is an interesting concept. A lot of money is at stake for the budget if the Government can make it work, but just how will that money be delivered on the back of the promise?

The minister highlights a mistaken decision by Westminster-based politicians and a very correct decision made by ministers of the same party in Scotland.

I, too, thank Cathy Jamieson for the opportunity to debate this important issue. I also thank her for alerting me to something that I had overlooked completely: the proposal in the budget to remove this funding. When you look into the matter, it is startling to find that that has happened, given the relatively small amount of money it represents in the bigger scheme of things. In a sense, it is a no-brainer: we should support this grant scheme. As Alison McInnes said, there is an environmental impact to putting freight back on to our roads. After the winter that we have had and the scenes that we have seen up and down the country—including of huge potholes, which councils are struggling to repair—do we seriously want to put more freight, by way of more lorries, on to our roads? I am talking not only about the impact on my own area in Renfrewshire but right across Scotland. The FFG is a scheme of proven value. It takes lorry journeys off our roads and puts them on to rail. I spoke to Andrew Malcolm and Jim Clark at W H Malcolm, a Renfrewshire-based company, about the scheme and its value. The company has two sites that have benefited, at Elderslie and Grangemouth. They told me in particular about the 20 loads per day that the company is involved in taking up and down to Aberdeen. I think that Asda is a particularly big user of that service. Other members have spoken about Aberdeen. The consequences of putting that freight back on to our roads would be horrendous. W H Malcolm has two projects in the pipeline that would be threatened by the removal of the grant scheme. The projects are not in the west but the east of Scotland. The company has the capacity and ability to take yet more lorry loads off our Scottish roads and the UK network. We are talking about around 50 to 60 loads per day and journeys that range from 50 to 100 miles to Anglo-Scottish routes of up to 350 miles. It is becoming difficult for many freight companies to operate in the current environment because of the recession and high costs. In these difficult times, and given that those companies are already struggling to survive, do we honestly expect them to find all the money to do something that benefits us all? Freight companies are not asking for anything that is unreasonable. No one is  asking for long-term subsidies for rail. I think that the freight industry recognises that rail should ultimately be able to stand on its own feet and compete. We are talking about a relatively small amount of money to kick-start something that we will all benefit from. I hope that there has been an oversight. I hope that it is just that when the officials were producing the figures, they did not give proper thought to the issue. Even at this late stage, I hope that, rather than have a confrontation over the budget to resolve the issue, common sense can prevail and the money be restored. If that happened, everyone would win.

Will Hugh O'Donnell take an intervention?

I welcome Hugh O'Donnell's commitment to telling the public what his party proposes. Do the Liberal Democrats support the idea of replacing qualified teachers with non-qualified staff in Scottish schools?

Margaret Smith was somewhat inconsistent in some of her arguments. On the one hand she said that it is not for her to intervene in or comment on decisions that specific local authorities make; on the other hand she spent a substantial amount of time castigating the cabinet secretary about class sizes, which are the responsibility of local authorities. She cannot have it both ways. Margaret Smith was right, however, when she said that I was trying to address an issue that is confronting Renfrewshire Council. The council meets today to decide whether to remove teachers from classrooms for 10 per cent of the school week and replace them with unqualified staff. Before I go into the detail of that, I will reflect on some of what the cabinet secretary said in his speech. He said that the numbers of teachers in 2007 were unsustainable. However, in the SNP manifesto in 2007, he and his colleagues pledged: "We will maintain teacher numbers in the face of falling school rolls". Either they are sustainable or the cabinet secretary misled people in the manifesto promise that he made. We really should know whether the SNP knew in 2007 that teacher numbers were unsustainable and whether it had no intention of maintaining them. The cabinet secretary also said that he was making progress on the target of every pupil having two hours of quality PE each week, delivered by a specialist PE teacher. In Renfrewshire, I presume that we will have those two hours delivered by a quality PE teacher, plus two and a half hours of education delivered by unqualified staff, so there will be four and half hours in which pupils will be removed from mainstream curriculum work. That is a worry for parents as well as teachers. The cabinet secretary said that he wanted to develop political consensus. One of the agreements that had been reached in Scottish education across political parties with teaching  unions and with parents was that Scottish education would be delivered by qualified, trained, skilled and experienced teachers, unlike what had happened in England and Wales for many years, where unqualified staff and teachers not trained in the relevant specialisms often taught children. We set our face against that and said that education would be delivered by teachers. What is happening in Renfrewshire turns that consensus upside down. The council is diluting the quality of education. For 10 per cent of the school week, education will be delivered by unqualified teachers. It is a disgrace, a dilution of education and, potentially, the thin end of the wedge. If Margaret Smith and others think that what is happening in one specific authority is nothing to do with them, they should open their eyes. They should listen to the worries of the EIS about what that means for Scottish education because it is the start of a process that says that, for purely financial reasons—as the director of education and the leader of Renfrewshire Council have indicated—we can take teachers out of the classroom and replace them with unqualified staff. Renfrewshire Council has already shed proportionately more teaching jobs than most authorities in Scotland—nearly 250. It proposes to remove 60 teachers from the classroom and replace them with unqualified staff. I tell members to listen not to me, any of the Labour members or anyone else in the Labour Party but to parents and teachers. I had an e-mail from a constituent whom I do not know, who says: "I am writing to express my absolute disgust both as a parent and a teacher at Renfrewshire's decision to create non-teaching jobs to replace qualified teachers." She is one of the teachers who may lose their job, and she goes on to say: "to be told ... that my position is on the line again after almost six years is soul destroying, especially when I will be displaced by a non-teaching person. The fact the proposals are being rushed through so quickly is scandalous ... We are looking for education, not a baby-sitting service ... It makes a mockery of the level of scrutiny newer teachers have to endure to become qualified teachers ... How do we ensure they—" those non-teaching persons— "are up to GTC standards ... The message Renfrewshire is sending out is to save as much money as possible but to hell with our children's education." It is shocking that parents and teachers are being put in that position. Des McNulty appealed to Mike Russell to use his influence. The leader of Renfrewshire Council  listens to Alex Salmond and Alex Salmond listens to him. I appeal to Alex Salmond to use his influence over the leader of Renfrewshire Council to stop that ill-judged, retrograde step, which threatens the quality of Scottish education. We want qualified, experienced teachers to deliver education, not unqualified staff—or possibly even, as Renfrewshire Council's director of education said, volunteers.

Will the member give way?

Does Margaret Smith agree that teaching during the school week in Scotland should be delivered or supervised by qualified teachers?

Does the cabinet secretary still have the aspiration of every school pupil having two hours of high-quality physical education each week, delivered by specialist PE teachers?

First of all, I must apologise: I cannot stay for the full debate as I have another meeting to attend. Nevertheless, I thank Bob Doris for giving us this opportunity to put on record the sterling contribution that the Irish in Scotland have made in many fields and across many generations. Like Mr Doris, I welcome to the Parliament Danny Boyle and his sister Katie who with their other sister, Roisin, make a tremendous contribution to Irish traditional music and culture in Scotland. I remember them in their early days going to learn their skills at the Comhaltas at St Roch's on a Tuesday night—unfortunately, my children did not have their staying power—and they have gone on to make a very significant contribution to Irish culture in Scotland. Like many others, not just in this Parliament but in Scotland, I come from an Irish background; all my grandparents are Irish and my mother is Irish. Unlike, I suppose, most of the Irish in Scotland, I have no Donegal connection; my mother came from Cavan and my father's parents were from Sligo. Much of the history that was talked about in Scottish education meant little to me or the generation that I grew up in. Indeed, the famine that Bob Doris mentioned was more of a historical issue for my family than many of the events from Bannockburn onwards and we often felt that our role in society was overlooked and that very little attention was paid to our history and culture. Similarly, with music, the Clancy brothers and Tommy Makem probably contributed more to my musical development as a child than many of the Scottish musicians that are familiar to others. There have been tremendous changes even in my lifetime. When the troubles started, people of an Irish background became nervous about talking about their identity and expressing their musical tradition, but I welcome the fact that my children do not have to face the same kind of discrimination or antipathy that I or my parents' generation faced. It is fantastic that Irish people in Scotland are asserting their proud heritage and culture through Irish music and sporting traditions. That is to be celebrated. Scotland has many fine musicians who have drawn their talents and inspiration from their Irish background. Gerry Rafferty, whose sad and untimely death was reported last week and who went to the same school as me, was from such a background and contributed not just to  contemporary Scottish music and life but to British and international music and life. Tonight's debate should celebrate what can be achieved by an inclusive Scotland that recognises the distinct skills and traditions that many people from the Irish community in Scotland have. It allows us to say proudly in the Parliament what many of our forefathers could not say, even in their own community—that we are proud of who we are, of our Irish background and of our contribution to Scottish life. I am delighted that several people will make that positive statement tonight.

Fergus Ewing referred to the foreword that he had written. It is encouraging to see that at least one person in Scotland has read that foreword. I hope that others will follow the minister's exhortation. A number of points were raised, but James Kelly raised a significant one. A number of members said in their speeches that they support the general principles of the bill but simply do not agree with the specifics. James Kelly is right that if members support the general principles of the bill they should vote for it at stage 1 and allow us to sort out at stage 2 some of the issues that cause concern. Fergus Ewing said that one of the problems is that the bill would simply replicate the law as it stands. There is an issue to do with obstruction  and hindrance, which could be addressed at stage 2. When I drafted the bill, there were arguments for not including hindrance and obstruction in the offence, and others for including them. If that matter alone is the problem, we could address it at stage 2, but where would we be if we introduced such provisions? We would be in exactly the same position as we are in with the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005. Fergus Ewing has also just said that there is no need for additional legislation because the bill does not add to what the common law offers. However, we heard Kenny MacAskill say at committee that he supported the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005 and we have heard a number of other members say the same today, even though the act did not add to what the common law says. There is therefore an inconsistency in their argument. It would be better if people were up front and honest and just said that they do not agree. I was disappointed to hear Mike Pringle's speech. It is only a short two or three weeks since he and I were pictured holding the bill, when he left the trade unions, the Scottish Grocers Federation and other retailers organisations with the impression that he was going to support it. Of course people are entitled to change their minds, and of course people come under pressure in their parties from their whips and party discipline, but even at this stage, I hope that he will reflect on the impression that he gave to others. Kenny MacAskill said that the bill is far too wide and that it would protect so many people that it would simply cause confusion in the law. That point was echoed to some extent by Stuart McMillan, who said that he could not see why factory workers on the shop floor would not be covered but the managers would, or why shipyard workers would not be covered but the managers would. Perhaps he was just being disingenuous, or maybe there is genuine confusion. A bill that seeks to protect those who serve the public has to have a definition of workers who are serving the public. If shipyard or factory workers are assaulted in the course of their work but are not engaged in serving the public, of course they would not be covered. Why should they be? That is not the intention of the bill. However, if a shipyard worker was out serving the public, for example by going down to Govan and giving a public talk on what they are doing in building warships or, indeed, on why they should be building them, and in the course of doing that on behalf of his company is assaulted, then of course he would become covered by the definition. We just need to be a bit more sensible about what we are trying to do when we propose or knock down the arguments.  Bill Butler was absolutely right to say that there are areas where the bill could be improved and that there are arguments for and against. However, if that is the genuine belief of members, I repeat my view that they should not destroy the bill at this point, but let us proceed to the next stage. Robert Brown said that if there is a problem, then the Liberal Democrats are reluctant to say that the way to deal with it is simply to jump to new laws. I ask him to forgive me if I am wrong, but I think that he voted for the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Bill, which did exactly that. I cannot see how he can logically justify voting for that bill but not for the bill that we are debating today. At least the Conservatives have had a consistent view, in not supporting this type of legislation. There is no consistency in the Liberal Democrats' position—although perhaps we should not be surprised about that.

I recall many of the disagreements that we had. One of the problems that we had arose because of the nature of coalition. The Conservatives are now finding out the joys of working in coalition with the Liberal Democrats and just how parties are constrained. One problem that we had was that the Liberal Democrats would not allow the boat to be pushed out further, if members will allow me to continue with the shipyard analogy. Let us talk about what coalition brings. Maybe Labour and the Conservatives can mull over its joys and some of the problems that arise. I turn to the points that Fergus Ewing made about practical action. I accept what he said about that, and I commend him for his commitment to it. Practical action has a place, but the same argument could be made on any proposed legislation. Fergus Ewing said that the law is not just words on a page. Of course that is the case: no law is just words on a page—it has significance only if it is followed up by practical action. As a minister, I supported the action that followed the passing of the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005, and I note that Fergus Ewing has committed himself to that, too, but he should not use the argument that practical action is needed as justification for opposing the bill. Practical action is always needed in the aftermath of the passing of legislation. Practical action will be needed to ensure that the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Act 2010  has any practical impact. The minister's argument is disingenuous. I was encouraged by Kenny MacAskill's fulsome praise for the bill, but he said that even though it was well intentioned, it would not make a difference and he could not possibly support a bill that would make no difference. The minister can correct me if I am wrong, but he might have been one of the SNP members who voted for the legislation on fur farms in Scotland. I am still waiting to see what practical effect that will have. Maybe it is the case that he will vote for some bills that will have no practical benefit and against others that he thinks will have no practical benefit. There is a wee bit of inconsistency and disingenuousness there. What do we have? Unfortunately, it would appear that we have parties lining up along party lines. I regret that that is the case. [ Interruption .]

I think that it was Kenny MacAskill or Fergus Ewing who quoted Victim Support Scotland, but a wide range of organisations in Scotland support greater protection for workers. I can point to the Scottish Grocers Federation, the Federation of Small Businesses, Asda, Morrisons, Scotmid, the Co-op, as well as a wide range of trade unions including Unison, Unite the Union, USDAW, the CWU and the Educational Institute of Scotland—which supports action to protect teachers—and a wide range of voluntary organisations. All those organisations think that action is necessary to support their members of staff in delivering services to the public. I ask members who argue that the bill is too wide—which, apparently, is not something that can be dealt with at stage 2—or that it would have no practical effect, to examine their consciences. They should examine what they have already voted for in the Parliament and look very critically at some of the legislative proposals that they will support in the future. The long and short of it is that the bill represents the culmination of a campaign over a number of years by trade unions who are desperate to protect the members whom they represent and who believe that the Parliament should take a stand by saying that it supports workers. As others have, I have mentioned the implications of our alcohol legislation. We think that it is good enough for shop workers to put themselves on the front line and take abuse in support of the Parliament. If that is the case, the Parliament should do something to support the shop workers who are  supposed to make a difference in solving Scotland's alcohol problem. I appeal to members to think again and to allow the bill to go to stage 2. Please, do not turn your backs on those Scottish workers who provide vital services the length and breadth of Scotland.

What additional punishment is available under the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005 that is not available under the common law?

I want to thank a number of people and organisations who helped me to bring the bill to the Scottish Parliament. I thank the Scottish Trades Union Congress, which helped to co-ordinate efforts, and those individual trade unions that lobbied and worked hard to make the bill a possibility. It was their determination to do the right thing by their members that led to the bill being introduced. I am grateful for the work that was done by Mike Dailly of the Govan Law Centre on drafting what was previously a general set of ideas, and I am especially grateful to Frances Bell and Tracey White of the legislation unit who helped to put the final touches to the bill and make it fit for purpose. The bill is based on the simple notion that anyone who attacks a worker who is serving the public should be charged with a specific offence and punished accordingly. The Parliament accepted the principle of such an approach when it passed the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005. The bill seeks to adopt similar measures and provide them for workers other than police officers, fire officers and health service staff. Is there a problem that needs to be addressed? Even those who do not support the bill recognise that there is a problem. I accept that there are difficulties in the way in which statistics are gathered; we heard about that during committee evidence sessions. I hope that the minister will address that point. It has been argued that, in 2007-08, the total number of physical assaults against public sector workers in Scotland was 32,263. According to Unison, that figure included 9,121 assaults on local government workers and represented an increase of 3,000 on the previous year's figures. The Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers reported that in this year's freedom from fear survey, 11.3 per cent of Scottish shop workers had been assaulted and 40 per cent had been threatened. The Scottish crime and justice survey found that, in 2008-09, 7 per cent of public-facing workers had experienced physical abuse during the previous 12 months. A 2010 survey by Queen Margaret University found that 8 per cent of young  workers had been physically assaulted during the previous 12 months. We should remember that it is not just the individual who suffers as a result of an assault. The family suffers, as do the wider public when a bus or train service is withdrawn following an assault. The whole community suffers, particularly the poor and disadvantaged who have to rely on public transport. When a local shop is closed following violence, the community feels the loss. When postal services are disrupted following an assault, individuals, businesses and many others can be affected. If vital care services are withdrawn, the disabled, sick and elderly lose out. I could spend the next hour telling stories reported by Unite, the Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen, the Communication Workers Union, the Federation of Small Businesses, Unison and others. There is clearly a problem. Voluntary sector workers, teachers and shopkeepers are all saying that action needs to be taken. Large responsible employers are also lining up to back the bill. I thank the Co-op, Morrisons and Asda for their support and for calling on the Parliament to take action. Transport operators such as FirstGroup plc also support the bill. All those people look to the success of the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005 to justify their view. The EWA has clearly found support. It can be said to act as a deterrent, but increasingly it is also being used, which is why more crimes are being recorded. Answers to parliamentary questions show that in 2006-07, 723 minor assaults were recorded; in 2007-08, 753 were recorded; and in 2008-09, that figure had risen to 1,150. The number of convictions from those charges is also rising. I am told that there is no need for the legislation as penalties for assault have now caught up with what I propose. If that is the case, how can we justify the continuation of the EWA? The Cabinet Secretary for Justice has said that my bill is not required and yet he defends the EWA. Disappointingly, the Scottish Police Federation says that there is no need for the bill and yet it defends the continued availability of the EWA for police officers, even though it acknowledges that similar penalties are available under the general law. The fact is that the EWA is symbolically important. It sends out a clear message that the Parliament will not tolerate attacks on those who provide emergency services. Why, then, should we be silent about attacks on bus drivers, train drivers, postal workers, care workers, housing officers, shop workers, teachers, voluntary sector workers and others?  The Parliament wants action to tackle alcohol abuse, and we have said that shop workers should demand proof of age under the challenge 25 scheme. Shop workers who are faced with the current legislation already experience problems, and we will be exposing shop workers to more harassment, intimidation and abuse. We have asked shop workers to enforce our alcohol policy; surely the least that we can do is to offer those shop workers the added protection that I propose. To those who say that the current law is strong enough, let me point out that this Parliament and its predecessors have already acknowledged that the current law is not good enough for a range of people in our society. In 1988 Westminster introduced additional penalties for crimes involving incitement to racial hatred; in 2003 this Parliament required that religious prejudice be considered as an aggravated offence; and in 2009 this Parliament provided statutory aggravations for crimes motivated by malice towards an individual based on their sexual orientation, transgender identity or disability. Let us sum up. I am told that we do not need the bill. A police officer has added protection, but not a train driver. A fireman has added protection, but not a bus driver. A doctor has added protection, but not a care worker. There will be added penalties for a crime against someone based on their race but not against a shop worker. There will be added penalties for a crime against someone based on their sexual orientation but not against a postal worker. There will be added penalties for a crime against someone based on their disability but not against a voluntary sector worker who helps those people with a disability. Frankly, it is a cop-out to suggest that the bill is superfluous—the Parliament has already created precedents. I appeal to members to allow the bill to proceed to stage 2. I urge them not to turn their backs on workers who provide a service to the public. I ask them to vote for the Protection of Workers (Scotland) Bill. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Protection of Workers (Scotland) Bill.

Johann Lamont gave a powerful statement of some of the problems that face kinship carers right across Scotland, and she made a moving and persuasive argument about our failure to support those people who are doing so much for many young people in our country. Richard Simpson was right to point out some of the party-political issues. Others have said that they do not want party politics in the debate, but party politics are involved. Part of the problem with the party politics is about the parties that are in power. It is not just about the SNP in power, it is about Labour in power. I was a minister, and I hope that I moved the kinship care agenda forward. I was involved in the discussions on the charter for grandparents, and I am proud of the contribution that I made. However, Presiding Officer, I remember being very politely lambasted by you on a number of occasions about our failure to do more for kinship carers, and you were right. When we are in government, we often have to make difficult decisions, but more can always be done. The same applies to the current Administration. It can take some satisfaction from what it has done, but it should also recognise that more needs to be done. I hope that out of this debate will come some willingness on the part of all the parties in the Parliament to say in their manifestos what they are going to do to support kinship carers. More than that, I hope that they will meet that manifesto commitment, and that it will not be just another broken promise. Whether the current Administration remains in power or, as I hope, Labour returns to power, I want to see some positive action. We have a disgraceful situation in this country. For years, when we have discussed health, time and again members of the Parliament have said that they are not prepared to accept a postcode lottery for health. What have we heard tonight? We have a postcode lottery when it comes to kinship care. It is unacceptable that kinship carers are supported better in some areas and not at all  in others. The care is provided no matter where people live. As Johann Lamont and others have said, we live in a society that in some ways has changed beyond all recognition. Drugs have completely laid waste to many communities and families. Every member in the Parliament will have had kinship carers come to them in their constituency work. I remember as a minister many people saying, "We thought that at our stage in life it would be time for us to put our feet up, relax and enjoy the fruits of our hard work." What happens? Because of some disaster, tragedy or problematic situation, those people are suddenly lumbered with all the responsibilities of child care at the time of their retirement. They include emotional responsibilities, physical and mental responsibilities and, yes, financial responsibilities. Those people are doing taxpayers, local authorities and the state a huge favour by taking on the troubles and problems of those children, but they do not see it as trouble or a problem; they see it as their duty and responsibility, because they love those young children. Are we seriously suggesting that they should turn to the children and say, "We can't look after you. You're going into care or foster care, because there is more money to support you there than there is in taking you on ourselves"? No, of course they would not say that, so why should we take advantage of them because they do the right thing for the children they love? It is about time that the Parliament faced up to its responsibilities.

I thank Jeremy Purvis for giving us the debate and allowing Parliament to record its thanks for and appreciation of those who have served us well. He is right to focus in his motion on what we should do as part of our responsibility to those people. I grew up in the grounds of what was known as Erskine hospital in Trish Godman's constituency—it is now the Erskine home, as she said. My father was a prisoner in a Japanese prisoner-of-war camp for nearly four years. The fathers of all my friends suffered in one way or another—at the hands of the Japanese or in the theatre of war in Europe. When I was young, it was not unusual for me to mix with men who had lost limbs, suffered terribly in explosions or suffered—as my father did—privation in prisoner-of-war camps. In the interests of consensus, I will not introduce disagreement into the debate. However, suffice it to say that, when I was a boy, the veterans from the first world war who lived in Erskine hospital had a very different view of Earl Haig from the benign view that John Lamont presented. They still had bitter memories of what they thought that Earl Haig had done. I grew up in what I now know was a wonderful, caring and supportive environment. The people who were privileged to be there received huge  support not just from the staff but from the local community, because everyone was in it together. However, although that environment was as good as it was and was much better than the circumstances in which my father's comrades often had to live outwith it, I reflect that the veterans still received little counselling for the horrors and little direct medical support, although Erskine tried to do its best. That was because we as a society had not learned how to cope with people who came back from war. We are in a much better place now than we were then. We have learned about the psychological and physical consequences of war, but we still make mistakes and we still fail. Undoubtedly, for those who are worst affected, the services—imperfect as they are—are probably much better than the services for those who are less severely affected but who are still traumatised and suffering as a result of their active service. Far too many servicemen are addicted to alcohol or drugs, too many are in prison and too many are suffering homelessness. As long as that remains the case, we as a society are failing. It is therefore right that we exhort and encourage people to work together better and specify how we want that to be done. That is not just because society must pay a terrible price when we fail in our endeavours but because it is a disgrace that we allow individuals who are suffering because of what they have gone through to have to bear the consequences of that turmoil. Jeremy Purvis is to be congratulated. It is right for the Parliament to put on the record the fact that we can and should do better. More power to his elbow.

Like Nanette Milne, I pay tribute to Helen Eadie, not just for securing this debate but for her work in helping to promote awareness of the issues that are mentioned in the motion. She is a tireless campaigner on a range of issues and it must be hard for her to keep track of everything that she is involved in. This evening she has secured a debate in which we focus on a set of medical problems that affect a huge number of people in Scotland. There can be barely any families who have not experienced the consequences of the conditions that are mentioned in the motion. Nanette Milne and Jamie Stone talked about the personal impact of some of those conditions. It is hard to watch someone suffer. We often feel frustrated that so little can be done to ease pain. Tremendous progress has been made on drugs and a range of therapies and treatment is available, but sometimes we can only watch as people shrink before our eyes, as Nanette Milne said, and we can only witness the debilitating effects of severe arthritis. Osteoporosis and arthritis have affected members of my family, and it is tragic to see people suffer. We all know about the litany of issues that affect our health in this country, such as diet and lack of exercise, but we cannot do anything about the  climate. At this time of year, and even in a Scottish summer, when the weather worsens the pain starts, as I know from the experience of close family members. Medication is undoubtedly welcome, but there are long-term consequences to taking some of the significant drugs that are available. We need to be aware of that. The organisations to which Helen Eadie referred do a fantastic job, not just in raising awareness but in campaigning for a better and more understanding approach. I worry that in the financial climate that we are entering into some services that can make a difference to people's quality of life might be the first things to be dispensed with. I am thinking, for example, about the aids and adaptations that make a difference by enabling people to operate independently in their own homes. We must ensure that such assistance for sufferers is regarded as vital. I ask the minister to reflect on an issue on which I have heard contradictory information and evidence. I am concerned about schoolchildren who carry extremely heavy loads to and from school. Heavy bags are often carried for a considerable distance. My intuitive response to seeing children carrying heavy loads is to wonder what will be the long-term consequences for their backs. I hope that we can undertake research into the long-term consequences of carrying excessive loads from an early age. If there is an issue in that regard on which we should be reflecting, let us do so. In conclusion, I want to mention Helen Eadie's idea about an award. I do not dispute the significance of giving awards to the companies that are doing the research, but they are often well rewarded when they come up with a product. If we do anything to recognise achievement, I like to think that we would recognise the achievements of those who, despite their illness and disability, contribute significantly to their families and to the community, and to those who help them. The untold good that is done by volunteers and sufferers of debilitating illnesses is immense, and I hope that, in some way, we can put on record our appreciation of what they achieve.

I am instinctively suspicious of being asked to agree to legislation without knowing the full details of what we are voting for. In effect, we are being asked to buy a pig in a poke. It is not responsible to ask members of the Parliament to make major decisions that will have significant implications for many businesses throughout the country without knowing the full facts. Therefore, I hope that the cabinet secretary and her colleagues will listen closely to Jackie Baillie's exhortations to them to come back to the Parliament having discussed the matter with the industry, retailers and all those affected. We talk about the polluter paying. I take the view that the polluter is the person who gets drunk, often with substantial amounts of money in their pocket, and causes mayhem in their local community. We should not pass the full burden of responsibility on to responsible drinkers or responsible publicans and off-licence holders in many small communities, who will suffer as a result of our agreeing to a financial penalty without knowing the details. If we are going to introduce a levy, it is incumbent on us to ensure that the volume  retailers bear the responsibility. I hope that the responsible publicans and retailers who are doing their best, often at very small margins, will not be punished. If we lose pubs in small towns and villages throughout Scotland, we will damage the social fabric. It is incumbent on the Parliament to be more open and honest, and to go back and have further discussions with those who are directly affected.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to support a publicly owned postal service. (S3O-11830)

I thank the minister up to a point for that answer. He and I share the view that communities and consumer groups throughout Scotland value the Post Office, but he stopped short of committing himself to a publicly owned postal service. Will he go one step further and commit himself, with the unions, consumer groups and communities throughout the country, to the idea that a publicly owned postal service is vital to Scotland's interests?

It is a shame that Stuart McMillan was not able to deliver that speech to SNP members earlier, because he might have ended up a bit higher up their list in his attempts to return to this Parliament. Jeremy Purvis made some prescient points about the three-year budget, which I will return to, but one thing that has come out in this debate is that we need leadership, maturity and statesmanship from Government ministers. They are the ones who have the facts and figures at their disposal; they are the ones who understand what is ahead of us. The rest of us—the other parties in the Parliament—can only guess at this stage about exactly what is to come. There is therefore a duty on them to start showing some leadership and to take some responsibility.  I had hoped that the SNP had moved beyond its opportunism of 2007. The exchange that took place a short time ago on student debt was interesting. I remember the letters going backwards and forwards to The Herald . Allan Wilson, my good friend, pointed out that there was no way that the SNP could deliver its policy on that. He pointed out that they were telling lies, and there was a flurry of letters from people who are now ministers in this Administration to say that he was misleading the people of Scotland. Who has been proven correct? Allan Wilson was the one who told the truth. There were misleading comments—to say the least—on class sizes. We know from an answer under freedom of information legislation that the First Minister and others misled the Parliament and that officials in this Administration told university principals that the promises would not be delivered, and not just by 2011; they said that they might not even be delivered by 2015.

With all due respect, Presiding Officer, my comments about lies were about things that were said before 2007 and outwith the Parliament. I think that I am at liberty to make such comments. As far as misleading comments by ministers are concerned, I refer you to the answer that Alex Salmond gave me in September 2007 and to the minutes of a meeting, attended by Donald Henderson and university principals, that prove that the promises made by the SNP would not and could not be delivered by 2011. If that is not misleading, Presiding Officer, I will take a word from you that does describe it.

Presiding Officer, I refer members to the   official records of what was said and to the Official Report . I will move on. The promises on class sizes would not be met. We are still waiting for the SNP to do a U-turn on student financing. The one-year budget is simply another device for the SNP to use to try to get elected. The SNP wants to hide the truth and defer the debate. I can understand some of its decisions to defer. I can understand why Alex Salmond is deferring on the referendum. He conned his activists into supporting the idea of a referendum and he has conned them again into delaying a  referendum until some future date. Everything has to be delayed in order to try to save Alex Salmond. We need some honesty from Government ministers. The information is available to set out a three-year plan. Members should not be surprised if Opposition parties resort to a political knockabout when we have an Administration that is prepared to hide the reality rather than engage in constructive discussion. Even the promise of a two-year council tax freeze has no money on the table beyond one year. We need the full facts so that the Parliament can start to face up to its responsibilities. It is this Government's responsibility to create the opportunity for a mature debate. The Government has the facts. We are prepared to pursue projects such as a Borders railway on a shaky economic analysis. The house building programme has collapsed, the costs will overrun and a permanent revenue subsidy will be needed. Even so, there has been no discussion about the maintenance backlog on council property of £1.4 billion; the road spending requirements of £1.7 billion; the university estate backlog of £0.7 billion; or the NHS estate backlog of £0.5 billion. Sports facilities in this country need to be upgraded at a cost of £2.7 billion. There are school improvements that will take 20 years to deliver and a problem in our prison estate, with numbers projected to increase by 20 per cent. This Administration needs to come forward with the facts. We can only conclude that it is prepared to hide the facts in order to get by the election and then, if it is re-elected, it will present the reality. That is wrong and it is irresponsible.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. My console indicated that the vote was on amendment 44.

Michael Matheson has twice exhorted members to sign the pledge. I come from a background in which signing the pledge had slightly different connotations, but this one is equally significant and important, and I commend James Kelly for giving members the opportunity to put on record the Parliament's understanding of the significance of sport in our society.  A number of people who have been doing a tremendous job, such as Kim Atkinson and her colleagues at the Scottish sports alliance, have already been mentioned tonight. However, I want to pay tribute to the work of Margo MacDonald as the convener of the cross-party group on sport. It is probably one of the most active cross-party groups in the Parliament, and it regularly hosts stimulating speakers and discussions. It also gives us the opportunity to get but a small glimpse of the variety of sport that is available the length and breadth of Scotland, and the tremendous work that is done by volunteers in their own time. Those people want to make a difference and are in love with the concept of sport as described by Michael Matheson, and they want to do their best for young people throughout the country. Margo MacDonald, ably supported by her staff, is doing a tremendous job in stimulating a much-needed debate on the subject. I know that the people who participate in that group value the opportunity to come to the Parliament and present their case. James Kelly and Michael Matheson have outlined the difference that sport can make. It is taken as read that sport can make a huge difference to the health and wellbeing not only of young people, but of everyone in the country. It sometimes depresses me when I regularly go on holiday to France to see the type of sports facilities that are available in small towns and villages there, and which are often denied to young people in our communities. If we want people to participate in a healthy lifestyle, we must make it easy for them. We seem to be making it hard for people to participate in sport. That is not a political comment on any one Administration; it has been happening for generations. The facilities are not there and the money is not there to support coaching and development. If we are serious, we need—as James Kelly has said—to make the investment. We also need to appreciate, as Michael Matheson mentioned, the difference that sport can make in reducing antisocial behaviour and crime. When people are engaged in positive activities and a positive lifestyle, they are less likely to turn to nefarious activities that damage themselves and the wider community. I fundamentally believe—and I feel angry about this as an ex-teacher—that we do not pay sufficient attention to the contribution that sport can make to improving the educational opportunities and achievements of our young people, both in our schools and when they leave school to develop their careers. There is no doubt that those who participate in sporting activities go  on to be better citizens and have a better chance to make something of their lives. We are not being asked to do a huge amount today in respect of what James Kelly has outlined in the debate and the pledge that we are being asked to sign. That should be taken as a given. The more fundamental issue for all of us who have influence in society is what we can do to encourage everyone, collectively, to take sport more seriously. A relatively small short-term investment will have huge returns if we are prepared to make that commitment.

Stevie Chalmers's winning goal.

I will not talk about the detail of what the Public Audit Committee will consider if and when the First Minister comes, but I will comment on the process. In my role as convener of the committee, I have written to the First Minister—[ Interruption .]

I will come to the question, if members will please allow me to frame it. I have written to the First Minister to indicate that it will be for the committee to decide when witnesses appear and to remind him of the powers that are available to the committee to compel witnesses. Does the First Minister accept that the committee has the right to make its own decisions?

I note what the cabinet secretary says, but the point that I was driving at is that many people come to the same conclusion—a degree—by different routes, such as through our FE colleges. Christopher Harvie also talked about the contribution of part-time degrees and other ways of achieving the same end result.

Ken Macintosh was right to point to the dithering of the present Administration and the chaos that that is bringing to Scottish universities. As members have said, it is right that we recognise the contribution that our universities make. We also need to recognise that we need to invest in order to deliver the best-quality education—not just for the students who attend universities but for the secure future of our society. It is right that we take this opportunity to re-examine fundamentally the role and function of our universities. It is a scandal that many bright young people in this country from poorer backgrounds are still denied opportunities to attend university in Scotland: as Murdo Fraser and others pointed out, Scotland has the worst record in the United Kingdom for widening access to universities. We need to consider how we can ensure that equity and fairness underpin our approach to higher education, and to commit ourselves to more and better financial support for less well-off students. However, we also need to recognise that, in the current financial climate, hard decisions about funding will need to be made. It is no good for politicians of any party to try to out-promise people as the SNP did in 2007, when it made false promises that were there to be broken. That leads to cynicism and apathy among electors. When we talk about hard decisions about funding, we need to seek a fair and sensible system that sees students making a modest contribution. As other members have mentioned, previously we had a system under which students made a modest contribution once they had started earning, and then only for a limited period. Regrettably, the SNP decided to scrap that system, which still has much to commend it to those who are looking at the future of Scottish education. I hope that it will be one of the options that is considered. I have a personal preference for a system that involves students contributing for a limited period, rather than through a lifetime increase in income tax that would financially penalise teachers and other relatively low-paid workers but take no additional contribution from millionaires who make their money without the benefit of a university education.

That is an issue for another day and a more specific debate, but such options have much to commend them. Unlike many of my colleagues in the chamber, I think that there needs to be a debate about the number of students who attend university. Boasting about who will have the most students at university should not be a test of political virility. It ignores the fact that just over 20 per cent of higher education students study in the college sector. Why are universities paid more than colleges of further education, often for providing the same courses? As a country, we need to address our future skills requirements and to consider what institutions are best placed to do that. We ignore at our peril the critical role that our excellent FE colleges can play and the flexibility that they offer in getting students into jobs. That issue must be part of any sensible debate. There needs to be a debate about the four-year degree. I accept some of the cabinet secretary's warnings, but Alex Johnstone put the issue in a better context. We need to look at the structure of the academic year and at how the exam system in our schools prepares people for university. Simply saying that we will not touch the four-year degree is not the best way forward. We need to consider where the four-year degree—or any degree—fits into our broader education system. Liz Smith raised the issue of enhancing autonomy. I agree that there should be autonomy in relation to academic freedom, but we need to question the lack of accountability in our universities and the way in which they use—and abuse—valuable public resources. University principals are accountable only to university courts. Is it a coincidence that, right across our universities, the courts have decided to increase substantially the salaries and perks of our university principals? Most are earning around £250,000 plus perks, at a time when they are holding down staff pay, increasing workloads and making staff redundant. It is time for the cabinet secretary to take action to end the excesses and abuses in too many of our universities. That display of greed contrasts with the hardship faced by students and the stresses faced by staff.

Will Bob Doris take an intervention?

I understand perfectly what the member says about autonomy and the need for universities to have academic freedom, but when we look at the excessive pay awards that university principals have been awarded by their courts—awards that seem to have moved in tandem—taking them almost to £250,000 per year and with excessive perks as well—

Does she not agree that a greater degree of accountability is required of our universities?

Jackie Baillie is to be commended for allowing the Parliament the opportunity to put on record our support for the see me campaign and to raise some of our worries about on-going issues around mental health in Scotland. In a way, the debate shows up one of the weaknesses of the Parliament—consider when we are debating it and the number of MSPs involved. This comment is not directed at any one party, but is it beyond our collective wit to take part of the Government's time for its debates to address issues such as this, rather than some of the nonsense that we debate to very little purpose? If we did that, members such as Anne McLaughlin would be able to put on record what I thought was a very human and a very pertinent contribution about the issues surrounding mental health. It is a shame that we do not accord issues such as this more status in the Parliament; we should not leave them to members' business debates at the tail end of the day. Other members have eloquently highlighted the fact that mental health problems do not affect just a small number of people in the community—they can affect anyone, irrespective of social background, status or economic circumstances. Probably all of us have friends or family who have suffered mental health problems. We have probably struggled to cope, frankly, with what it has meant. It manifests itself in different ways. Suddenly, the person behaves differently. That can be stressful. We do not know whether to distance ourselves or get closer—many of us just do not know how to cope and how to respond. That in turn makes the person involved feel more awkward and can drive them into further isolation. It is heartbreaking to see someone going through severe mental health problems. Dealing with constituents asking for help, and perhaps complaining about doctors, can be heartbreaking. One constituent spoke to me about their son. They spoke about their frustration: they wanted to talk to the doctor but the doctor—understandably—cited issues of confidentiality. Their son was an adult, and there were things about the son's illness that the doctor could not disclose. That illness sometimes manifested itself in aggressive and violent behaviour. My constituent was at their wit's end trying to get the help and support they needed to assist their son. Help would kick in only when their son was arrested, but it should not have been necessary to get to that point—earlier intervention could have made a difference. Mental health still poses major problems and challenges for us. Antidepressants have been mentioned. The Public Audit Committee recently commented on the prescribing of antidepressants, which is  inconsistent across the country. That is something we should reflect on. We should see what more can be done either to avoid antidepressants being prescribed inappropriately or to support people to come off them when that is the right thing, rather than just leaving people on antidepressants because it is easier for society to cope with people if they are being medicated. There are some good organisations in the community. I put on record some of the commendable work that happens in my area and across Scotland. Specifically, I can mention the Renfrewshire Association for Mental Health, which is a first-class organisation that does a lot of good work. It is involved in the Scottish mental health arts and film festival across Renfrewshire during the month of October, when some imaginative and exciting events are held. The association has produced a directory of mental health services in Renfrewshire. The festival includes a see me photography competition. RAMH is branching out its work across the Clyde into Jackie Baillie's area—it is developing youth counselling services in schools in West Dunbartonshire. Last year, that service supported 204 young people in secondary schools. RAMH received a near-perfect score from a recent inspection by the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care. There are good things happening. The worry that RAMH and others have is that the funding situation is beginning to impact severely on the work of voluntary organisations. We could face real problems if organisations such as RAMH suffer because of a lack of funding. We need to support the very commendable work that the voluntary sector in Scotland is doing in this regard.

To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on the United Kingdom Government's approach to the reform of housing benefit. (S3O-11417)

I thank the minister for that very clear statement. I share his concerns. It is worrying to listen to some of the comments being made by the Deputy Prime Minister, Nick Clegg, about people who live in poverty and people living on benefits. The more that all of us in this chamber can do to dissuade the UK Government from its approach, the better. Many of my constituents are not council tenants but private tenants who rely on housing benefit to pay their rent. Do the minister and his colleagues see the provision of housing benefit to private tenants as merely a way of propping up landlords' private income?

Earlier, Bill Kidd said that the debate is important. In fact, it is largely pointless. What we have here is a report commissioned by Scottish ministers to make suggestions about what might happen and how we might manage our finances, but Scottish ministers have no opinion whatsoever about the conclusions and recommendations in that report. That makes me ask what the point was of commissioning the report in the first place if ministers will not come back to the Parliament and tell us their opinion of the independent budget review group's suggestions. That means that we are discussing nothing today, we will come to no conclusion, we are no further forward, and, apparently, we will have to wait until November when the budget is produced. Given that, the cabinet secretary and others should have said that the debate should be put back until then. However, the reality is that ministers already know the consequences of what is in the report. They have the information to hand, and their own chief economic adviser has already given them an indication of what will be involved. I will come back to that point in a moment or two. It is important to put the context of this debate into perspective. Yes, there is a world-wide recession caused by irresponsible banks and financial institutions, but we should remember that since the Parliament was created 10 years ago, Scotland has seen unprecedented increases in public expenditure. We have had more money to spend than any other generation of politicians has ever had. Audit Scotland indicated that there has been on average 5 per cent real-terms annual growth since devolution. Indeed, this year alone, an additional £1 billion of expenditure was available to the cabinet secretary and his colleagues. We know, therefore, that the Government has had money to spend, and that does not even take into account the £1.5 billion that was left in reserves for the current Administration when it came to power. At the same time as that unprecedented growth in public expenditure, the Government has managed to cut services the length and breadth of Scotland. On numerous occasions, Jackie Baillie has articulated the cuts in the number of doctors and nurses that the health service faces. Wendy Alexander, Trish Godman and I have outlined the cuts in Renfrewshire in teacher numbers, delegated school budgets and social work expenditure and services at a time of unprecedented financial growth in the Government's budgets.  George Foulkes was right to pose a question about blindly and glibly taking at face value what the Conservatives, supported by the members of the millionaire clique of Liberal Democrats who now control the top echelons of their party and who give cover to the Conservatives, are saying. We should not accept at face value that there is no alternative to what they propose. For the debate to have had any point, the cabinet secretary should have advanced a programme of action so that we could stand shoulder to shoulder and argue that there is an alternative to what is proposed. He should have said that, along with all the social agencies in Scotland, including the trade unions, we will articulate a different approach because we do not want to see severe cuts that put this country into a double-dip recession and result in costly rising unemployment. He should have said that there is something else that can be done but, unfortunately, he and his colleagues have been silent, because not only is there an election coming up next year, but he needs to keep his own troops on side with talk of independence, independence, independence at every opportunity, even though we know that Alex Salmond and his cabinet secretaries have no intention of delivering what his back benchers want in that regard. To return to the position that faces us, the Government's chief economic adviser has suggested a ballpark figure of around £3.7 billion, which equates to an average cut of 3.3 per cent over each of the next four years. Why have we had no detail on what the cabinet secretary and his colleagues have got to say about capital expenditure? We already know from Audit Scotland that somewhere in the region of £4 billion probably needs to be spent on the public sector estate, never mind any future demands. The maintenance backlog on council property amounts to about £1.4 billion, and we need to spend £1.7 billion on roads, £700 million on the university estate backlog, £500 million on the NHS estate backlog and £2.7 billion on sports facilities. It will take 20 years to catch up on school improvements because of the present Administration's dereliction of duty on the new school building programme. That is the scale of what confronts us, but today we have heard nothing about how the SNP intends to address it. We do not know what its view is on pay and pensions, and we have heard little of what it has to say on efficiency savings. The Government has skirted over the issue of universality—

When it comes to structures—although I appreciate some of what Tricia Marwick said about police and fire services—again there  has been silence. One or two things have been ruled out, but nothing has been said about the key decisions that need to be made. There has been a dereliction of duty by ministers who are charged with looking after the best interests of this country, and it is shameful.

I do not think that anyone can adequately explain the joy that a parent or grandparent feels at the birth of a child, but one of the things that comes with that joy is the fear of what else might happen. I thank Gil Paterson for giving us the opportunity to record our appreciation for the work of the Scottish Cot Death Trust. That fear of what could happen overlays far too many families. David Stewart outlined very well the sheer human emotion of losing a child. He talked about the personal support that comes from so many, but also expressed the fear and horror of having to deal with a system while grieving for a child who was so eagerly anticipated. From speaking to people who have had a sudden death in the family, I know that they often blame themselves somehow, and think that they did something that contributed to the death, particularly of an infant. They wonder whether they could have done something that would have prevented it. The work of the Scottish Cot Death Trust should and can help to assure people that these things happen, as members have said, and that they should not feel any guilt or remorse that they somehow contributed to what was an unexplained death. The trust has done tremendous work on research and education. I remember that, when my children were born, we had all the debates about whether we should lie them on their front or put them on their back. It is good that we now have some kind of scientific basis for saying to parents how they should proceed. However, we should not underestimate the contribution that the trust makes in supporting bereaved families. The home-visiting service provides that bit of comfort and sympathy that can come from someone who knows a bit about what has happened, but who is not immediately attached to the family. Counselling is often underestimated. We cannot know how people will react to an unexplained death and what they might do as a result but, too often, we leave people to their own devices to grieve and to mourn and to have to suffer the consequences without their having someone there to help them through a difficult period. The contributions of the trust's befriending service, family days and next infant support programme are inestimable. We can imagine that a person who has just been through the trauma of losing a child and who has another one on the way will wonder whether it will happen again and whether the death happened because of something that they did. The trust has done tremendous work to help to put the issues in context and, more important, to give that human and personal touch and support  that can so often make the difference to bereaved families. It has been a tremendous record of achievement in 25 years. Whatever little we can do to support it should be taken as a given. I hope that the trust continues to develop. Although it is fantastic that the number of sudden unexplained deaths has reduced, each one that still happens is a tragedy for that family and leaves a family looking for support. I thank everyone who has done so much in the past 25 years.

Can the member be quite clear that if, after the next election, his party does not have a majority in Parliament—I am not talking about whether or not it is the largest party but whether it has a majority—that will mean that the people of Scotland have rejected the SNP's view?

In his opening statement, the First Minister referred to a couple of distinguished Scots who have now died. One distinguished Scot who is now dead whom he  reminded me of in his contribution is Chic Murray—although without the self-effacing humour—because underlying much of what the First Minister had to say, I think, was a tongue stuck firmly in his cheek. How otherwise can we explain how a person in his position could glibly pass away some of the significant promises that were made but have failed to be delivered on? There are things in the First Minister's statement and the proposed legislative programme that, like others, I support. It is commendable that there are 40,000 training places including 20,000 modern apprenticeships, but the problem is that there are young Scots today who are facing problems that the First Minister will not address or help with. I have written to him about a number of my constituents, including Stewart Donaghey—a young Scot who cannot find a place anywhere to enable him to finish his apprenticeship. We should be making a commitment to young Scots such as him that we will enable them, at the very least, to finish their apprenticeships. People such as that young man are the very people we need to build future prosperity in this country. I welcome the support that is given to encourage job creation and I welcome any jobs that come to the areas that I represent, including the 700 jobs that the First Minister mentioned as coming to Hewlett-Packard in Erskine, in the constituency that Trish Godman represents. However, I have to ask a question. If the company cut 700 jobs last year, how can we justify giving it £7 million to help it to create 700 jobs just one year later? At a time of economic constraint, we have to look closely at whether public resources are being used wisely or whether they are just propping up the profit-and-loss accounts of multinational companies. Indeed, we should ask further questions. It has been put to me that the £7 million that the company is receiving for the 700 so-called new jobs is for jobs that have been brought from elsewhere in Scotland, which have been shed by other companies. I want to know whether there is any truth in that claim. There are other things in the statement that I agree with. I agree with the private rented housing bill, although one thing that worries me in relation to bad behaviour by the tenants of private landlords is that, all too often, the SNP Government is turning a blind eye to the fact that councils and other public agencies such as the police are not using the full range of powers that they have been given to protect decent people in decent communities. Sometimes, more needs to be done. I hope that the First Minister's housing minister will meet me to discuss the case of Jean Gallagher of 22 Tower Road in Johnstone, whose life has been plagued by rogue private landlords who use and manipulate the current legislation thereby causing chaos and mayhem for decent  people who are trying to get on with their lives. I hope that the bill will be an opportunity to deal effectively with a problem that exists throughout Scotland. One of the headings in the statement is about a smarter Scotland. Well, we heard the litany of broken promises that the SNP made before the election in 2007, which continued after it. On 5 December 2007, in a statement to the Parliament on early years, Fiona Hyslop said: "In the budget, we announced that the entitlement will increase further, to 570 hours a year, from August 2010."— [ Official Report , 5 December 2007; c 4070.]  Lo and behold, another broken promise, another commitment ditched. This time, it is because the Government is giving councils more freedom to do what they want. That is not what Fiona Hyslop said in the chamber at the time and it is not what was promised. People should not hold their breath for the Government to deliver its commitment to a 50 per cent increase in the level of early years entitlement by 2011. Over the past few years, the Administration has made but not delivered a litany of major promises. It has broken them, and cynically at that. The First Minister spoke about people "gagging" to vote for a referendum bill. The only people who were gagging to vote for such a bill were his back benchers. I am not one of those people who believed that the First Minister would introduce a referendum bill. I have spoken in private to SNP members who told me that the First Minister had no intention of doing it and that all that he was doing was buying off pressure from his back benchers. He was trying to keep his back benchers onside while doing what he wants to do, which is to stay in office and in power. This is a First Minister whose interest is himself and his pursuit of power. Frankly, the poor, misguided cynics on the First Minister's benches who believe in independence will never see their cause progressed in any way by this First Minister.

I regret the comments from both the cabinet secretary and Maureen Watt about party politics, because, as far as I can hear, not only today but during the course of the debate, the only people who have tried to introduce party politics into the debate have been members of the SNP, who have consistently refused to listen to and talk and work with members of other parties. Indeed, for the past two years, I and others have called for a consensual approach and joint party working to try to come up with a solution to the problem. However, the minister and the cabinet secretary have refused to meet and work with the other parties to bring anything constructive forward.

The cabinet secretary may well have met people individually. The point that I have made consistently for the past two years is that there should have been a cross-party initiative or working group to meet with experts to come up with something sustainable. I commend ministers for their initiative in stimulating an alcohol debate but, unfortunately, they have refused to engage constructively with others in the Parliament, which I regret. As others have said, the extent of our problem with alcohol is a matter of record. We now have one of the highest cirrhosis rates in western Europe—it is much higher than the rate in England. Over the past 30 years, UK cirrhosis mortality has risen by over 450 per cent across the population, with a 52 per cent increase in alcoholic liver disease between 1998 and 2002. In Scotland, chronic liver disease mortality more than doubled between 1982 and 2008. No one can doubt the need for action. Indeed, I agree with Maureen Watt's point about the alcohol-related problems for our NHS and the  impact that they have on others. The BMA has said that, in 2008-09, there were 41,922 alcohol-related discharges from general hospitals in Scotland. I know of the problem from personal experience because I remember that when my elderly father—God rest him—fell and broke his hip on Christmas eve, he had to wait nearly three hours for an ambulance. The ambulance staff were apologetic about the length of time that it had taken, which was because of the drunkenness and mayhem that they had had to deal with on Christmas eve. That is the human consequence of the problems that we face. We face a growing impact, too, from women drinking to excess, and Richard Baker and others have spoken about the law and order problems that excess alcohol consumption causes. In that regard, I and some of my colleagues in the west of Scotland met the chief constable of Strathclyde this week and heard about the 14 murders that were alcohol related. The chief constable was right to point out the mayhem in towns and cities across Scotland every Friday and Saturday night, which we need to address. We need to have a view in this country that that kind of public drunkenness is just unacceptable and will be dealt with. We need to stop being frivolous and making jokes about drunkenness being okay and something to aspire to. We also need action to remove licences where that is appropriate. We need more rigorous testing of alcohol sales, as Richard Simpson, Richard Baker and others have said, to ensure that young people do not have access to alcohol. I support, too, Richard Baker's call for the problem of caffeine-based alcohol drinks to be addressed, because that is a chronic problem. I agree with the concept of the polluter paying and with social responsibility payments. However, the mayhem on the streets is not necessarily caused by pubs and other small establishments. Many young people drink before they go out. Why should the publicans pay for the problems that are caused by cheap alcohol that is sold by supermarkets? Indeed, if we are talking about the polluter, surely the polluter is the intelligent drunk person with money in their pocket or purse whose drunkenness and loutish behaviour costs the rest of society dearly. They are the people who need to be challenged and penalised for the pollution that they cause. We need more action against public drunkenness and bad behaviour. I agree that the cost of the alcohol that is sold in supermarkets is an issue. Michael Matheson posed the point that stopping discounting would surely just put more money in the supermarkets' pockets. Well, the way I understand marketing to work is that stopping discounting reduces sales, reducing sales reduces revenue and reducing revenue reduces profits, so stopping discounting does not have the impact that he and the cabinet  secretary tried to suggest. I am also opposed to the idea of giving local authorities the ability to vary the age at which alcohol can be purchased from off-sales within their areas. In my part of Renfrewshire, would it be sensible to say that young people could buy alcohol in Johnstone but not in Linwood? What would that mean in terms of young people buying drink in other communities? Even if the legal age for off-sales was allowed to be varied between different local authorities, would it be sensible that young people could buy alcohol in Penilee, which is in Glasgow, but not in Ralston, which is in Renfrewshire? What would be the effect in places that lie on the borders between two local authority areas? Those sorts of inconsistencies would arise. Although others have highlighted the issues with minimum pricing, one issue that has not been addressed in detail is the fact that not only would there be an increase in cross-border and internet sales but, in many communities, the criminal fraternity would then be able to sell cheap alcohol along with tobacco and drugs out of white vans. We should not underestimate the impact of that. I hope that there is still time for us to come together as a Parliament and have a sensible debate on alcohol. I commend the cabinet secretary and her colleagues for what they have done so far, but it is time for them to face up to the fact that they should listen to the will of Parliament.

I start by commending Murdo Fraser for his sterling defence of SNP policy. It is clear that that alliance is alive and well. It certainly augurs well for their political future, although whether it does anything for Murdo remains to be seen. Those of us who have been members since the early years of the Parliament will recall the numerous complaints that we received in our constituency postbags and at our surgeries about health-related problems. People were concerned about the length of time they had to wait for an appointment to see medical staff and about the quality of care and facilities. Those complaints justified the very real investment in the health service that the Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition Executive made to address those problems. Was the investment justified? It was. Did it work? I think that it did. If members think of the inquiries that we receive from our constituents, I suspect that most of us would say—or would have said until recently—that there has been a significant fall in the number of health-related complaints. That is not so say that such complaints have been eliminated completely or that we will not receive individual complaints about things that cannot be justified, but the general picture is that the volume of such complaints has reduced. However, like many other MSPs, I am beginning to see a recurrence of complaints about waiting times, waiting lists and the level of service and other general concerns about the health service.  Murdo Fraser was right to say that we should measure outcomes and not look only at inputs. Ian McKee ably identified where progress can be made and has been made in the health service over many years. The problem is not that new techniques and methods of health service delivery are resulting in staff no longer being required; it is that advances mean that conditions can now be addressed that previously could not be addressed. Despite the progress that Ian McKee described, demand for our health service has not reduced. People now, rightly, have a higher expectation that the health service can meet their needs and demands. That is what we have to address. We will always be faced with the perennial problem of whether we should have a bottomless health budget that allows any medical condition to be treated, irrespective of the cost. That is a philosophical and ethical debate and it will, no doubt, continue for many years. Yes, it is right for us to look at outcomes and not only at maintaining health service jobs, but the demands on the health service are sufficient to justify maintaining the number of medical staff at existing levels. Anne McLaughlin said that it is wrong to spread unnecessary fear and alarm among staff about their jobs, but I think that she missed a fundamental point about the concerns of health service staff. By and large, health service staff are dedicated to the health service—they are dedicated to their patients and want the best for them. When health service staff express fear and concern, they are talking not only about their own jobs but about the impact that colleagues' job losses have on their ability to deliver the service that they believe they should deliver for patients. Staff are concerned. I am sure that Anne McLaughlin has heard the same comments from medical staff that I have heard. People are worried about their ability to do their job if the cuts impact in the way that is being suggested. As Ross Finnie rightly said, the debate should not be about only budgets and figures. He said that there was barely a reference to patients in the motion but, understandably, any debate on the NHS is predicated on the amount of money that is available and the number of staff who are required to do the work of our health service. However, Ross Finnie was right in saying that it is the human story that is important in a debate such as this. I will conclude by raising some of the complaints that I am now hearing in increasing number in my constituency work—and I have no doubt that the situation is replicated elsewhere. All the complaints that I will raise relate to podiatry services, which can at times be dismissed as not being vital but which are critical to the quality of life of many people in our communities, particular the elderly. The first case is that of an elderly  gentleman who had received chiropody treatment at the Royal Alexandria hospital in Paisley. Recently, he had need to contact the podiatry service again but, when he did so, he was told that he would have to wait at least six weeks for an appointment. After telling staff that the nature of his problem meant that he could not wait that length of time, he was told, "You will have to go private then." Is that the answer that we now want to give to elderly people if they can no longer get the service to which they had been accustomed—just go private? Ministers need to reflect on that. I was contacted by another constituent with diabetes. We all know the significance of the problem that diabetes causes and will continue to cause in Scotland. My constituent used to have his toenails cut every three months, as his mobility was made difficult if the nails were left to curl. He has not had a home visit since October of last year. His carer has tried time and again to make an appointment for him, but she was told, "Well, you can just cut his nails." Are we trying to shift the responsibility on to carers?

No, thanks. The third and final example involves a woman whose mobility was restricted as the result of a broken ankle. She contacted the podiatry service in Paisley only to be told that no home visits were available and given no appointment for a later date. That is the human impact that the cuts are having even before we start to see the consequences of a loss in staff numbers. That is something that the Parliament needs to address.

Does Mr Pringle believe that the 2005 act does more than simply duplicate common law?

Can Robert Brown explain to members the difference between an assault on a nurse who works in the community and an assault on a social worker who is trying to take a child into care following allegations of child abuse? What would be the difference in terms of the significance of their employment?

Clearly, the detailed argument on the questions that the member raises can take place in the Parliament at a later stage. The member talked about face-to-face contact and asked whether call-centre workers would be covered. He might have more experience of call-centre working than I do, but I have a certain basic understanding of what happens in a call centre and I know that it is not necessarily face to face. Many bus drivers do not work in the public sector. They work for private companies, as do  train drivers. By definition, workers in the private sector are also covered.

I accept what the cabinet secretary said. The bill that I propose to introduce will not provide for longer sentences than the ones that he outlined. However, the same logic applies to nurses, doctors, midwives and others who are assaulted in the course of their duties because, if assaults are sufficiently serious, the perpetrators can be given the long sentences that the cabinet secretary mentioned. The logic of my bill will be no different from the logic that currently applies.

It is hard to imagine that in 21st century Scotland workers are still being assaulted simply for doing their job. Unlike MSPs who, in this Parliament building, have security measures built in almost at every step, the ordinary worker is often left vulnerable to attack and assault. Of course, the recent stabbing of Stephen Timms MP is a reminder that, outside the confines of Parliament, politicians can also be vulnerable. I recognise that some people in the legal profession would say that the law already takes seriously the issue of assault. Equally, however, I point to the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005, which all parties in the Parliament, except the Conservatives, supported, because legislation was required. The act recognised that something more than the existing law was worthy of support to demonstrate to the violent minority that attacks on emergency workers are unacceptable. It also demonstrated to emergency workers that members of the Parliament were prepared to act to give vulnerable workers that bit extra in legal protection. We were told at the time that the 2005 act was not necessary and yet, by the second year of its existence, 200 charges were proved under it in Scottish courts. If further legislation was not necessary or useful, why were those cases taken to court under that legislation?

No. It is still the case that prosecutions can be made under the common law. The act is an addition, which is there to be considered as appropriate. I know that the Liberal Democrats accepted that argument and voted for the act at the time.  The new Administration, which was elected in 2007, reflected on the need for such legislation to protect workers who serve the public. The Official Report of the Justice Committee meeting of 15 January 2008 shows that Shona Robison said: "Okay. Enough time has passed since the legislation came into force to allow us to consider its success and the potential benefits of extending its scope to cover other staff. That is an important point. I will share some information on the success that has been achieved so far. According to the most recent figures, 1,256 charges have been laid under the 2005 act, of which 1,008 have led to prosecution and, thus far, 594 convictions. A further 218 cases are on-going. Seventy-five per cent of cases that have led to prosecution have resulted in convictions, which is a very high number indeed. I suggest that that shows the success of the act."—[ Official Report, Justice Committee , 15 January 2008; c 469.] As a result of that analysis, ministers extended the 2005 act. They decided to cover other health workers who work in the community, not necessarily always in emergency circumstances. I applaud ministers for taking that decision not to rely on the common law but to use the additional strength that is delivered by the act. Ministers were right at that point to reject the arguments of those who said that existing legislation was enough and that no new powers were needed. I turn to other workers who serve the public and in doing so render themselves vulnerable to assault. Are they any less worthy of our support? Do the services that they provide mean that they deserve any less protection from the law than those who are covered by the 2005 act? When a bus driver or a train driver is assaulted, the passengers are put at risk. When services are withdrawn because of violent incidents, whole communities are affected. Those who rely on public transport can be left isolated and vulnerable as a result. When a postal worker is assaulted and the mail is stolen, scattered or not delivered, there can be significant implications. Families who rely on authorisation for financial payments can be left struggling, businesses can be affected and deadlines can be missed. When a shop worker has to bear the brunt of an enraged customer's anger, that worker often has no back-up or support readily available. If local stores have to close for security reasons, as has happened, whole communities bear the brunt as a consequence. Often, it is poorer communities and more vulnerable people who are worst affected, because they have no alternatives. If a shop worker does the right thing and carries out the will of the Parliament in relation to alcohol or tobacco sales, should they not expect the Parliament's support if they are assaulted as a result?  Are child care workers, elderly care workers and social workers any less important than the nurses or midwives who work in the community? It is right to give added protection to a nurse who serves patients in the community, but why not give protection to the child care worker who deals with sensitive cases of child abuse allegations or those who are there to help the frail elderly and are assaulted by whomsoever when doing so? Should they not be given that added legal backing if they are assaulted when carrying out their duties? The number of assaults against many of those workers is staggeringly high. In 2007-08, the total number of physical assaults against public sector workers was 32,263. That number included 9,121 assaults on local government workers, which represents an increase of 3,000 on the previous year's figures. In 2007, the British retail crime survey report detailed a 50 per cent increase in physical assaults against shop workers compared to 2006. A Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers survey showed that nearly a third of shops reported at least one physical assault against staff in 2007. Contrast that with the simultaneous reduction in the number of assaults perpetrated against health workers. According to figures produced by Unison in 2007-08, the number of assaults on health workers fell by more than 1,000 from the previous year. It could be suggested that the decline can be attributed to the threat of tougher penalties contained in the 2005 act. The increase in the number of convictions under that act, which I mentioned earlier, has underpinned the tough message that has arguably led to the reductions in assaults. The success of the act has been recognised not only by ministers of the present Administration but by the trade union movement. The Scottish Trades Union Congress has spoken out clearly about the need for further legislation. I am grateful for the support received from a range of unions: Unite, which represents bus drivers; the Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen, which represents train drivers but also speaks up for other staff in the train industry and for the travelling public; USDAW, which has been relentless in its campaign for freedom from fear for shop workers and is determined to protect its members; the Communication Workers Union, which worries about postal workers being assaulted in the course of their duties; Unison, which represents care workers, who often work in extremely isolated and vulnerable situations; and the Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians, the building workers union, whose members often have to carry out emergency repairs and can be assaulted as a result. The unions are determined to do what is right for their members, which is why many union members  have taken the opportunity to come to the Scottish Parliament today to demonstrate their support for more legislation. We sometimes get hung up on statistics, which do not tell the human side of the story. When union officials and shop stewards speak to me about the need for legislation to protect workers, they are talking about protecting ordinary people who have a sense of duty to those whom they serve, and who are not asking for much. A member of USDAW, who works in a store in Portobello, approached someone whom they suspected of shoplifting but never got a chance to speak to the person before being knocked to the ground and rendered unconscious. The worker, who had simply been doing their job, suffered concussion and was off work as a result. Bus drivers have been assaulted while trying to protect passengers from violent and aggressive passengers. The drivers were trying to protect not the bus or their cash but members of the travelling public. Do such people not deserve additional support? Train drivers and other railway staff constantly have to worry about being approached as they travel through the train. They sometimes have to step in to protect passengers, and there have been a number of cases in which railway staff were assaulted as they sought to protect other people. Postal workers have been knocked down simply because a person was enraged by the non-arrival of a letter. That is unacceptable. Care workers have to go into frightening situations in which they must deal with people who are enraged by decisions that they have taken. They, too, deserve our support. There is a compelling imperative to apply the logic of the Parliament's decisions equally and fairly. The Parliament decided that workers who serve the public deserve a level of protection over and above the law as it was in 2005, which is why it passed the 2005 act, whose success has been acknowledged by Shona Robison and which was subsequently extended by ministers. The time is right to draw on the benefit of our experience and take the next step, by ensuring that all workers who are assaulted while they are serving the public receive the same level of support as we give to emergency workers. That is the least that we can do for the people who work to serve us. I move, That the Parliament believes that further measures need to be taken to deter violence against shop workers and other workers delivering a service to the public; notes with concern the finding of the Scottish Crime and Justice Survey 2008-09 that, of those adults who had jobs involving contact with the general public, 35% had experienced either verbal abuse or physical abuse; recognises that  there has been a 78% increase in violence and abuse against Scottish shop workers over the last three years, according to Retailers Against Crime; welcomes the Freedom from Fear campaign organised by the Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers (USDAW), which seeks to make shops and shopping areas safer for staff and customers; acknowledges the efforts of the trade union movement as a whole to highlight the continuing problems of violence for those workers with direct contact with the public; recognises that there have been year-on-year increases in prosecutions under the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005, and believes that the Parliament and the Scottish Government should take further action to ensure that workers can carry out their duties without facing violence or intimidation.

Angela Constance is to be commended for giving the Parliament the opportunity to debate an issue that has been overlooked for far too long. I do not have any direct experience of the negative side—of the criminal implications or of breakdown, which often face people who come from a veterans or services background—but I do have experience of the positive things that can be done to help people who have come through those circumstances. Angela Constance referred to Erskine. I grew up in the grounds of what was then termed Erskine hospital. My father was a disabled ex-serviceman and obtained one of the cottages there. I lived in what I now realise was a wonderful environment. It was a close-knit community and a very supportive environment, where families flourished and were allowed to get on with their lives. I saw some positive signs in Erskine hospital—it would now be regarded as a care home—concerning people whose family relationships had broken down. Sometimes people turned to taking a good drink, as it was described at the time—excessive alcohol consumption—and they ended up coming into Erskine hospital. They were supported and helped there. I saw things that I did not understand as a child—the horrors that wars cause. My father spent nearly four years in a Japanese prisoner of war camp. When I was younger, he frequently suffered from malaria, and he relived all the horrors that he had experienced, through nightmares. In those days, there was no talk of post-traumatic stress or psychological support for those who had been through horrendous situations. However, my father benefited from a loving and supportive family and a close-knit community. In those days, we lived in a totally different world. Even those who were not fortunate enough to benefit from places such as Erskine generally  lived in communities where the family was still strong and important, where the community was close and tight knit, and where people looked after their own. Unfortunately, that is often no longer the case. We lived at a time when, although drink might have been a problem, drugs were not, unlike today. Unfortunately, too many young ex-service personnel now succumb to problems with drugs. I saw the nightmare and stresses that war can cause, and I began to realise the implications for those who try to get on with their lives with no support. As other members have said, we are duty bound to consider our debt and our responsibility to those who have put so much on the line for us. The key to all this is not to deal with veterans when they get to prison; the key is early intervention to ensure that, when they come out of the armed forces—as Sarah Boyack and James Kelly said—a decent house is available for them, as well as social work and psychological support services. I commend ministers for taking a close interest in matters such as medical facilities. There is a problem that, fortunately, we are now recognising more and more. It pays us all in the long run to deal with such problems early, in a mature, conscientious fashion, not just from a financial perspective but because we owe it to those who have given so much for us.

A particular phrase was used in the motion, but that should not be taken as denigrating test purchasing. As a minister, I was fully behind the introduction of test purchasing: I promoted it, I welcome it and I believe that it has been used to good effect in many areas in Scotland. The points that I am trying to make tonight are that responsible shop workers should not carry the full responsibility and take the full brunt of the problems that are caused by someone who is under age managing to purchase alcohol, and that there should be a supporting strategy to prevent underage sales. The motion is not about stopping or replacing test purchasing; it is about having a broader strategy to tackle the problem.

Like many others, I take for granted the fact that there should be no abuse or violence at work. People think that should be the norm in a civilised society, but unfortunately that is still not the case for many workers across Scotland, particularly shop workers. Over the past few years, like many other members of the Scottish Parliament, I have received regular reports of violence against bus workers, train drivers, postal workers, social care staff and, of course, shop workers. Indeed, I have received such reports about many other workers in different occupations in Scotland. That is the main reason for my proposed workers (aggravated offences) Scotland bill. I am grateful to MSPs not only from the Labour Party but from other parties who have supported my proposal, and I look forward to taking the bill on to its next stage. I am also grateful for broad-based support from trade unions in not only highlighting the problems that their members experience but offering practical support in moving forward what is, for them, a very important bill. Tonight, I will focus on one issue: violence against and abuse of shop workers. In 2002,  USDAW, the shop workers union, launched its freedom from fear campaign to highlight the violence and abuse that shop workers throughout the United Kingdom face. Since then, USDAW has organised annual respect for shop workers events, including events in Scotland. I have been pleased to help to highlight the issue by hosting events here in the Scottish Parliament. One feature of the campaign is that events have secured support from MSPs from all political parties. I know that USDAW is grateful for that broad-based support. Unfortunately, the problem does not go away. I acknowledge that, since USDAW launched its campaign, there has been a decline in the number of reported incidents, but everything is relative. In 2009, there were still more than 13,000 physical attacks and hundreds of thousands of reported cases of regular verbal abuse across the United Kingdom. That is unacceptable—no worker should have to face such incidents in the course of their employment. I pay tribute to USDAW for the work that it has done in taking such a determined stance against a problem that is totally unacceptable. John Hannett, the general secretary of USDAW, has led from the front and put his union fully behind the campaign to make a difference. I thank David Williams, the political officer of USDAW, for the work that he has done. He has been a true friend to those in Scotland who have campaigned on the issue. John Scott may not share my view, but I wish David Williams well in his campaign to be elected as the next member of Parliament for Crewe and Nantwich and look forward to him being at Westminster. Here in Scotland, Lawrence Wason and Stewart Forrest have been vigorous in their work to promote awareness of the problem and to bring it to the attention of the wider public.

Margo MacDonald is right to mention some of the contributory factors. It would be foolish to suggest that alcohol and drug misuse is not a problem. Unfortunately, there are other issues that often lead to violence and abuse. I will come on to those. There are flashpoints during the year. Christmas time is particularly stressful and difficult for shop workers. Many people are desperate to spend money—where they still have it. Sometimes the social norms of politeness and good manners fall  by the wayside when people are harassed and looking to buy presents. Shop workers bear the brunt of that. They take abuse when someone is not able to get service as quickly as they expect, when an item is not in stock and for shoddy items that are produced by manufacturers on other continents. Shop workers are on the front line at such stressful times. Margo MacDonald mentioned alcohol. One of the most difficult problems that shop workers face relates to alcohol sales. USDAW is fully behind the measures that have been taken in that area over the years—not only in the Parliament and by ministers in different Administrations. All of us back demands for shop workers, shopkeepers and those who sell alcohol to act responsibly; there is no doubt that that should happen. However, we must also consider the fact that shop workers are in a particularly difficult situation. Often it is difficult to determine a person's age. I welcome the measures that many responsible retailers have taken on proof of identity, but those can cause difficulties. I was recently at a Morrisons store in my constituency, where I witnessed a shop worker asking someone to prove their age. The person got abusive and aggressive simply because they had been asked to prove their age. The shop worker was doing their job properly, but they faced abuse as a result. It is not right that shop workers have to take full responsibility if a mistake is made when alcohol is sold to someone who is underage. There has to be a strategy by retailers, the police, local authorities and others. Shop workers need to be protected. I have mentioned just some examples of the difficulties that shop workers face. Unfortunately, the issue persists, but we have a union that is prepared to support its members, and it is incumbent on us as elected representatives to ensure that the law, local authorities and responsible organisations also fully support them. No shop worker should have to face violence and abuse—it is about time that we put an end to that.

When I began to reflect on the debate, I started with the instinctive view that I would not be happy with anything that gave the state the "unfettered" right, as the cabinet secretary described it, to prosecute and persecute people. It is important that we build into our system safeguards that protect the individual from abuse by the state. It is not right that the police have the right, time and again, to come after someone simply because they cannot get the case right in the first place, nor is it right for prosecutors to come back time and again because they failed, for whatever reason, to get the verdict that they thought was right. Also after reflection, however, I concluded that it cannot be right for victims and their families to see someone who is palpably and clearly guilty get off scot free when they have, as Bill Aitken and others have suggested, admitted their guilt for whatever reason, or new evidence has emerged that demonstrates beyond all reasonable doubt that they should have been convicted of a serious offence. The balance should shift in favour of victims and their families—and, indeed, the public—so that when it can be clearly demonstrated that evidence now exists in the case of someone who, for whatever reason, was previously acquitted or found not guilty, it should be considered whether to prosecute that person again. Such an approach cannot be unfettered, as a number of members have suggested. It would not be right simply to have every possible case brought forward. I am not sure that I wish, in this debate, to go into the full list of circumstances that would justify that. Today, we should be debating whether it is right in principle to change the present practice. Then, through the process of consultation that has been outlined by the cabinet secretary, we should give ourselves and others the opportunity to reflect and consider how best the approach can be adopted carefully. We should proceed cautiously and carefully. The last thing that we wish to do is to rush headlong into addressing an injustice in such a way that creates another one in the process. If there is new evidence to demonstrate a case beyond all reasonable doubt—through improvements in DNA techniques, for instance—it should be considered. As I said, I do not wish to go through an exhaustive list of circumstances, but I instinctively agree with Stewart Maxwell that, where serious sexual offences have been committed against children, we cannot close our ears to the cries for justice. I do not think that the Liberal Democrats' proposal to restrict the policy to very specific circumstances is the right one.  We have long-established principles in this country that the law should not be retrospective, but the case has been made that, if someone has previously been convicted, then we have changed the law and the evidence is found to be there, there is an argument for looking at it. I hope that that will be considered sensitively in the consultation process. Publicity is a difficult issue. Trials can be tainted by publicity. The problem is that the publicity surrounding a first conviction, or rather the lack of a conviction, would almost demonstrate—if we consider the argument against the proposal—that no cases could ever be brought back before the courts. There will inevitably be publicity. Judges will have to consider that carefully, but they are experienced in doing so at present, and publicity in itself should not rule out the opportunity to hold another trial.

I agree with that point, but the same applies to the first trial. The judge must make it clear to the press and other parties that injudicious comments could prejudice a fair trial, so people should be very careful. Unfortunately, we now live in the kind of society where prurient and sensational headlines and stories appear, and, although they might well sell papers, they do not help the judicial system. The judge will have to take some responsibility for that.

I do not doubt that that is the case, but the same applies to all trials. Such is the scope of the internet that people can read comments that have been made elsewhere about trials taking place in this country. Indeed, if we were to take the argument to its logical conclusion, the scope of the internet would allow very few trials to proceed. Care needs to be taken, and I am sure that it will be. On the question of who should make the decision and how it should be made, I am attracted to the suggestion that the Lord Advocate should determine issues of serious significance and that a judge should make the final decision. My mind is open on the matter and I hope that more evidence on that will emerge as a result of the consultation.  I support the principles that the cabinet secretary outlined in what I thought was a measured speech. It is right that the Parliament takes steps to change something that I believe to be fundamentally wrong.

How many times over the years have we heard about good ideas, products and innovations that have been developed in Scotland but which have not, unfortunately, come to anything or have been taken on and developed by others elsewhere, who have then benefited from them? It is clear that we are discussing a product that has been designed, developed and delivered in Scotland and which can make a difference not only here but elsewhere. It would be a tragedy if we let that go for whatever reason—as a result of neglect, carelessness or wringing our hands because we think that there is nothing that we can do. Some of the debate is predicated on the question whether there is a need for investment in buses. Alison McInnes was right to talk about the significant investment that many major bus companies in this country are making. I pay tribute to them. I recently met representatives of Arriva in our area, who explained to me exactly what the company has been doing to develop local bus services. We need to recognise the exceptionally difficult climate in which bus operators are operating. Their margins have been cut, and passenger numbers in some areas are down because of the recession and changed employment patterns. If we are going to ensure the survival of those companies and their investment, it is incumbent on us to do something about that. Despite the investment by good bus companies, too many buses—certainly across Scotland's central belt—still leave a lot to be desired. We have buses that are not fit for purpose and that, frankly, verge on the dangerous, as well as buses that emit noxious gases at an unacceptably high level. Buses are often not just uncomfortable but unreliable. That is the issue that we should address if, as Charlie Gordon described, we are to have a bus industry and a bus service that are not  only fit for purpose but attractive, so that we bring passengers back on to the buses. Alexander Dennis Ltd produces a cutting-edge product. There is no doubt about the technology and the contribution that it can make. The cabinet secretary was absolutely right to pay tribute not just to the company and its management, but to the workforce for the sacrifices—I use that word advisedly—that it has made. It is a dedicated and skilled workforce that was determined to keep the product and to keep the jobs in the local community. I wonder whether the company would have survived without the sacrifice and commitment of the workforce. I pay tribute to the workers and to their trade union for everything that they have done to give the company an opportunity for the future. We should ask what we as a Parliament, with our appointed Government ministers, can do to make a difference. John Swinney said that it is a matter for local government. That is correct up to a point, in that it is a matter for local government if that is how we choose to play it. However, it can be a matter for the Parliament and its Government ministers if we and they choose to do something about it.

I acknowledge that but, in a sense, it proves my point that the matter is not just one for local government—Government ministers can do something. The question is whether what they have done is sufficient. However, I pay tribute to ministers for what has been done. One thing that can make a difference is a spend-to-save initiative, which I saw when I was leader of a council. By putting in money up front and encouraging expenditure by various departments, we ensured that they did something more efficiently and effectively and saved money. Some of the measures to which the cabinet secretary referred are in that direction. We can spend to save through Government initiatives that save jobs, reduce running costs and protect our environment. The question is whether we can unite around not only the motion but the principle of ensuring that Alexander Dennis Ltd and its dedicated workforce have a fighting chance for the future. We should and can do that, for the best.

I agree with much of what the cabinet secretary said this afternoon. Indeed, like most members in the chamber, I can endorse much of what he has said since his appointment on issues of serious and organised crime. When he says, as he did this afternoon, that he is sending out a warning that those who are involved in crime are not untouchable and that their ill-gotten gains will be taken from them, I fully support him. I also fully support the statements made in many Government documents, including that which specifically says: "Fraud against government reduces the money available to fund services like schools, hospitals and police on the street." I was, therefore, surprised that when I asked the cabinet secretary whether he would support my call for the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 to be used against a convicted fraudster, he said that he  could not comment on a specific case as a cabinet minister. Then, strangely enough, he went on to list specific examples to illustrate his support for the use of the proceeds of crime. Of course, his speech was written before I asked the question, so the cabinet secretary was clearly prepared to endorse specific action against some people. I cannot understand why he is so reluctant to be specific in his support for the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 to be used against the individual I asked about. I hope that a letter of comfort from a cabinet secretary colleague would not temper his zeal in ensuring that the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 is properly applied. I share the views that many members have articulated about the complexity and the significance of the threat facing our society from serious and organised crime. Some of the legislation that has been mentioned has been significant and has had a profound and positive impact. However, like any other legislation, we need to be able to develop it as required. We need to learn from our practice and experience and, where improvements can be made, we need to be prepared to make them. That is why I believe that the time is right to ensure that the impact of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 and the recovery of assets are strengthened. Where there are weaknesses, we should address them radically. We should not hesitate. In ensuring that we are able to tackle serious and organised crime, it is not enough just to change the legislation if required. We need to be able to invest to ensure that those criminals are tackled. I commend the additional money that the cabinet secretary has mentioned will be invested. We expect that such a problem will continually demand more resources. It is not enough to say that we are spending more than we did a couple of years ago; that should be taken for granted. The question is whether we are prepared centrally to invest what is required. I hope that the cost of some of the advances that the cabinet secretary mentioned, such as the investment in forensic techniques, is being met from central resources and that we are not using money from recovered assets and the proceeds of crime to fund what should be centrally funded from Government and police board resources. We know that many criminals have access to the best accountants, lawyers and equipment. If we are serious in our determination to match them and beat them, we must ensure that the SCDEA and our police forces equally have access to the best resources. We should not hesitate to provide such investment. We have been blessed with many talented individuals. Graeme Pearson has been mentioned; I knew Gordon Meldrum, the current director of the SCDEA, in his previous post in the police; and there is also Johnny Gwynne. Those are talented,  experienced and dedicated officers who are determined to make a difference and that determination should not be thwarted by any internal wrangling in police forces or arguments about the deployment or secondment of resources. The SCDEA needs the full support of every agency and politician in this country to ensure that it does its job to best effect. I support what has been said about the need to disrupt the organised criminals and about the need to divert resources. I commend the work that has been done through choices for life, the education programme for primary 7 children throughout Scotland. However, one of the last things that I did before I moved from the justice portfolio was ask for an examination of the impact of that programme. Significant amounts of money have been invested in it and it is possibly right to continue with it, but is it having an impact? Are children at that age being deterred from criminality in their teenage years? There should be some tracking to see whether that investment and effort are having the desired effect. I make no criticism—it is a wonderful programme and I have attended its meetings—but we need to examine whether our investment and what we are doing are having the desired effect.

I commend the minister for his comments on seizing assets from criminals. I know that in his statements he has been vigorous in his determination for such seizures to be put into effect. Will he join me in calling for action to be taken to recover the assets of the convicted fraudster Abdul Rauf? If not, will he explain his reasons to the Parliament?

Say "Germany".

Karen Whitefield and Cathie Craigie mentioned the double edge of local newspapers, which can certainly be difficult outlets for many politicians. As a public representative for many years, I have been on the receiving end of withering criticism from local and national papers, but that is healthy—it is a fundamental of the democratic process. Politicians should not seek to use only the outlets that are favourable to them; they need to recognise that local papers play a vital role in keeping the public informed and giving access to information, as Iain Smith and others have said. Anything that damages that function should be opposed. The change has the potential to be a financial dagger to the heart of many of Scotland's newspapers. The people who will be the beneficiaries will be those in power at the local or national level. The danger is that no one will be left to scrutinise and criticise the decisions that are being made. I will come back to that point. Ian McKee asked who reads newspapers. I have spoken to my local newspapers on the subject— The Gazette , a weekly newspaper, and the Paisley Daily Express , a campaigning daily newspaper. Anne Dalrymple, the editor of the Paisley Daily Express told me that, over the course of a year, over 60 per cent of local people read her paper—a significant number. Indeed, in any one week, something like 55 per cent of local adults read the Paisley Daily Express . What would the loss of revenue mean to such local papers? Scottish and Universal Newspapers has estimated that its group could lose up to £1 million. That is equivalent to the annual revenue of the Paisley Daily Express —a staggering and significant amount. Amanda Ramsden, the editor of The Gazette and the Barrhead News said: "I can say categorically the plans for changing the law to allow Public Information Notices to be advertised electronically in place of newspapers would be a devastating blow to our titles." The debate is not only about what newspapers and politicians are saying but, as Cathie Craigie indicated, the duty and responsibility that politicians have to the people whom we represent. What are members of the public saying on the subject? To its credit, the Paisley Daily Express took time to go out on the streets and ask. A woman from Glenburn in my constituency is quoted as saying:  "I get all my information from the Express , I read it every day. They've already stopped advertising councillors surgeries in the papers so I had to go down to the library to ask the staff there how I could find out about contacting my councillor". Renfrewshire Council has stopped advertising councillor surgeries; its councillors are now hiding from their public, which is a disgrace. The paper also quoted Paisley worker Carolan Forbes, who had not heard about the Government plans. She said: "I think it sounds like a very bad idea ... not everyone has access to the internet or uses the internet." Gordon Barr from Paisley told the paper that he uses the internet easily but that his parents would struggle if the Government's plans went ahead. He said: "My parents are both well into their 70s and they don't use the internet at all."

It is a farce to consult on an issue to which there is such overwhelming opposition. Another of my constituents, who lives in the west end of Paisley, is quoted in the paper as saying: "We feel it's the thin end for the wedge. They could push through all sorts of planning things without anyone knowing." That is the critical issue. As well as the financial blow to local newspapers, a huge democratic issue is involved. Those in power, whether councillors or Government ministers, will take decisions and no one will know what is happening. In essence, the Government case is based on cost savings; little consideration has been given to what many believe should be a fundamental part of the democratic process, which is that the information that legislation requires to be communicated to the public should be targeted to give maximum visibility on a cost-effective basis. Yesterday, I spoke to a journalist who told me of decisions that are being taken "under the radar". In other words, decisions are being pushed through and no one knows about them. If it were not for local newspapers, how would my constituents, whose children are having their school transport removed, know about the decision? The council did not tell them in advance of its decision. Local newspapers were the only ones to highlight the issue. Without local newspapers, how could my constituents campaign to save libraries that the  council is attempting to close in Elderslie and Johnstone? Those local papers are the only means that people in our communities have of reading about what is going on in the council and of expressing their outrage. The suggestion challenges democracy, which will be under threat if the proposal goes ahead. We need healthy, campaigning and functional newspapers.

I share the member's views about the requirement to publish public notices by councils. Does he agree that it is important that councils publish details of councillors' surgeries, which are also a public issue?

The member spoke about nursery teachers and Glasgow City Council. Does she share my disquiet about Renfrewshire Council's removing nursery teachers from schools?

Like others, I welcome the commission's work and its valuable contribution to the development and enhancement of literacy in Scotland and pay tribute to my Labour Party colleagues who commissioned the report. I know that everyone in the chamber appreciates the significance of literacy—or, perhaps more accurately, the significance of illiteracy. A National Literacy Trust paper by George Dugdale and Christina Clark that eloquently sets out some of the issues refers to a 2002 report by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, which indicated that "Reading for pleasure has been revealed as the most important indicator of the future success of a child ... and improvements in literacy, at any point in life, can have a profound effect on an individual." I am sure that we all agree with that analysis. In their report, George Dugdale and Christina Clark outline the profile of a literate community. In such a community, individuals are far more likely to participate in its work, are more likely to trust its people and are more likely to perceive it to be safer. Such positive aspects can serve only to enhance the quality of life in any community. The report also sets out the profile of a literate nation. Such a nation is more likely to vote, the significance of which cannot be overstated; is less likely to smoke and drink—and we are aware of the profound significance of such factors; has better mental health; and has a better skilled and more flexible workforce. Some of those issues highlight why tackling the problem of illiteracy should be the number 1 educational priority of this and indeed any Administration. The fact is that every child who leaves primary school should be able to read, write and count. However, any literacy policy needs to address three key factors: gender; parental input, which Karen Whitefield mentioned and to which I will return; and socioeconomic factors. On gender, we should not dismiss lightly the differences between boys and girls as far as literacy is concerned. We know that boys at any age are less likely to read.  However, although we need to find ways of engaging them more, we should also recognise that boys' books are pitched at a lower level than are books for girls of the same age. With that in mind, I encourage the cabinet secretary to engage with Learning and Teaching Scotland to review the advice that is given on practice so that it reflects available expert opinion. There is another issue around literacy that we need to encourage, and on which I hope that the Government will also engage with Learning and Teaching Scotland. We need to encourage better and more significant links with the United Kingdom and the rest of the world, so that we articulate our success with some of the initiatives that have been outlined this morning, and so that we learn from best practice elsewhere in the world. We could do some more work on that. Karen Whitefield mentioned some of the parental input initiatives. Over the years, the contribution made by some of the good sure start projects—I am not saying that every sure start project has been a success—has clearly shown the benefits of more parents getting involved with children at a young age. That has a lasting impact on the child, and indeed continues when that child becomes a parent. As a teacher working in a deprived area, over the years I saw generations of families that were failing because the parents were unable to articulate to their children, and when those children became parents they were unable to help their own children to develop. We were cementing in disadvantage in certain parts of the country, which was tragic for those families, the community and the country. We need to consider socioeconomic issues. The Dugdale and Clark research looks specifically at impacts on the individual. The profile of a person with poor literacy shows that they are more likely to live in a non-working household; they are less likely to have children, and if they do their children are less likely to be successful; they are more likely to live in overcrowded housing; and they are less likely to vote. If we tackle the problem of illiteracy, such families and individuals are less likely to rely on state benefits and more likely to become home owners. They are more likely to be able to engage productively in the workforce and to be able to use the new technology that is increasingly available in every workplace. We know about the negative results of socioeconomic disadvantage and the positive ways in which literacy can address them. We ignore that at our peril. Socioeconomic issues demand different types of teaching in different areas. Language development will be different in different communities. We cannot take a one-size-fits-all approach to the problem. Teaching children who  traditionally have a small vocabulary needs teacher-intensive phonics and vocabulary building, whereas children who come from more affluent households can go with more child-directed work and develop as a result. I say to the cabinet secretary that we should encourage and allow local authorities to allow individual schools to take the approach that is best suited to the children they teach. We can all sign up to that crusade. I understand Christina McKelvie's point that we should not be negative about what has been allowed to develop in this country, but the truth is that, despite the best efforts of this and previous Administrations, there is clearly a deep-rooted problem in Scotland. If we do not tackle that problem and double, redouble, and quadruple our efforts, in 20, 30 and 40 years we will be having the same debate and failing the same families from the same areas.

Presiding Officer, you wrote to me to say that Parliament can hold ministers to account through oral questions. With your assistance, Presiding Officer, can I ask the cabinet secretary which ministers were copied into advice about class sizes in primary 1 to primary 3 between 9 May and 2 July 2007?

That was a dangerous exhortation, Presiding Officer. There is no doubt that, as is wider civic society in Scotland, all members are committed to the principle of getting it right for every child. It is a principle that is based on common sense, a caring philosophy and understanding. The minister is right to talk of the progress that has been made—progress that all parties, those in the previous Administration and this one, supported. He was also right to point out some of the issues that are essential if getting it right for every child is to be implemented effectively. We need joint leadership, commitment, training and a single planning process. It is also right to pause and reflect on some of the challenges that face us. It would be wrong to dwell solely on all the positive things that are happening and to be blind to the risks and dangers. I was shocked—as I am sure other members were—to hear the statistics that Duncan McNeil articulated. If nothing else, hearing his encapsulation of the figures, which are in the public domain, should make us pause and question whether Parliament and ministers need to investigate the situation further. We heard the horrendous death toll of vulnerable youngsters in this country. We rightly talk of our shock and horror at deaths from drug addiction and say how committed we are to dealing with the problem, but we seem to say little about those 144 children, the plight of whom Duncan McNeil raised. Perhaps a warning bell should be rung on the issue. I turn to Angela Constance's speech. As she said, there is never room for complacency. She pointed out that only 12 councils were given excellent reports and also, rightly, that satisfactory was not good enough. She would not accept a satisfactory rating for her child. Like her, I would not accept a satisfactory rating for my grandchildren. I am sure that no member would  accept satisfactory for any child who was associated with them. I repeat what I said in a previous debate on the very point about the HMIE reports that Angela Constance raised: "If a school were to get a 'satisfactory' report in an HMIE inspection, there would be an inquiry into the school's performance because that would not be good enough. A 'satisfactory' report is barely scraping a pass." In terms of HMIE definitions, "barely scraping a pass" is essentially a "satisfactory" report. I went on to say: "I refer to 'The Summary of Indicative Quality Indicator Results from HMIE inspections, 2009', which reveals that out of 30 councils, 16 are barely passing or are failing on the quality indicator that 'Children's needs are met'; 24 are barely scraping a pass or are failing on the 'Recognising and assessing risks and needs' indicator; 17 are barely scraping a pass or are failing on 'Operational planning'; 17 are barely scraping a pass or are failing on 'Leadership and direction'; and 18 are barely scraping a pass or are failing on 'Leadership of change and improvement'."— [ Official Report , 24 September 2009; c 19945.]  That is not good enough for our children and should not be good enough for anyone here or anyone who has any influence to do anything about it. There is still a challenge. Members are right to point to professionals' commitment and to the challenging and difficult job that they do. However, we ignore at our peril the damning indication of weaknesses in our system. If we do that, the figures to which Duncan McNeil referred will continue to grow, which is unacceptable. We need to look at what is happening as a result of our actions. I refer to Parliament collectively—I am not trying to damn the present Administration, because the problems have existed for a number of years. Collectively, we need to do something to achieve more success. What are we achieving from our political and resource input?

We are duty bound to review any area of activity in which there is a sign of weakness. Home visiting is critical, because often it can pick up some of the weaknesses and dangers that Duncan McNeil highlighted. I hope that ministers will listen carefully to what Robin Harper has said.  Do we spend enough time listening to our children and young people and to the concerns that they articulate? Often, when I speak to teachers and health workers, I hear stories of young children pouring their hearts out about the circumstances that they face at home because of their parents' addiction to alcohol or drugs. Are we listening to them? Do we sometimes brush them off when their behaviour is a bit aberrant, without understanding what is causing that behaviour? This comes back to Robin Harper's point: are we spending enough money to ensure that we achieve the desired outcome? The voluntary sector in Scotland—as the statutory services are—is under pressure and struggling. There are cuts and redundancies in many voluntary organisations across Scotland, but we depend on high-quality services to make a difference. As the minister and others have said, we need to improve information sharing and to ensure that our GIRFEC principles are at the heart of any proposed legislation. My final point relates to our children in care, both those who are looked after in foster care and those who are in residential care. For years, we as a society have failed those children. It is remarkable how some survive and, indeed, thrive, but too many are left vulnerable to homelessness, addiction and prison once they leave care. We need to put that issue back at the heart of our commitment and discussion, in order truly to make a difference for every child in Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

There is no doubt about the need to take effective action to tackle the scourge of alcohol in families and communities throughout Scotland. I do not intend to go into the damaging effects that excessive alcohol consumption can have—they have been spelled out by other speakers and in many articles prior to today's debate. I hope that we can rise above our differences on the subject and come together to take effective action. Although the cabinet secretary and her colleagues have made a well-intentioned proposal—and I commend them on the vigour that they have introduced to the alcohol debate—as we know, the road to hell is often paved with good intentions. My concern about the debate today is that the SNP has not addressed many of the concerns and criticisms that have been levelled. I am here to be persuaded that minimum pricing would have a positive effect and achieve the desired result, but so far I have heard nothing to persuade me. We heard today about the legal issues and I do not intend to go into them, but they undoubtedly need to be addressed. We heard of the worry about the damage to the Scottish whisky industry, not just in Scotland but potentially internationally. That needs to be addressed, although it is but one small part of the wider argument about tackling Scotland's significant alcohol-related health problems. Murdo Fraser rightly mentioned some of the damaging products that are available in our communities but would not be hit by a minimum pricing policy. That point needs to be answered. I encourage the cabinet secretary and her colleagues to reflect on some specific issues. Michael Matheson mentioned cross-border trade and Canada, but there is a difference between what is happening in the Republic of Ireland and Canada. By my estimation, one could near as damn it fly from Glasgow to Toronto as quickly as one could fly from Toronto to Vancouver. Opportunities for short cross-border journeys are not exactly available in Canada. Recently, along with other members from this Parliament, I spoke to politicians from the north of Ireland and the Irish Republic. The TDs who represent border areas in the Republic said that something like over 60 per cent of all alcohol sales in Ireland are now made in the north of Ireland. Although the cabinet secretary and her colleagues might suggest that other shopping is done when people go to the north, it is  nevertheless true alcohol is a major influence on that pattern. The cabinet secretary, I and others who are well paid, have internet access and credit cards, have the opportunity to go online to do our shopping and have deliveries made from Carlisle to Glasgow. Such facilities are not necessarily available to the poorer in our communities so the policy has a prejudice in favour of the better-off. It would create the opportunity for booze runs to Carlisle, not only for those such as me with the means to do that, load up the car and have a day out. It would also create opportunities for those with white vans who sell tobacco illegally in our communities to load up and return to sell the alcohol along with the tobacco. Many such people are also associated with the drugs trade, so we should worry that what we do has the potential to reinforce criminality. We should also worry about the impact on Scottish retailers. My final point is that the proposed policy will not put a penny towards paying for extra health or addiction services or putting extra police on our streets. Although I favour using pricing to limit the consumption of alcohol, in a country such as the United Kingdom it should be done on a consistent basis whereby there are no anomalies, it is done through taxation and the revenue is invested in the facilities and services that we need. Even at this late stage, I appeal for consensus. This debate shows the best and the worst of the Scottish Parliament. It shows the best in that we can address fundamentally important issues; it shows the worst in that we take up entrenched positions and will not reach out to achieve consensus on a matter that vitally needs it.

I am not surprised that, at the start of her speech, Sandra White said that she did not want to talk about  ProjectScotland, but it was bizarre that, at the end, she launched into an outright attack on the organisation with her ill-judged and ill-informed comments. Far be it from me to leap to the defence of either Robert Brown or—God help me—Jackson Carlaw, but Sandra White completely and utterly distorted what they said. It was grossly unfair and was unhelpful in the context of the debate. On the one hand, it showed that she did not fully understand what was being discussed and, on the other, it showed contempt for all those who volunteer in many capacities that go beyond the very narrow one that Sandra White sought to define.

I often wonder what people mean when they talk about a dialogue with the deaf. I think that I am beginning to experience a bit of that today, because Sandra White is clearly incapable of understanding what is being said. I do not intend to go into the figures around ProjectScotland. I merely point out that she launched into an ill-judged attack. Johann Lamont was right to point out that, regrettably, there are organisations throughout Scotland—several MSPs, including me, have experience of this—that are profoundly worried about impacts on their budgets, particularly for helping with volunteer activity. Regrettably and tragically, they are scared to speak out. What kind of Scotland are we trying to build when we intimidate those who try to help others, and make them fear that their funding is under threat if they say anything? I want to put on record the positive aspects of what volunteering can do. In my area, there are a number of projects that provide a fantastic range of services, from the small level of volunteering in the Renfrewshire Law Centre to the larger activities at the citizens advice bureaux, helping people with problems relating to benefits, debt and so on. I also have two WRVS projects in my constituency. One of those, the WRVS at the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley, is long established and renowned throughout the west of Scotland. Its volunteers service the cafeteria, the gift shop and the newsagent. It also provides more than 100 volunteers for befriending and lunch clubs. Through the volunteers' efforts, particularly in the cafeteria and gift shop, phenomenal amounts of money are raised to provide valuable and essential services in the hospital. Indeed, Sandra Robertson, the area manager, cannot speak too highly of the service that the volunteers  provide. The WRVS also runs a cafeteria in Causewayside Street in Paisley that not only is a fantastic drop-in facility for the public but helps people to volunteer. I say to Sandra White that people manage to get back into work through such volunteering. They started out to help through the volunteering ethos, and helped themselves back into work in the process. They did not volunteer in order to get back into work, but they developed their talent, skills and confidence through their volunteering activities. Last, but not least, I pay tribute to the Renfrewshire Carers Centre and its volunteering project, which provides a range of services, such as one-to-one volunteering and befriending. What is probably most significant is that it helps young people to do volunteering work and supports young carers. It is a truly outstanding service. Our gratitude goes to all those volunteers in the Renfrewshire Carers Centre and elsewhere who do such a magnificent job for the wider community.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the minimum number  of required teaching hours will be per month for each early years establishment serviced by a peripatetic teacher. (S3O-7919)

We have heard another cop-out from the minister: a grand promise was made, but there has been no action to back it up. The minister talks about input being sustained. Will he confirm that, as I am told, a two-hour visit from a teacher once a term will be sufficient?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am sure that the minister would not want to mislead Parliament. He said in response to my first question that it was a matter for local authorities to decide. However, he then said that a two-hour visit once a term would not be acceptable. If the minister knows what is not acceptable, why has he just told me that that is for local authorities to decide? Can you help me, Presiding Officer, in trying to get the minister to reply to the question or to withdraw the misleading information?

There is no doubt that social workers across Scotland do an excellent job in very difficult circumstances. It is a job that I do not envy them: their having to face the trauma, the despair, the sheer deprivation and the lack of support and care in many families is extremely stressful and demanding. In the cases that we hear about in which something has gone wrong, sometimes a mistake has been made by a basic grade worker and sometimes there has been a failure of management, but all too often there has been a failure of the system—there is an organisational reason for it. All too often, the issue of resources has not been properly addressed. One of my fears is that we are, in the current climate, taking no action to protect social work budgets that are already under pressure and which will come under more pressure. Instead, we are leaving it to local authorities, whose budgets are already under strain. We should not be surprised when things go wrong, given some of the budgetary constraints. That said, one thing that worries me about today's debate is the existence of a conspiracy of complacency among politicians and professionals. When we see something going wrong, we should not be frightened to speak out. It does no good to talk about how well things are going and the need to learn lessons from mistakes and difficulties. We  should be prepared to speak up when we know that a system is failing. I suggest that politicians and professionals are sometimes prepared to tolerate standards for vulnerable children that they would not tolerate for their own children or grandchildren. I still hear stories of frustration because workers in one agency do not have access to information that is held by another agency. There is no good reason why that should continue; it continues only because of the failure by the Scottish Government and ministers to take the action that is required to ensure that information is exchanged where necessary. I come to the points that were made by Christina McKelvie about HMIE. She is right to repeat Susan Deacon's comments that no one party has the best ideas, that it is wrong to imply that other parties are failing and that we should all be working together on the issue, but it does no good to try to distort or ignore the reality of the HMIE inspections. If a school were to get a "satisfactory" report in an HMIE inspection, there would be an inquiry into the school's performance because that would not be good enough. A "satisfactory" report is barely scraping a pass. I refer to "The Summary of Indicative Quality Indicator Results from HMIE inspections, 2009", which reveals that out of 30 councils, 16 are barely passing or are failing on the quality indicator that "Children's needs are met"; 24 are barely scraping a pass or are failing on the "Recognising and assessing risks and needs" indicator; 17 are barely scraping a pass or are failing on "Operational planning"; 17 are barely scraping a pass or are failing on "Leadership and direction"; and 18 are barely scrapping a pass or are failing on "Leadership of change and improvement". That is not good enough for our children; it is not good enough for those who are enduring hidden suffering in homes throughout the country. We must be prepared to invest and we must put our money where our mouth is. If there are continuing failures, it is right that politicians and professionals should be held to account.

I congratulate David Stewart on continuing to bring to our attention an issue that is of great significance to far too many people throughout Scotland. Let me welcome a number of the campaigners who are in the public gallery tonight. They include Fiona Campbell, who is from my constituency. Unfortunately, Dorothy Farquharson from my constituency, who had intended to be present, is unable to be here due to illness. The other campaigners from the west of Scotland include Martyn Cross from Barrhead—in Ken Macintosh's constituency—who is a young beneficiary of insulin pumps. I must gently chide David Stewart on his pronunciation. In comparing where insulin pumps are available, he said that they are available in Hawaii but not in Highland, and in Houston but not in Highland. I think he meant Houston, Texas, because, as his figures showed, people who live in Houston, Renfrewshire, do not have the same access to insulin pumps, which, as Ross Finnie, Mary Scanlon, Karen Whitefield and others have said, is an absolute disgrace. In the conversation that I had with the campaigners this afternoon, I was struck by the difference that appropriate access to insulin pumps has made to people's quality of life. Ross Finnie is right—they are not for everyone—but when they are for someone, they can make a huge difference. Fiona Campbell described to me what a huge difference having a pump has made to her—I hope that she does not mind me using her case as an example. For 20-odd years, she had to go into hospital every two to three weeks because of issues to do with her diabetes, but since she has had access to a pump she has had weeks and months when that has not been an issue.  Leaving aside the human benefit to Fiona, if the cost benefit that is associated with that relief were repeated, the benefit to the health service would be huge. It is true that an up-front investment of £2,500 to £2,700 per pump is required, but the long-term benefits to the health service are incalculable, as is the difference that use of a pump can make to the quality of life of the people concerned. The case has been made for those to whom a pump is available. One thing about this afternoon's conversation that disturbed me is the uncertainty that still exists among clinicians. Fiona was told that it would be dangerous for her to have a pump but, now that she has used a pump on a trial basis, she has been told that it would be dangerous for her to come off it. It is clear that there is an issue for politicians and health boards to address, but that inconsistency of approach suggests that there is also an issue for clinicians. Fundamentally, what we are looking for, as Mary Scanlon said, is a commitment to progress. The warm words of a year to 15 months ago are appreciated, but now it is time for delivery. The minister and the cabinet secretary should use their undoubted influence so that progress on the matter can be made right across Scotland.

The cabinet secretary mentioned the deaths that might occur in any pandemic. What steps have been taken to advise at-risk members of the public that they are in a particularly vulnerable group? What steps will be taken to give them assurances, given some of the concerns that have been expressed about the safety of the vaccine?

Does the cabinet secretary have anything to say to the parents of pupils at South primary school, which is closing tomorrow?

Will the minister revisit the valuation limits that are being used in Renfrewshire which are, according to Renfrewshire Citizens Advice Bureau in Paisley, preventing access to the mortgage to rent scheme? Will she consider giving tenants legal rights in order to protect those who faithfully pay their rent only to find that they face eviction  because unscrupulous landlords are not paying their mortgages, as reported by Renfrewshire law centre?

To ask the Scottish Executive what rights tenants have when facing eviction as a result of their landlord defaulting on a property's mortgage. (S3O-7315)

I thank the minister for that full reply. Will he condemn landlords who collect rent, including rent that is paid through housing benefit, but fail to make mortgage payments, thereby exposing families to eviction? Will he investigate abuses of the data protection legislation whereby mortgage lenders are refusing to provide legitimate information to those who seek to help families who are threatened with eviction?

What about the arc of prosperity?

I, too, commend the cabinet secretary for the way in which she has attempted to keep members informed. In relation to schools, what additional information will be given out to those responsible at local level to ensure that teachers and other staff are also adequately protected during the outbreak?

The First Minister will be aware that two people are in intensive care at the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley, suffering from swine flu. Reports suggest that there is a significant difference from previous cases, in that the patients are critically ill, despite having no underlying health problems. The First Minister will be aware of concern in the Paisley area. Will he comment on the implications of the development? Will he review existing procedures to reflect the change? Will he ensure that the local press and public are kept fully informed, so that those who might have been in close contact with people who are connected to the patients can take appropriate action to prevent further spread in the Paisley area?

The cabinet secretary, to her credit, took action that resulted in the abolition of car parking charges in Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board, as she said. Will she investigate complaints about the lack of consultation on and notice of new car parking arrangements at the Southern general, which have resulted in nurses being hit with car parking charges or fines? Will she take action to ensure that nurses, particularly those who are on shifts, are not penalised for having to bring their cars to work?

I congratulate John Wilson on initiating a debate that is important, although it is not being held in Government time. Everyone across Scotland is aware of the implications and the consequences of repeat offending for our communities. From talking to divisional police commanders in my area over many years, I know just what impact a small number of repeat offenders have in my local communities; that situation is probably the same throughout Scotland. However, if a small number  of offenders are removed, even periodically, from the community, the level of reoffending is reduced drastically. Removing repeat offenders has a beneficial consequence for the communities that suffer from their offending, but it does not take great imagination to understand that a significant reduction in crime also has resource implications for social work and the police, whose resources are not called upon in the same way. There is a distinct advantage in ensuring that repeat offending is both addressed and, where possible, reduced. Now, that is easier said than done. I know that politicians of various persuasions over many years have called for action to reduce persistent offending, but there are also some simple truths associated with the problem. Yes, one of those truths is that we need a visible police presence in our communities and that a range of agencies must be involved, but another fundamental truth is that many of those who are engaged in persistent offending have, as John Wilson said, a chronic and severe drug or alcohol dependency. If we as a society do not address those addictions, we will not be in a position to reduce repeat offending. Although many of the people who are engaged in reoffending might not be at the more salubrious end of society, repeat offenders are often driven by the need to feed an addiction and resort to stealing to do so. Clearly, the easy solution would be to ensure that more resources are deployed to tackle repeat offending. Like John Wilson, who eloquently outlined the contribution that a multiagency approach has made, I congratulate Strathclyde Police and Glasgow City Council's community planning partnership and social work department on their determined efforts, which have clearly made a difference. However, we need to be realistic in acknowledging that such initiatives cannot be left just to one area. Certainly, I would love to see such an initiative in my Paisley South constituency where many communities would benefit greatly from an initiative that successfully tackled repeat offending, but the question is how we do that. If we are honest, we must acknowledge that, successful though it has been, given the numbers involved, the prolific offender programme is not a cheap option. If we expect the minister to endorse and support that programme and if we expect action from the Parliament, we need to face up to the financial consequences of that. Given the scarcity of the resources that are available, it is not enough for me just to call for Strathclyde Police and my local council to roll out the initiative without saying that extra money will be made available.  Another point to consider is the need to adopt a spend-to-save approach. By spending money now, we could save money in the longer term. I do not think that it is good enough to say, "Well done, the project should be rolled out", if we then leave the police and local authorities to their own devices. Towards the end of his speech, John Wilson clearly accepted that funding is needed. I hope that the minister will recognise and endorse the success of the prolific offender programme, but he should also be clear that, if the programme is to be rolled out elsewhere in Scotland beyond its current boundaries, Government ministers will need to commit further resources to the police and to local authorities to make that happen.

Derek Brownlee echoed John Park's comments about the human costs of redundancy. It is right that the effect on ordinary people should be the main focus of attention in the debate. The comments of Duncan McNeil and James Kelly concerned me. If workers are made redundant anywhere in Scotland, they deserve the full attention of politicians, and specifically ministers, irrespective of where the companies are and who the workers' local representatives are. I hope that ministers are not being partial in their response to redundancies, as some of the evidence that I have seen suggests. It would be fundamentally wrong if workers who are made redundant had to pay a price for political infighting in the Parliament. I understand that, inevitably, ministers will support members from their party on local initiatives—that is the nature of politics and I do not criticise them  for it. However, no worker in the country should have a delayed response from ministers simply because they live in one area rather than another. I hope that ministers will reflect on those comments. Let us not have a stushie; let us just reflect on the issue and possibly change attitudes and future behaviour.

I will reflect on that but, equally, Jim Mather needs to reflect on the criticisms from Greenock, Cambuslang, East Kilbride and other areas where there have been delays in responses from ministers. That is unacceptable and the minister must address it. We must plan and prepare for our future and we need to invest in our young people. I am concerned that, in Renfrewshire in the past year, 30 apprentices have been made redundant, of whom 21 are still looking for alternatives. The main source of apprenticeships in the construction industry has dried up. Large companies are now often contract managers and brokers, so they subcontract rather than employ. Therefore, we need to support small companies that can provide apprenticeships for young people. I am thinking of companies such as MPS Training in Johnstone in my constituency, which is run by Willie Cosh. Such companies often offer young people varied and stimulating training and learning experiences that are better all round. If we invest in those companies now, we will be paid a handsome dividend in the future. Several members have mentioned ConstructionSkills in Scotland. I do not want to be particularly critical of it, but we need to have an open mind, be objective and ask hard questions about its performance. Is it helping small companies? Do they feel that it is of value? Let us be open minded and objective in coming up with answers on what we can do and, more significantly, what we can do better. I pay compliments to colleges throughout Scotland for their role in tackling the problem. For example, Reid Kerr College in Paisley has an outstanding record of helping young people into training and employment. I give particular credit to the college's built environment department. Colleges can make a difference, so we must invest in them. Packages of employment and training need to be made available and we need partnerships that  can work together closely. We need partnerships between the private and public sectors and between schools and colleges. ConstructionSkills in Scotland should be the facilitator for such an approach, but at this juncture, I worry whether it can do that job. I worry that rather than preparing young people for the construction industry as it exists today, it is continuing to prepare young people for the construction industry in a world that no longer exists and in social circumstances that have moved on. That should be a wake-up call and a challenge to us all.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the budget increase for Renfrewshire Council was in 2008-09 and 2009-10. (S3O-6899)

The fact is that Renfrewshire Council received a real-terms budget increase. However, I will not dwell on that. Instead, I refer to an exchange at First Minister's question time on 30 April. The First Minister said: "I genuinely do not understand how a rising education budget in real terms can translate into fewer teachers and schools in Glasgow. Glasgow City Council owes an explanation of that not only to the concerned parents but to everyone else in Scotland."— [ Official Report , 30 April 2009; c 16967-8.]  Should Renfrewshire Council do the same?

One of the issues underpinning the debate, which should not focus only on the Daily Record  and the Sunday Mail , is the need for quality journalism in our society. For generations, events have shown that journalists who ferret out the truth and information play a significant role for the public in holding those in power to account. In political circles, that means those in power at both national and local levels. They also hold businesses to account, focus on damage that is caused to the environment and local communities and expose criminality in communities up and down the country. To enhance and develop that quality journalism, our society needs investment in that type of service. I am profoundly worried about what is happening at the Daily Record and the Sunday Mail because it is a harbinger of what might well happen throughout the rest of the industry and the rest of the country, which will leave us so much poorer in the future. The only people who will sit comfortably with newspapers being destroyed and their quality being eroded are those in power and those who have something to hide. The Daily Record and the Sunday Mail have made a significant contribution to Scottish civic life over many years. They have exposed criminality and scams affecting old people, and they have fought for children who have been the victims of abuse. Notwithstanding the fact that they are part of the same stable, they have competed with each other for stories and neither has been constrained in what it has said because the other has reported a story first. I fear that what is being proposed will eliminate much of the internal competition in that newspaper group. We will also see not just the erosion but the elimination of years of the experience that is necessary to develop good-quality stories. Other newspapers in the Trinity Mirror group will be watching what is happening anxiously. I suspect that the group is trying it on in Scotland knowing that, if it succeeds here, it will find it much easier to impose similar cuts elsewhere. I also suspect that many other newspapers are watching what is happening because they intend to follow suit. Our society stands to lose significantly if this ill-judged management proposal goes ahead. I have been struck by the willingness of the trade unions and the workforce to co-operate. They are not seeking confrontation; they are willing to engage with the management. As David Whitton has said, an extremely profitable company that is led by a well-paid chief executive is refusing to talk to the people who deliver the profits for that organisation. It needs to think again.  I urge the Government, ministers and local councils such as Renfrewshire Council to reconsider their willingness to move away from the placing of public notices in newspapers. The internet may well be used in addition, but it should not be a substitute, as many people rely on newspapers for such information. Not only is the approach that is proposed socially damaging; it will be economically damaging for newspapers as well.

I am pleased to have the opportunity to debate the motion. I thank all the members who signed it and all those who intend to participate in the debate. It is appropriate that we debate the motion during the Scottish Huntington's Association's 20 th anniversary year. A number of visitors in the gallery this evening have an interest in the issue because they have supported people with Huntington's disease. In particular, I welcome the families who are suffering because of the effects of the disease. I hope that members can join them after the debate. Families who were living with the disease established the Scottish Huntington's Association in 1989 because they could not get help or support from health or social care services. The association continues to provide vital help and its focus is the goal of improving the quality of life of families who live with this devastating illness. The organisation provides Huntington's disease services in nine of the 15 health board areas across Scotland. Staffed by skilled nurses, those services make a significant difference to the lives of those who are affected by HD. The nurses ensure that families always have someone to talk to who understands the problems that they face. They advocate on behalf of families to ensure that they have access to the correct health and social care services and they manage and co-ordinate that care. They educate other professionals about the disease so that they are in a better position to help ensure that symptoms of the disease are well managed. They also run a  national youth service that supports young people who live in Huntington's disease families, 70 per cent of whom are young carers. Many of them experience social isolation and have to live with the psychological burden of having a 50:50 risk of inheriting Huntington's disease. The service provides one-to-one support, group work, information and advice. Huntington's disease is devastating. It is a high-risk, inherited neurological condition. Its impact is so terrible because it destroys a crucial part of the brain, which leads to loss of control of the affected individual's muscles. That manifests itself as speech difficulties, involuntary movements and loss of the ability to swallow. The disease also causes a profound form of dementia. Mental ill health is common, as is depression, anxiety and personality change. Those three groups of symptoms gradually worsen over 15 to 25 years until complications from the disease—often pneumonia as a consequence of swallowing problems—lead to death. The number of people living with Huntington's disease is three times the number with the more widely known motor neurone disease, which led to the premature death of the great Jimmy Johnstone, and because it is a genetic condition a large number of people in Scotland are living at high risk of inheriting the disease—the current estimate is between 4,000 and 6,000. Huntington's disease is a family disease; it often affects two or three generations at the same time. In one family that the Scottish Huntington's Association has supported recently, a child of eight years died of the juvenile form of the disease. Her father has it and he needs a great deal of support to remain at home. Two of her father's siblings also have Huntington's disease and her grandfather died of it only three years ago. Those who live in a family with the disease but who are not at risk of inheriting the gene are also profoundly affected. Loss is a constant visitor in Huntington's families. One member of the family I described did not inherit the gene that causes HD and will not therefore develop the disease, so it cannot be passed on to his children—a glimmer of light in the bleak picture that is Huntington's disease—but that young man says: "People tell me I'm lucky that I won't get HD, and I am, but I will still never escape from it. I still have to watch most of my family suffer and eventually die. I might end up caring for them. When I look ahead I see a future on my own." In addition to all those problems, Huntington's disease brings further pressures to bear on families. People with HD have to give up work very early and spouses have to give up work to become carers. Up to 80 per cent of affected families live in poverty. Relationship breakdown is sadly very common and it is estimated that 70 per  cent of marriages end during the course of the disease. The disease also carries a terrible stigma and has in the past often been a family secret. The mental health problems that are commonly caused by the illness, and the physical disabilities that frequently lead to falling and loss of confidence, often lead individuals to become withdrawn and isolated. Unfortunately, the involuntary movements, poor co-ordination and slurred speech have led to many people with the disease being accused of public drunkenness and, as a result, being wrongly arrested. One of the core goals of the association is to ensure that, in every health board area where a need exists, a specialist nurse is provided. There is currently an inequity of service provision in Scotland. That leaves families who live in areas where the Scottish Huntington's Association has, as yet, been unable to deliver a service without the specialist help that they so desperately need and deserve. There are three health board areas where the association knows of an unmet need. In its 20 th year, the association wants that to change. It wants, as a minimum level of service, every family living with Huntington's disease to have access to a specialist nurse, regardless of where they live in Scotland. For services to be sustainable, they need support from all the statutory agencies. The best funding model exists where local authorities join forces with the regional national health service boards. That has already happened in Highland, Tayside, Fife and Glasgow. I ask for the minister's support in trying to influence those health boards and local authorities that currently offer no assistance. I also ask the minister to recognise that the landscape of care for people living with Huntington's disease needs to change throughout Scotland, so that those affected by this terrible condition are cared for properly. [ Applause. ]

In order to know whether more people will be affected, we need to know the numbers that are involved. Does the member accept that it is regrettable that the minister has indicated that the Government is no longer prepared to compile statistics on persistent young offenders, which means that we do not know how many young offenders there are in Scotland?

There was much in what Michael Matheson said with which I can agree. It certainly would be naive to try to  legislate away the problem and I do not think for a moment that anyone was suggesting that we should. He is right to say that we should learn from the experience of implementing the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 and, where it is found wanting, strengthen and develop it. That is how we should approach all legislation—building on reason and experience and improving where necessary. Nobody in the Parliament would suggest that because something had been passed a few years ago, it should remain sacrosanct for ever and a day. I agreed with much of what the minister said. Yes, prevention is certainly preferable to taking action. We would all agree that resolving a problem by cutting it out is much better than trying to resolve it once lives have been affected or blighted. I agree with him that we should not judge success on the basis of ASBO numbers, vehicle seizures or anything else; we should judge success on outcomes and the impact of legislation and preventive measures. I was pleased that the minister pointed to many of the initiatives that were started by the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats in the previous Administration. Those initiatives are proving to be worthy and could be developed even further. He spoke about giving early support to families to promote good parenting skills, which is exactly what sure start and other initiatives were intended to do. He spoke about the twilight basketball initiative, which was started previously. I was involved personally with many of the initiatives involving the Scottish Rocks basketball team. We could also refer to the twilight football leagues that operate throughout Scotland with the involvement of local police and the support of the Bank of Scotland. Prevention has always been at the heart of what we have tried to do—trying to stop a problem before it starts or, where we identify a problem, resolve it through good commonsense, effective measures. However, Paul Martin and others are right to say that, although we are trying to prevent problems from developing, where one has already developed beyond what it is reasonable to accept, it is right that we take action to deal with it. I was pleased to see that the document recognised that "The tools provided by the 2004 Act have clearly made a difference to the lives of people across Scotland: they empowered local agencies and communities to take a stand against ASB and provided those who had suffered in silence for too long with some much-needed respite." That was at the heart of the 2004 act and it should be at the heart of anything that we attempt to do now. Without suggesting for a moment that we are looking only at numbers, I think that we cannot close our eyes to the fact that measures have  been taken over several years throughout Scotland in council areas run by different political parties, which have seen the local value of what is on offer. For example, in 2007-08, Aberdeen City Council saw the need to effect 30 adult ASBOs and there were 18 in Edinburgh, 33 in Fife, 13 in Stirling, and 14 in West Lothian. Those councils recognised that other measures had failed in their areas and that it was therefore right to use the tools available. Michael Matheson rightly mentioned issues to do with vehicle seizures. If measures to close premises are to be strengthened and improved, I would welcome it. My constituents and I find it frustrating that many people in our part of Strathclyde put up with month after month of intolerable abuse. For whatever reason, the police are not willing to use closure orders, despite the fact that such orders have been shown to be effective elsewhere. I remember visiting a block of high flats in Aberdeen when I was a minister. The residents told me that they had been queueing up to get out because of the behaviour of one bad tenant. However, because the police applied for, and received, a closure order leading to that individual being removed, the residents' lives were transformed and they were proud and happy to stay where they were. That one individual ruining their lives had been the only reason why they had wanted to get out. We should not close our eyes to the positive impact that enforcement can have when we use the powers at our disposal, and we should not tolerate professionals, in whatever agency, who are not prepared to use their powers to improve the quality of life of the people whom we represent. Paul Martin raised another relevant issue. Many of the professionals, and many politicians, do not live in the areas that are worst affected by antisocial behaviour. We should not accept or tolerate behaviour in the areas where the people whom we represent live if we would not accept or tolerate it in the areas where we live ourselves. There has to be a balance between enforcement and prevention, but let us not turn our backs on the people whose lives are blighted.

I am delighted that practitioners support the new framework and strategy. The minister said that the strategy is also supported by communities. Will he list for our attention the communities that have indicated their support for the strategy?

Does the member agree that we should be wary of a minimum pricing strategy that would put money into retailers' pockets but not into funding additional nurses, doctors or police officers? Does he agree that we should consider a United Kingdom-wide strategy that involves a more effective and equitable taxation system?

There is no doubt that we are facing a serious problem in this country. This morning's Audit Scotland report highlights some of the significant issues. I congratulate the Cabinet Secretary for Justice on the way in which he has raised the temperature in the debate. I understand why he has done that. We had to have a debate and we must confront serious problems. I am also pleased that ministers' emphasis has shifted towards the health problem, to some extent. Although Bill Aitken is absolutely right that the alcohol-related behaviour of a minority of people in this country causes problems and it is right that we use enforcement and preventive measures with justice-related powers and responsibilities, he did not dwell significantly on the fact that the health of too many people is beginning to suffer because of the hidden consumption of alcohol at home, which is perhaps not so hidden on a night out. We have to realise that many people who do not necessarily pose problems with antisocial behaviour and crime, or who might not regard themselves as problem drinkers, have a growing problem with alcohol. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing documented well some of the significant impacts that such a problem is having. Bold measures are absolutely necessary—Robert Brown was right to point out the distinction between justice and health, in terms of the language that is used—and Kenny MacAskill was right to raise the debate in the way that he did, but in a Parliament of minorities, it is not enough to talk about agreement and consensus; we need to deliver it. To be frank, there is no party-political advantage to be gained on this matter, and no party-political argument should be advanced to score points over one party at the expense of another; we are in this together. Nicola Sturgeon is right that, as politicians, we should take the lead on the issue. Sometimes there is a question about whether we attempt to lead public opinion, but we cannot do that by trying to ram ideas down the throats of other parties in this Parliament of minorities. On alcohol policy, above all others, we need a cross-party approach. We should be looking back to some of the historic work that was done by Strathclyde Regional Council, for example, and the officer/member working group reports on which all parties came together to make bold,  imaginative and radical suggestions to advance social policy. If either of the cabinet secretaries here today wants to be bold, the bold measure on alcohol policy is to implement a mechanism whereby all parties can come together to work on the issue and come up with some agreement. The last thing that we need in trying to deal with the alcohol problem is parties trying to score points against one another or fraying at the edges as the argument develops. If we cannot work out together a solution to the problem, the present generation of Scots will suffer and future generations will continue to suffer. We are dealing with too big an issue for us to revert to our party-political dogma and political bunkers. I appeal to the cabinet secretaries to reach out to other parties and I appeal to other parties to approach the problem in the way that it demands—to rise above our political perspectives and come together to work out a solution that will have a lasting effect. It might require radical and bold solutions, but the problem needs that type of approach. For once, can we not do the right thing in this Parliament?

The minister's colleagues are on a crusade against the irresponsible consumption of alcohol. I am sure that most people support that crusade, but as part of it responsible elements in the licensed trade have been demonised. Pubs in our town centres perform critical economic and social functions. Is the minister prepared to meet Scottish Beer and Pub Association representatives and other representatives of the licensed trade to discuss how it can play its part in transforming Scotland's town centres?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it agrees with the comment of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities president Pat Watters that this year's local government finance settlement "will be a standstill at best." (S3O-6093)

If—as the cabinet secretary suggests—local government is receiving record levels of investment, will he explain why Renfrewshire Council is cutting its education budget by £2.5 million and why it is to axe 81 posts, including 28 teachers, eight classroom assistants, seven foreign language assistants and 10 school secretaries?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, when populations in many local authority areas are falling, it is astonishing that some local authorities have chosen to increase the salaries of chief executives and senior officers not only beyond the rate of inflation, but beyond the agreed pay rises? Renfrewshire Council has awarded more than £350,000 per year, every year, to the chief executive and senior directors at a time when the population is falling. Does the cabinet secretary agree that that is unacceptable?

I thank the minister for that but, in addition to cases in which Clostridium difficile was recorded as the reason for death, there are cases in which it was a factor in the cause of death but something else was listed as the main cause of death. A number of my constituents have approached me because they are concerned that their relatives were affected by Clostridium difficile but it was not listed as the cause of death. There is concern that the problem is wider than is recorded and admitted. Will the minister accept that there needs to be full publication of cases in which C diff was a contributory factor, and an investigation into just how serious the problem is at the RAH?

Will the member take an intervention?

Sandra White's criticism of the Labour Party is misplaced because we are only reflecting the fears and concerns of housing associations across Scotland. Those worries are being expressed not by us but by the SNP's partners in the housing movement in Scotland. The SNP needs to listen to them.

If Parliament is disposed to sanction Alex Neil's appointment as minister, a gain for the ministerial team will be a loss for "Newsnight"—I am sure that the BBC is taking steps to plug the gap. One of the things that has unfortunately marked the housing debate over the past 18 months to two years has been a mixture of stubbornness and stupidity. Alex Neil is not known for stupidity, and I hope that he will bring his calming influence to change the stubborn attitude that has developed among his colleagues in the Administration. The "Firm Foundations: The Future of Housing in Scotland" document would have been better titled "Building on Quicksand". It has managed to alienate and alarm the housing movement throughout Scotland, including people who are politically well disposed towards the SNP. They do  not have a good word to say about the current housing policy. I could make a number of political points, but the problem that faces the housing sector in Scotland is too important for that. We need some sort of movement and solution, and I would rather that we were able to persuade the Administration to admit that it has been wrong and that it will change. I welcome the slight shift that has been announced this week, but it is too little too late: the damage has been and is being done. The increase that was announced comes too late for many schemes—housing associations will have to revise projects to see whether they stack up. The work is time consuming, and the unhelpful delays will further undermine the construction industry at a time when fast and decisive action could make a real difference in providing not only houses, but jobs throughout Scotland. Housing associations will still have funding problems even under the revised proposals. There will be a rise in private finance contributions, rents could go up by as much as 20 per cent in all the new-build developments and—worryingly—standards could fall. The maintenance of those developments could be affected simply because the money will have to be used to service increased loan-repayment charges. Lenders are not offering favourable rates, if they are offering to lend money at all. Many are worried about the future viability of some housing associations because of what is going on. Why should housing associations use their own reserves to plug financial gaps? The Administration has ignored warnings from the housing movement. Reserves are built up over time from the rents of existing tenants, and are designated mainly for future maintenance of properties. Why should those reserves be used to subsidise new housing for future tenants?

Mr Doris might want to reflect on the matter and to talk to housing associations about how what happened previously pertains to what is happening now. Housing associations would appeal to return to the levels that were previously available. The Administration needs to revert to the HAG assumptions that were used in the previous financial year to kick-start affordable house building programmes in Scotland. It needs to use the expertise of housing associations, which I think members agree have a proven track record throughout Scotland.  I appeal to ministers to abandon the idea of a lead developer. That model has failed in England, and there is no evidence in the document that any cost savings will be made or that the model has worked elsewhere. Lead developers are just another level of bureaucracy that could cost more money to set up than would be generated in savings. The problem with the rhetoric over the past 18 months or so has been, as Ross Finnie suggested, that it has created an artificial division between council housing and houses that are provided and built by housing associations. I worry that that rhetoric has sought to downplay—if not to undermine—the role of housing associations. Housing associations in Scotland have proved themselves: it is time for the Government to undo the damage, ditch the dogma and admit that it has got it wrong.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I do not dispute what Margaret Smith says about early intervention. Indeed, I believe that it is critical. Does she share the concerns that I have discussed this afternoon with an ex-employee of one of Scotland's major councils, who told me that many local authorities are diverting money away from initiatives such as sure start and early intervention because of budget cuts? The lack of dedicated funding will surely have an effect. Does she agree with that?

The early years framework is undoubtedly full of warm words and good intentions. No one in this chamber or beyond could dispute the necessity of giving children the best possible start in life. We would all agree that, if we fail to address problems early in children's lives, they can be left disadvantaged for the rest of their lives. It is right to acknowledge the point that this is not only about education. We need to reinforce the value that parents bring to a child's development. What goes on in the home can be as important as what is taught in the school or in an early years establishment. We must acknowledge that parents sometimes need help and support in basic parenting skills, and I support the amendment that the Conservatives have lodged. Labour's sure start initiative was important, but it is right that we acknowledge that improvements can be made to such initiatives. We should not simply accept that, because the initiative is there and money is being spent, everything is as effective as it could be. That is why I asked the cabinet secretary whether I could have a copy of the results of the work that has been done in reviewing sure start, which the minister has  promised. I look forward to that information being made available.

I will have a look at that. However, we should recognise that the early years framework represents a missed opportunity to put early years services on a proper footing. Although it contains warm words, it is bland, it lacks originality and it takes ideas from others. Worst of all, because of the failure, as Hugh O'Donnell and Karen Whitefield pointed out, to accept any responsibility for funding, it marks an acceptance of lower standards across Scotland. There are no new ideas in the framework document and, as I am sure the officials supporting the ministers are aware, any good ideas that there are can be traced back as far as the 1981 and 1985 Strathclyde officer/member group reports. Credit needs to be given to the Labour-controlled regions that drove forward the early years agenda; the people who were involved in that work were visionary. The strategy also takes ideas on accessibility and affordability that were promoted by Labour in 1998 before this institution was even established. So, as I say, we have no new ideas and a bringing together of what has already been done. Worst of all, as a result of the failure—not just the failure, but the refusal—to invest the money that is needed to make the strategy work, problems will develop across Scotland. Karen Whitefield highlighted what the document says about funding. In a PowerPoint presentation that he gave in November to the Learning and Teaching Scotland conference, Don McGillivray, one of the officials who is present in the chamber this afternoon, reinforced the fact that the strategy and the supposedly new ideas that, as I said, it does not contain will attract "No new resources from central Government". He went on to say that Government wanted a "resource transfer from crisis management to prevention and early intervention". If money is being transferred away from crisis management, will the minister explain what will happen while new ways of working are being developed? Because of the Administration's refusal to guarantee the availability of funding, the money for early years staff development is not guaranteed; it is simply not there. Is it true that in some parts of  Scotland students are dropping out of university courses because local authorities are pulling funding? As Hugh O'Donnell made clear, we are talking about the training and development of nursery nurses, who are among some of the lowest paid staff in local government. In my area, Renfrewshire, which was mentioned by Karen Whitefield, every nursery school is to be closed; teachers are to be transferred to a peripatetic unit, visiting children once every few months. Indeed, in some cases, children who start at nurseries will see Santa before they see a teacher. It is disgraceful that the headteachers—the highest qualified early years staff in the authority—will no longer be required. Because there are no longer any jobs to move on to, there are no incentives for teachers either in Renfrewshire or in some other local authority areas to take additional qualifications. The Government has taken good ideas from elsewhere and has substituted glib and patronising words for action. It is offering nothing new and is refusing not only to provide extra resources but to guarantee that existing resources will be spent on early years. This document is a missed opportunity and lacks the vision and determination to take early years to the next level.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I do not dispute the need to support parents, and some of the work that was done recently focuses on that. The sure start initiative made a significant contribution. Will the minister provide me with a copy of the result of the review of the sure start initiative that was requested in late 2006 or early 2007?

If Patrick Harvie could enlighten us as to what was discussed when the First  Minister called him from the chamber earlier this afternoon, it would help the rest of us who have been in the chamber to reach a conclusion come the end of the debate.

Do not keep us guessing. Tell us.

One of the things that would help us all would be to have as much information as possible about not only the budget, but current negotiations and discussions on it. To that extent, those of us who remain in the chamber are at a disadvantage. It would be helpful to know exactly what Alex Salmond said to Patrick Harvie when he called him from the chamber to further the negotiations, because that could help influence what the rest of us conclude about the value of not only the debate but the budget itself. The cabinet secretary is absolutely right: now is not the time to play party politics. In the current circumstances, we need stability and a degree of certainty and we have to encourage improved confidence not only in the business community but in all communities throughout Scotland. It would therefore be helpful if the cabinet secretary were to remove two of the spectres that are haunting not only people in Scotland but the Scottish economy. The first spectre is the unnecessary referendum that the cabinet secretary and the First Minister are threatening. Apart from wasting money on the process, they are introducing a degree of uncertainty among the business community in particular. The second spectre is the local income tax, which has been denounced from virtually every quarter and which is causing huge uncertainty among businesses big and small throughout the country. If this budget is to have any resonance and any effect, measures such as the local income tax should be removed completely from the table.

No thank you. I attempted to clarify something with the cabinet secretary earlier, but he refused to take an intervention. One of the problems that we have in debates such as this is that there had been high hopes for a new beginning in the Scottish Parliament and for a new way of doing things, but what we have seen is the introduction of pork-barrel politics of the worst kind, which has never been seen before in this country. I do not condemn the individuals who are looking to maximise the returns for their specific interest or area, but, given the composition of the Parliament, I do not think that that process serves the greater body politic. The budget should address a number of things. The cabinet secretary talked about accelerating capital funding. Any such acceleration is undoubtedly to be welcomed, but if the cabinet secretary was genuine about making that effective, he would surely abandon the proposals for the Scottish Futures Trust. I really do not care where the money comes from as long as it comes  quickly and effectively. A stranglehold is being put on new investment the length and breadth of Scotland because of dogmatic politics on the part of the cabinet secretary and his colleagues. I welcome the nod in the direction of our hard-pressed town centres. That was long overdue, and I have argued for it. The Tories may laugh but even Derek Brownlee, if he looks at the record, will be able to read the joined-up writing and see that I have argued that point for a number of years. We need clarification on the potential contradiction between what the cabinet secretary said today and what Stewart Maxwell wrote on 3 June 2008: "A new ring-fenced fund would inevitably only lead to greater bureaucracy and unnecessary micro-management from the centre." We need a guarantee that there will be a fund, that it will be ring fenced, and that it will not be used for other purposes. If Stewart Maxwell is wrong, the cabinet secretary needs to spell that out. The council tax freeze to which the cabinet secretary referred might well put money in the pockets of individuals across the country, and I am sure that most people would welcome any extra money that they might be left with. The cabinet secretary and his colleagues must face up to the problem of inadequate local government funding, which is having a devastating effect on quality of life the length and breadth of Scotland. I have previously set out in the chamber some of the consequences in my area of Renfrewshire. Six nursery schools and a primary school are to be closed. Money is to be removed from the budget of every school in Renfrewshire. Probationary teachers are being used to plug holes in the supply of the teachers who should be on permanent contracts. That is the reality. Warden services are being reduced, and libraries and neighbourhood offices are being closed. The cost of children's swimming lessons has increased. Services across the country have been hit, particularly in Renfrewshire, and we are seeing the damaging consequences of the SNP's economic illiteracy.

There is no doubt that, in the current climate, the public want politicians to put aside petty differences, to focus on the problems and to try to work together to produce solutions, provide assurances and give confidence in the uncertain period that we face. It is right that all parties, including mine, put aside some of the shibboleths to which we have become attached, acknowledge that others sometimes have answers to questions that are being posed, and recognise that no one party has all the answers to the problems that we face. To that end, I welcome Fiona Hyslop's offer that other parties are welcome to attend the skills summit. That is but a small first step in the Government's recognising that others should be engaged in finding a way out of the current problems. I congratulate her on that. I urge the present Administration to recognise that, in a period of uncertainty, the last thing that  business and working people across Scotland need is more uncertainty and worry. I suggest that the proposed local income tax would add significant uncertainty to businesses that already face many problems in coping with the impact of the international financial crisis. Many business organisations have already spoken on record about their worries about local income tax. I understand the politics of what the SNP promised to gain power and of scoring points against others. However, leaving aside the arguments about whether the proposition could work, we should recognise that it would bring great uncertainty, cause tremendous turmoil and not be easy to introduce. If we are genuine about wanting to help Scottish companies—not just big companies but small and medium-sized enterprises—to ride out the problems that they face, we should be big enough to recognise that the threat of a local income tax might be enough to put some of them under or, worse, to deter people from investing in Scotland. Much as the Government aspires to replace the present system for financing local funding, it should recognise that, in the present circumstances, it would be extremely foolish not to pay attention to businesses' worries. The Council of Economic Advisers raises the issue of planning. I agree that we should work to ensure that planning is improved, decisions are expedited and more attention is paid to sustainability. Often, planners take too long to make decisions, and sometimes those decisions seem perverse. I welcome any measures to encourage investment and speedier decision making at a local level. However, I introduce a note of caution. Often, unfettered development occurs and decisions about where investment and building should take place are made at the expense of the long-term interests of local communities. We should not fetter the right of local councillors and planning officials to consider what is best for their community. Sometimes, they must make hard decisions that involve balancing the needs of companies that want to invest, which want quick decisions, and the needs of the wider community, not just in the short term but in the long term. In my area, I have seen companies come in with all guns blazing and a full fanfare of support for the jobs that they bring, only to close and move away, leaving an empty building that blights the landscape for years to come. We should ca cannie. Finally, if the Council of Economic Advisers is to have any influence on the Administration, it must address the issue of town centres. If we want to revitalise and protect Scotland, we must do something about our traditional town centres. We need to work across parties on investment in town centres and the decisions that can be made to  combat not just out-of-town centres but the recession that is impacting on many small businesses. The last thing that we need is economic blight in town centres, which are both economic drivers for the country and important social providers for the people who live in the areas that they serve. A town centres initiative would be welcome and should be introduced soon.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it remains concerned at the removal of nursery teachers from nurseries in some local authority areas. (S3O-5409)

The matter might well be for local authorities, but the minister might have found the wording of my question familiar because his party's manifesto in 2007 stated: "We are concerned at the removal of nursery teachers from nurseries in some council areas." Those are almost the exact words in my question. In Renfrewshire, full-time teachers are being removed from six nurseries, including the Johnstone and Spateston nurseries in my constituency. Teachers will visit those nurseries only once every five or six weeks. Does the minister have concerns about that, or would he advocate that as a model for all nursery schools in Scotland?

In his statement, the cabinet secretary said that the substantial increase in funding that he said he was providing would allow councils to sustain the essential services that they provide to communities and would enable them to improve the fabric of education. However, let us look at the reality of the situation and examine what has been happening in Renfrewshire, under the SNP-led council, which is supported by the Liberal Democrats—Jeremy Purvis might want to caution his colleagues about that, as the party's increased popularity in the past four or five years is being jeopardised in Renfrewshire as a result. What is happening in Renfrewshire? The education budget is being cut by £4.5 million. The delegated budget to every secondary and primary school is being cut. Many schools are finding it hard to afford to photocopy materials and buy paper, pens and pencils. That is the reality of the cabinet secretary's claim to be enabling councils to improve the fabric of education. The council is closing South primary school, which had an excellent report from Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education, to save less than £200,000 a year—yet the same council has found £312,000 to boost, over and above the normal inflationary increases for staff, the salaries of senior officers. It is closing six nursery schools—every nursery school in Renfrewshire will be closed—and it is reducing the qualified teacher input to the children in those schools. Peripatetic teachers will go into early years establishments—the children might see one every four or five weeks if they are lucky. There have been cuts in primary school staffing in 2007-08 and 2008-09, as a result of which numbers are down by 3.2 per cent—that is the reality of the Government's claim that it is improving the fabric of education. Experienced primary and secondary teachers are being forced out of the door in early retirement, which will involve the council finding the money from other local government funds to pay for those additional costs for years to come in order to sustain a perverted and distorted view of education.  Probationary teachers were mentioned earlier today, when Alex Salmond asked pertinently why some local authorities are finding jobs for probationary teachers at the end of their probation but others are not. I urge him and the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to ask that specific question in Renfrewshire: why has the council employed none of the 172 teachers who completed their probationary year? Proportionately, Renfrewshire has one of the highest numbers of probationary teachers of any authority in Scotland at the same time as the council is getting rid of experienced teachers in primary and secondary schools. There is a suspicion that Renfrewshire Council is using probationary teachers as a means of employing teachers on the cheap to cover up the cuts that it is making elsewhere. I will move on from education to other vital services in Renfrewshire. The council has reduced the warden services in sheltered homes, and it is increasing the charges for those services. It has closed four libraries: Gallowhill, Todholm, Elderslie and Bargarran, some of which had far higher usage than other libraries that were left open. It has closed five neighbourhood housing offices; increased the charges for swimming lessons for children; cut the park ranger services; closed the Apex community centre in Ferguslie Park; and cut the number of available hours for museum and observatory services. At question time, we heard from Michael Russell and Richard Lochhead about the need for recycling, but Renfrewshire Council has withdrawn funding from recycling. Tragically, and worst of all, day centres for the disabled are to close in Renfrewshire. The cabinet secretary and others talk about the funding settlement, and Alex Salmond talks regularly about local government having more money than ever before, but the reality is that, even before this year's settlement, Renfrewshire Council has been slashing services across the board. It has been reducing the quality of the services that are available to council tax payers in Renfrewshire—and that is before next year's budget cuts, which threaten to be even worse, start to become a reality. It is no wonder that, for the first time in its history, the Educational Institute of Scotland's Renfrewshire branch passed a motion of no confidence in the present council leadership. That is the reality of this budget and last year's budget. God help people across Renfrewshire if the Government is allowed to continue on this course unchallenged.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the impact of the current economic situation is on meeting recycling targets. (S3O-5179)

I commend the minister on maintaining the pressure to meet recycling targets, but he will be aware that the current situation has led to a fall in prices for recycled materials and that, as a result, there are reports of increased use of landfill and reduced incomes for local authorities. Will the minister take steps to ensure that any reduction in local authority income is replaced or supported by grant from him so that  there is no diminution of pressure on local authorities to meet their targets? Will he tell me what additional measures he will take to ensure that there is no increased use of landfill?

I echo a point made by Gil Paterson: there is no intention behind the proposal to stray into issues of local government finance. We understand clearly that those issues are a separate interest. As Dave Thompson suggested, it is right that we should clarify the parts of the Auditor General's work that the Audit Committee can consider. I can understand the worry that, if we simply gave the Auditor General carte blanche to put issues before the committee, some issues extraneous to his current work and our current work could end up being considered. It was right to make it clear that any documents put before the committee should have an accounting or financial basis. It was also  right to reflect the nature of the work that the committee has been doing. The suggested change is supported by all parties and all members of the Audit Committee. If we are constrained by a rule that says that a document or a report has to be laid before Parliament, we are constrained by a tight and specific definition, as Dave Thompson suggested. It is in the wider interests of the Parliament and the public that the committee be allowed to consider the financial and accounting issues that the Auditor General considers significant. There is no intention to stray into the remit or work of other committees. People would be right to be worried if the Audit Committee wanted to become an all-encompassing committee that could delve into policy matters on justice, health or education, because that would be inappropriate. When we think about how things might look in the future, we often refer to how things looked in the past, but there is no point in examining the past if we do not learn lessons from mistakes. However, when we are in danger of considering policy development issues, we should refer those issues to other committees. The proposed change has the unanimous support of all committee members and all parties. The proposal better reflects the work of the committee, and the change in nomenclature will be easier for the wider public to understand, because it will take us away from the notion that we are simply an internal audit committee of the Scottish Parliament, when internal audit is not part of our remit. I have no hesitation in recommending the proposed change to Parliament.

Can the cabinet secretary enlighten us about whether, in any of the discussions that he mentioned, the UK Government has indicated a willingness to collect the tax on behalf of the Scottish Government and return it to local authorities?

What did the Liberal Democrats ask the wider public about what they believed the implications of a 6p local income tax might be, and what were the results?

Unusually, I agree with Joe FitzPatrick: the Conservatives need to publish the figures to justify and sustain their arguments. However, I hope equally that John Swinney will listen to his exhortation and publish an analysis of the cost to small business of administering the local income tax. Joe FitzPatrick cannot justifiably ask the Conservatives to publish the figures that justify their arguments while failing to ask ministers of his party to publish the figures that justify theirs.

I made no accusations; I merely said that I agreed with Joe FitzPatrick's exhortation and that he needs to speak to John  Swinney about publishing figures. I welcome the thrust of Derek Brownlee's speech and congratulate him on it. It was measured and well set out. He is right to point to the futility of introducing a controversial taxation proposal in a Parliament such as this, given the uncertainty that the country might face after the next election and the further turmoil that would follow from that. At some point, we need to consider what Brian Adam said about how much support there is. Joe FitzPatrick grandiosely stated that local income tax is what the people of Scotland want. Indeed, in the Paisley Daily Express this week, a nationalist parliamentary candidate welcomed the results of the Scottish Government's consultation on council tax. He said: "I'm glad and yet unsurprised that the people of Scotland have given their backing to the SNP's proposal". On what basis does he say that the people of Scotland have done that? He says: "more than half of all individual respondents supported the SNP's proposals". There were 430 respondents, 55 per cent of whom supported the proposals. In other words, only 237 people were in favour. That is what he calls the people of Scotland: 237 in favour. Joe FitzPatrick described Scottish Action Against Council Tax as the voice of the people of Scotland, but I have never heard of that organisation. That shows the reality of the SNP's proposals. According to the SNP, 237 people represent the people of Scotland. However, its own analysis of the consultation responses says that "Given the primarily self-selecting nature of" the consultation exercise, the numbers could not be said to be representative. The most damning point of the whole argument is the one that Margo MacDonald made about collection. She is absolutely right about the problems that would arise from trying to collect local income tax through HMRC. She is also right to say that, in an independent country, one could reasonably aspire to what the SNP proposes. However, with the dog's breakfast of proposals hidden from the people of Scotland as they are just now, the Parliament cannot reasonably draw any conclusion on any proposal. When people are asked about their views on taxation, they may know what they are against. However, so far, the detail of the proposals that are on offer from the SNP and the Liberal Democrats has been hidden from the people of Scotland. If we are to justify ourselves as a truly democratic, representative Parliament, that detail needs to be published.

Will the member give way?

Can Jeremy Purvis confirm that the Liberal Democrats will not support the bill unless it includes the provision for each council in Scotland to set a local rate of income tax at the outset?

I share the concerns that Jackie Baillie and Duncan McNeil raised about the abuse of the blue badge scheme. We need to take action to identify the abuse, to confiscate badges where there is abuse and to publicise the disabled parking strategy. I do not want that to be left to a UK initiative. Will the minister specify what the Government will do to tackle abuse of the blue badge scheme in Scotland?

I understand perfectly Jackie Baillie's desire to ensure that disabled people are treated fairly and I fully support what she is trying to do. Will she reflect—and encourage planning authorities to reflect—on the fact that appropriate numbers of parking bays should be allocated for disabled people when new retail developments are built? To allocate too many can encourage the type of activity that Jackie Baillie describes, particularly if people see a large number of empty bays in an otherwise full car park.

Will Ken Macintosh refer to the point that Murdo Fraser made about funding? I understand that the Labour amendment does not call for ring fencing but, notwithstanding what Murdo Fraser said about that and in light of Ken Macintosh's point about deeds, it is surely incumbent on the Parliament and on ministers to get local authorities to specify the resources that are intended for child protection and to guarantee that they will be spent on ensuring that children are protected.

I join Robert Brown and others in praising the work that social workers do, often in difficult circumstances. Ian McKee is right to talk about the complexities of their work and the difficult decisions that they make. Often, we do not dwell on the good, correct decisions that are made, because we take them for granted, but tragically we have to confront the wrong and bad decisions that are made, and that is often done only with the benefit of hindsight. Having been friendly with many social workers for many years, I know how difficult decisions can be, and I know the dilemmas that they face and the pressures under which they work. No one should underestimate the work that social workers do or the complexity of the decisions that they make. We can agree about much of what has been said in the debate. I agree with Adam Ingram  when he says that what we have is a national disgrace. He is right—the judgment is damning, and not just for the current Administration. The same applies to previous Administrations, including the one of which I was a part. Collectively, we have failed looked-after children over many years, and local authorities, collectively and individually, have also done so. Sometimes, we get into the trivia of wanting instant responses to everything, but we cannot make simple judgments about many children, given their complex lifestyles. As has been said, we want to avoid taking some children into care. Instead, we should do whatever we can to keep them with their family. However, as recent reports have shown, some children need to be removed from their family for their own sake and their own protection. Richard Simpson is right to point out the complexities that drugs and alcohol bring to the equation. As the Minister for Children and Early Years said, we can undoubtedly point to some successes. Some children have gone on to lead hugely productive and rewarding lives, but I wonder how much of that we can put down to the system and how much of it is to do with the individual and what they have achieved despite everything that they have had to confront. In passing, however, like Richard Simpson, I note that the families with which they are placed make an enormous and beneficial contribution to their development. We should thank those families for that. On the one hand, the debate is encouraging, because of the consensus and shared values that we have, but on the other it is profoundly depressing. I suggest that we all—including me—have a degree of complacency on the issue. I address the following words in particular to the minister. I worry that complacency can turn to negligence if we are not careful. In effect, we are neglecting looked-after children. Offering warm words, as we have all done this morning, is complacent. We need much more than warm words. Ian McKee said that we do not want to get into a squabble about budgets, but if social workers are not properly resourced at the local level, they are unable to make the decisions that children need. As politicians, we cannot turn away from that. We are guilty if we simply exhort social workers to take on better practice and say, "It doesn't matter about the budgets. We're not going to squabble about that." We need to confront that. We need to take action. Whether ministers and the Scottish Parliament should take action through legislation or just through policy development is a matter for debate, but action is needed. I ask the minister to consider the results of previous work  and reports. If he cannot do so in today's debate, I ask him to respond to me in writing. One reason why I am depressed about the situation is because, when I look back to the words that Peter Peacock and I said as ministers, and compare them with what Adam Ingram is saying, I find that we are not moving forward. In 2007, I said: "Too many of our most vulnerable young people are not fulfilling their potential ... This is a problem that needs care and attention from everyone ... We must increase the possibilities". We can go on with the warm words, but what has happened—

Can I just finish, minister? There is a specific point that I want to make. What happened to the commitment, which was made publicly on behalf of us all, that the Scottish Cabinet would get regular reports? How many times since 2007 has the Cabinet been given a report on how looked-after children perform at school? What has the national champion that was suggested been doing, if indeed they have been doing anything? What have we done specifically to remind councils of their role and responsibilities as corporate parents? What have we done to improve training for teachers and other professionals, as we committed to do? Can the minister give me details of the guidance that key workers have been given on their role in supporting young people? It is all very well to say that we want councils such as Inverclyde Council to be emulated—every council should have a champion—but we need not an exhortation but an insistence that that happens. Indeed, we should set an example by having a Cabinet of champions. Not just the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning—who, unfortunately, is not here—but every member of the Cabinet should be responsible for making sure that a certain number of authorities do their job. If we do not give a lead, how can we expect others to follow? As Adam Ingram said, the issue is a national disgrace. It has gone on too long, and we are all part of it. We need to finish with the warm words and commit ourselves to effective action.

I agree profoundly with Ian McKee on the need to support not just children but their families, but does he agree that some of the budget cuts that we are seeing in local councils across the country affect the ability of professionals to do exactly that?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I do not disagree with anything that has been said this evening. Everything that has been put on the record testifies to a vibrant festival that not only adds value to Paisley but contributes to cultural life throughout Scotland. Wendy Alexander highlighted some of the financial pressures that are associated with such an event. Will the minister use her undoubted influence and long-standing connection with events in the area to encourage the funding organisations to see what they can do to sustain the event in the future?

Minister, like you I recognise the significance of the problem. Across Europe, foams are estimated to account for 16 times the amount of CFCs and 3.5 times the amount of hydrochlorofluorocarbons accounted for by refrigerators, so there is clearly a major problem. Has the Scottish Environment Protection Agency issued guidance on the issue? If so, what checks are being carried out? What enforcement action is being taken against those who transgress?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to support Scottish traditional arts and the Scots language. (S3O-4606)

It hardly bears resemblance to the facts to say that there is support for Scottish traditional arts, because consideration does not pay the bills. A number of organisations in Scotland face financial crisis and an uncertain future. Will the minister ensure that adequate financial provision is made to ensure that those organisations are able to survive?

Leaving aside the cheap flights that are provided by Ryanair and, sometimes, Aer Lingus, does the member agree that the prohibitive costs of the ferries on the routes that he mentioned—to Northern Ireland from Stranraer, Cairnryan and Troon—inhibit the passage of people between those areas? A comparison with the much cheaper fares between the south of  England and France puts those outrageous fares into perspective.

Will the member not reflect on the fact that the debate gives us an opportunity to consider progress and co-operation? Perhaps for once, all of us, collectively, could put aside the opportunity to highlight division.

I start by going off at a tangent. The Scottish diaspora and the homecoming have been mentioned, and there is no doubt that the homecoming will be significant. We take great pride in the number of people who identify with their Scottish ancestry and with Scottish history although they were born elsewhere—indeed, some of those people, such as Rod Stewart, identify themselves as Scots. We take great pride in that, so it is sad that there are still some people in this country who condemn others in this country as traitors for aligning themselves with the Irish diaspora. We have some way to go to face up to problems that are being addressed as part of the British-Irish Council process and the Good Friday agreement process. Margo MacDonald said that the British-Irish Council sounds like a political talking shop, and I am sure that many members of the public are wondering why we are spending half a day discussing it. However, Ted Brocklebank and Jamie Stone put the issue in its proper perspective. Jamie Stone talked about the north of Ireland. I do not know whether members watched the television programme last night that was presented by Eamonn Holmes, who was born and brought up in Northern Ireland. He talked to people who grew up in Northern Ireland and went on to make it big in show business and television about what it meant to grow up in such an atmosphere. He drew a sharp contrast between what it was like to be young in Northern Ireland in the past and what it is like in the current environment, in the absence of fear, guns and intimidation. A product of the Good Friday agreement of 10 years ago that we should celebrate is that people in these isles can grow up in a much safer and more secure environment than the one in which previous generations grew up. However, the process has not finished. Last night's television programme, which showed the peace wall in Belfast, demonstrated that communities are still divided and that fear and suspicion remain. There are still people who do not talk to one another. There is a legacy of the suspicion of sectarianism, which we have sometimes seen in this country and which we must deal with here. We should use the product of the peace process—the Good Friday agreement— to reinforce the benefits that we in this country can gain from it and we should try to consolidate the gains that have been made in Northern Ireland. Ted Brocklebank was right to talk about our shared history. He talked about the contribution that migrant workers made in Scotland and the contribution that Scots and Irish people made elsewhere in the world. We have shared experience and knowledge of the consequences of migration here and in Ireland. Is it not better to discuss the issues together than to allow some of our communities to inflict violence and mayhem on others?

Others may have done so, Presiding Officer, but I think that the issues that I am raising relate specifically to the British-Irish Council. I would not want to suggest that the Irish are behind us in multiculturalism, although they have perhaps come to some of the issues of inward migration later than we did. The British-Irish Council allows us to share knowledge, experience and best practice. As a minister, I was involved in some discussions on the problems inflicted by illegal drugs on all our societies, including Jersey, Guernsey and the Isle of Man—places that members might not immediately think of as experiencing problems with drug abuse. We can pass on to them some of the experience that we have gained. Indeed, we can show some of the other Administrations that we are ahead of the game in many issues, but we can also be big enough to accept that there are things that they have done before us—recovered assets in the Irish Republic, for example—from which we can benefit. Unfortunately, procedural issues need to be addressed as part of the sharing of experience. I hope that the cabinet secretary can give us some further information on the working relationship between the BIC and the British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly and on whether there will  be a permanently staffed secretariat. If we can contribute anything to making the body work better, we will all gain from it. Aileen Campbell is right: 10 years of shared practice has been significant. The Labour Government at Westminster took a courageous step, not just in devolving power in the United Kingdom but, carrying on from the previous Government, in engaging in the peace process in Northern Ireland. We are living with both the consequences and the opportunities that those courageous decisions have brought. Although, as Margo MacDonald suggested, the British-Irish Council sounds like a political talking shop, the fact that we can point to stability and security in Northern Ireland, the like of which has not been known for generations, certainly makes that political talking shop worth while.

This debate gives some of us an opportunity to advance a powerful, unified and telling message about the contribution that lottery funding can make in Scotland, not only to sport but to quality of life. For other members, it is an opportunity to nitpick, score points and be negative. That is a price worth paying if, at the end of the debate, the Parliament can send a strong and powerful message that the lottery will make a difference in Scotland. Margo MacDonald has been tireless in her efforts to promote the links between education, better health and sporting activity. We know that intervention and participation in sport at a young age can make a real difference to what young people achieve in their education, the quality of their life and their health. We should view the opportunity that the Commonwealth games brings to Scotland in that context. Jamie McGrigor was right to raise the lack of development of facilities in our new schools. Those are once-in-a-generation opportunities to make a difference to a local community. We need  to be more thoughtful about how we plan our investment and the range of facilities that we deliver, because they can make a difference to local communities, particularly in more isolated areas of Scotland. Ross Finnie was right to talk about realistic objectives, and to consider not only what the Commonwealth games brings to Scotland in terms of structural regeneration. Frank McAveety was right to speak about what the Commonwealth games can bring to Glasgow, and the east end in particular. My family is from the east end of Glasgow—many still live there and, as people who know me will testify, I am a regular visitor to that part of the city. It breaks my heart to see what has happened there over generations: the deprivation, the poverty, the drug addiction, the alcohol abuse and the physical decline in the area. However, there is still pride and hope there, and many people in the area look forward to what the Commonwealth games will do to bring their quality of life up to the standard that others in Scotland currently take for granted. We should not just assume that we are starting with a blank canvas. I give credit to what Glasgow City Council has done—and is doing—to make a difference in the city, through regeneration projects and building new schools. There is imagination there about capturing the opportunity that the Commonwealth games bring. We should aid and assist Glasgow in every way that we can. What happens in the east end of Glasgow will spill out into the rest of the city, and to the surrounding areas. The people from the constituency that I represent will go to Glasgow to use the cultural and sporting facilities in which Glasgow City Council has invested, so it is clear that other areas will benefit from what goes on there. We must grasp the bigger picture. I did not agree with the tone of some of what Bill Kidd said or with everything that he said, but he was absolutely right to put the games into the perspective of what they can do to transform the life of people in the city of Glasgow. As the minister rightly said, we want to use the Commonwealth games to boost Scotland's standing in the world. However, as Ian McKee said, the way in which to boost Glasgow and Scotland's standing in the world in the long term is not to provide a one-off event, but to get rid of our image as the sick man of Europe and of violence and educational underachievement. That means that, although lottery funding must be used to boost and enhance sport, it must also be used to tackle the endemic poverty and deprivation and the lack of educational opportunities. It must be  used to boost the number of volunteers and the social infrastructure in areas. If we transform Glasgow's statistics on matters such as poverty, ill health, violence and deprivation, at a stroke we will transform Scotland's statistics and push Scotland way up the international league. Therefore, let us use the Commonwealth games as an opportunity to invest in our sporting infrastructure but, more than that, let us ensure that we tackle the deep-seated and deep-rooted problems that have blighted our society for far too long.

I thought I heard the cabinet secretary say that the school under construction that she visited this morning is being constructed because of a decision that the present Administration made. She said that the construction work started in June or July of last year, which would mean that the planning and approval for it would have been made before May 2007. Can the cabinet secretary confirm that, in fact, this Administration gave approval for that? If not, will she correct the misleading impression that she gave?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it holds statistics on work-related assaults and, if so, what they were for 2006-07 and 2007-08. (S3O-4156)

I thank the minister for that full reply. It is clear that the legislation is now beginning to have an impact and that many people are now feeling the benefit of it, and I welcome the Government's extension of the number of people who are covered by it. It was right to start with emergency workers, but will the minister now reflect on the success of the legislation and on the fact that many others workers in Scotland, such as shop workers and transport staff, face not only intimidation but violence and assault day and daily? Will he consider ways of extending the legislation to give those workers the protection that the public believe they deserve?

Other speakers have made it clear that clostridium difficile-associated disease is not just a problem in one hospital. On 5 September, the Paisley Daily Express  reported that the fact that there had "been eight cases of the deadly Clostridium Difficile infection in one ward at the Paisley hospital over a four-week period ... was a contributory factor in the death of one patient", so it is clear that people in my constituency are worried about what is happening in our hospitals. I welcome the content and tone of the cabinet secretary's speech. I thought that she made some helpful comments and recognised the scale of the problem. This is a debate on which we should try to reach some common ground on behalf of the wider public. People will not forgive us if we are seen to squabble for party-political reasons over an issue on which there is general agreement. I worry that the cabinet secretary might inadvertently—I am not suggesting that she is doing so deliberately—be teasing people with the possibility of a public inquiry. She said that she did not rule out such an inquiry, but that issue is separated out in the amendment, which is otherwise similar to Labour's motion. I hope that during the day, the cabinet secretary might reflect on where we are. We do not want to give out a signal to the general public that politicians are squabbling and cannot agree on taking serious action on a significant issue. I hope that we will send out a clear message that we are intent on improving the situation in our hospitals.  Several speakers have highlighted the problem. Christine Grahame was right to mention some of the cultural and practical issues in our hospitals. Staff are not deliberately casual, but the fact that they can move from one institution to another and not have any long-term commitment to a hospital can cause problems. Like the cabinet secretary, I have experience of elderly relatives suffering hospital-acquired infections. The state of cleanliness of some wards leaves a lot to be desired. There seems to be some confusion about who is responsible for cleaning certain things at certain times. Sometimes unclean and unsafe conditions are left for far too long. Jackie Baillie made a good point about inspection. Why is it that we can find out about the tea bar at the Vale of Leven hospital, but we cannot find out before we go into a hospital whether it has a bad record, relative to other hospitals, on cleanliness and hospital-acquired infection? We should put such information into the public domain.

I do not disagree with Wendy Alexander. Before they go into a particular hospital, patients should have the right to access the data for that hospital. I see no reason why we cannot have unannounced inspections of the cleaning and safety standards in hospitals. It is a concern that more progress seems to be being made on the issue in England than is being made here. We should be big enough to learn from what is happening elsewhere. I acknowledge that time is short and that other members want to speak. Suffice it to say that we must find a way of coming together to take action  on what is a significant issue for the public. There is an opportunity for us to have further debate on inspection regimes and other specific issues on which practical suggestions have been made. The last thing that we should do on such a major issue that has had tragic consequences is divide along party-political lines over of what will be seen as splitting hairs and playing with words.

Can the minister provide statistics on how many contributors from the floor there were at the events and on how many such contributors mentioned independence? If he cannot do so now, will he revert to us in writing?

Just answer the question, Bruce.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Is it not insensitive that, when a member is attending a funeral, another member seeks to exploit that?

The cabinet secretary said that this situation contrasts with the situation at HMRC—she would say that, wouldn't she? Will she reflect on comments that her colleagues made in relation to the HMRC incident? Mike Weir spoke about the incompetence of the Administration, Stewart Hosie suggested that the Chancellor of the Exchequer had lost credibility, and Sandra White and seven of her colleagues in the Parliament called for the chancellor's resignation. Does the cabinet secretary agree that those comments were inappropriate?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any concerns about local authorities that are increasing class sizes. (S3O-3852)

That is fascinating. According to the minister, class sizes are a matter for local authorities but, before and since the election, ministers have been vocal in arguing for reduced class sizes, explaining their value and promulgating that policy. Now the minister seems reluctant to comment on the issue. I am asking for the minister's opinion: does she agree with, and approve of, those councils that are increasing class sizes in secondary 1 and 2 in maths and English?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. You are keen to allow MSPs to hold Government to account and you believe that this forum is one way of doing that, but that can work only if ministers attempt to answer the questions that are asked. In this case, the minister ended by making a personal observation and comment supporting a council on early years class sizes, but she refused to answer and give her opinion on secondary 1 and 2 maths and English. In terms of the standing orders of the Parliament, how do you expect Parliament to hold ministers to account when they will not answer the question that is asked but instead attempt to answer a different question?

I do not intend to engage in the personalisation of the debate that Fiona Hyslop started, but I would be happy to meet her to consider my correspondence to Renfrewshire Council on education and the feeble replies that I have received from that council. Today, cabinet secretary, I want you to rise above the party politics of this subject. I want you to set aside some of the to-ing and fro-ing and tit for tat that often goes on, and I want you to listen to—

Sorry, Presiding Officer. I want the cabinet secretary to listen to and respond to the voices of ordinary people in Renfrewshire. Will she answer Mrs June Ramsay, who is dismayed that, due to budget cuts, her daughter is in the dark as to whether Gleniffer high school, or any school in Renfrewshire, will be providing advanced higher art? She wants to know what sort of message it sends to snatch away the opportunity to study art from a young person who wishes to stay on at school, and who has been able to study art until now.

No, thank you. I want the cabinet secretary to answer Jacqueline Masterson and Ruth Walsh, parents of children at Gleniffer high school, who are concerned about the impact that the withdrawal of supported study and homework club services will have on pupils at the school, particularly those from areas of high deprivation. I want the cabinet secretary to answer not me but Fiona Wilkie, who is worried about the impact of the removal of all sciences at advanced higher level on her daughter's opportunity to study medicine at university. I want the cabinet secretary to answer Mary Hill, Lorraine Knotts, Moira McKillop and Gillian Hill, parents of pupils at Gleniffer high school, who are concerned about the budget cuts and who are wondering what the point is of building a brand new school if the  resources are not going to be available to run it properly. I want the cabinet secretary to answer Christopher Voysey, a school pupil who organised a petition that was signed by more than 100 senior pupils from throughout Renfrewshire. The petition was ignored by her SNP colleagues on Renfrewshire Council, who, at the last point of checking, have not even had the decency to reply to Christopher's letter, which was sent along with the petition. I want the cabinet secretary to answer Erica Wishart, who is not only a parent who is concerned about the impact that budget cuts will have on her child's education but a network teacher who fears for her job in a specialism that is under threat from the cuts. I want the cabinet secretary to answer the EIS members at St Benedict's high school, who believe that "with a reduction in teaching staff, increased class sizes, a reduced curriculum, cuts in teaching, learning support and behaviour support, the quality of educational provision in St. Benedict's will be severely compromised". I also want her to answer properly the EIS members at Gleniffer high school, whom I believe she has misquoted. They have said that the cuts in funding "make it impossible to offer the same level and depth of curriculum". I want the cabinet secretary to answer the 80 members of staff at Paisley grammar school, who are concerned about the impact of budget cuts in their school. The cuts are happening on the cabinet secretary's watch. The parents, pupils and teachers in Renfrewshire are looking to the cabinet secretary for leadership. They want her to use her influence with her SNP colleagues in Renfrewshire. They want her to use the status of her post to protect education. I am asking the cabinet secretary to act for ordinary Scots who are worried. Will she ask Renfrewshire Council to think again? Will she dip into her Administration's budgets to protect education? Will she do the right thing?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it not within the normal rules of engagement and debate in the chamber that when members are specifically mentioned by name, they should be given the opportunity to comment?

I note what the cabinet secretary says about Westminster responsibilities. Will he however confirm that his Administration has the power to provide financial  assistance to post offices, if it decides that it wishes to do so?

To ask the Scottish Executive which three new prisons have been sanctioned by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and what funding method will be used to build each of those prisons. (S3O-3441)

I note that the cabinet secretary avoided saying which three new prisons were commissioned by him and the Administration that he represents. However, I heard him say in a television interview that he had commissioned three new prisons. In fact, HMP Addiewell was commissioned by the previous Administration, which also gave its agreement to the building of Low Moss. What the cabinet secretary has been saying to the public is wrong. I hope that today he will put on record the fact that he has not commissioned three new prisons.

He is changing his story as he goes along.

To ask the Scottish Executive what commitment it has to advanced highers following its announcement on national qualifications. (S3O-3189)

The minister will be aware that concerns are being expressed in the Renfrewshire Council area about the threat of cuts in the availability of advanced highers in the coming academic year, including in my constituency. Will she join me in urging Renfrewshire Council to guarantee that, in the coming academic year,  there will be no diminution of the availability of advanced highers?

To ask the Scottish Executive how much funding the voluntary sector will receive in the 2008-09 financial year. (S3O-3131)

The minister is aware of concerns about funding across the voluntary sector in Scotland, and of stories of impending  redundancies. I have a simple question for the minister. Has he instructed his officials to find out how many redundancies are occurring in the voluntary sector, or is he not bothered?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many of the teachers who finished their probationary year in June 2007 have failed to find a job in teaching during the current academic year. (S3O-2933)

It is profoundly worrying that you seem to take comfort from the figure of 87.8 per cent, because it includes those who are on temporary or short-term contracts and who have failed to get a permanent job, which means that 20 per cent of those teachers have still to get a job. Renfrewshire Council is cutting at least 55 to 60 secondary teaching jobs, which will make it more difficult for new teachers to obtain employment. Minister, do you have any concerns about what Renfrewshire Council is doing?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the chief constable of Strathclyde Police and what issues were discussed. (S3O-2817)

I hope that, when the cabinet secretary next meets the chief constable, he will talk about recovered or seized assets as cashback for communities. The cabinet secretary will be aware that the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency has for some time argued for funding for a forensic accountant to assist it in its work. Can he confirm that funding for that post has  come not through the normal means but from the assets that have been seized from criminals, which I believe should be distributed to the communities that are most affected by drugs and crime? Will he reflect on that decision to rob disadvantaged communities of that cash? Will he fund the post in the way in which all other posts are funded?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the funding settlement for local government in 2008-09 will be sufficient to maintain services at current levels. (S3O-2718)

That is a fascinating answer. The minister said that record levels of funding should be sufficient to improve front-line services. In Scottish National Party-led Renfrewshire Council, we are seeing four libraries being closed, two nurseries being closed, school budgets being cut and at least 50 to 60 teaching posts being lost. That is a shameful record, given the current financial climate that Mr Swinney described. Does he endorse the actions of Renfrewshire Council?

Murdo Fraser makes an important point about not only the teaching of science, but the need for science teachers. Will he join me in expressing concern that many teachers who complete their probation fail to get jobs and that there seems to be a lack of urgency in the Administration about getting those teachers into jobs?

There are four values that underpin the curriculum for excellence: justice, compassion, integrity and, last but not least, wisdom. It is a pity that Christina  McKelvie will not benefit from the curriculum for excellence. David Whitton should not despair about literacy, however—she read the speech that had been prepared for her very well. I will refer to the comments that the minister made. I intervened because of a specific issue concerning the curriculum for excellence. The minister spoke about developing the baccalaureate, and she referred to the advanced higher. The minister should be aware of the growing concerns in Scottish education about the impact that the cuts are having on delivery. The minister is ill informed, and she was being unfair when she said that such concerns are Labour scaremongering. In my council area, the Scottish National Party-led administration of Renfrewshire Council is making extreme cuts to education. Ms Hyslop does not need to listen to the Labour Party. Last night's annual general meeting of Renfrewshire EIS unanimously passed a resolution saying that the meeting "condemns Renfrewshire Council's budget for 2008 as a threat to education, and to teaching jobs and instructs the secretary to inform the Director of Education and Leisure of the meeting's view of the budget". Teachers are worried about what is happening with education on the ground. That is profoundly worrying at a time when we are introducing what I believe is a visionary and aspirational measure. In some respects, it does require a major pedagological, pedagogi, pedagogical shift for some teachers. At least I try hard words. Teachers will have to make a fundamental shift in their thinking. The curriculum will mean having more personalisation and choice, and it requires more depth. That needs resources. Resources are fundamental to the process, but resources are being cut. The curriculum for excellence will not work without adequate resources in schools, not least information and communications technology resources, which many schools do not have.

Keith Brown touches on a point that is relevant across Scotland. There might be one or two exceptions, but hidden behind the council tax freeze are real worries about cuts in services and diminution of quality. Teachers and parents are now beginning to feel the practical impact of that. We need to put in the resources to make the curriculum work.  Member after member today has rightly pointed to current weaknesses. Teachers are committed to the curriculum for excellence—they say that it is in many respects what they have always tried to do. However, they are also saying that, at the moment, the situation is woolly and open to interpretation. How do we measure success? There is an issue about measurement and testing. Teachers are worried that while they are bringing in the curriculum for excellence, they must still cope with the five-to-14 curriculum. The curriculum for excellence is starting to permeate. It is also addressing the four capacities and it is encouraging teachers to think more, but there are worries about the outcomes and the practical implications, not because teachers are opposed to the curriculum for excellence or because they want to undermine it, but because they care genuinely about the quality of education and about their pupils. They cannot provide quality education if the Government withdraws funding, fails to ring fence properly and fails to protect teaching jobs throughout Scotland. I suspect that what we are seeing in Renfrewshire is but the thin end of the wedge, which we will see develop as the years progress. We have a visionary and aspirational process, but the vision will not be realised and the aspirations will be thwarted if we do not support and fund the process fully. Ken Macintosh and others were right to say that the current Administration and minister need to face up to their individual and collective responsibilities.

Does the minister share my concerns that the current advanced higher system is under considerable pressure in some areas? For example, in Renfrewshire Council, in my area, at least 50 to 60 teaching jobs are about to go and teachers are reporting to me that they will have to cut back on advanced highers. How can the minister expect baccalaureates to be introduced when education is being cut?

I commend Trish Godman for encouraging and facilitating this important debate. I hope that she will join me in welcoming to the Scottish Parliament my constituents Caroline and John from Paisley. As well as recognising the difference that proper wheelchairs would make to the quality of their lives, will she acknowledge that it is important that they be able to use their wheelchairs in the wider community? Will she join me in encouraging Renfrewshire Council to improve the pavements in and around Paisley so that wheelchair users can access services when they are out?

Today we are discussing an issue that might not register highly in the public's mind, but it throws up fundamental challenges for the Parliament. It questions to some extent whether the Parliament is fit for purpose and whether it can, as it is expected to do, hold the Administration to account on behalf of the people of Scotland. I have concerns about how we are doing that, and I have concerns that the present Administration is playing fast and loose with the rules and the basis on which the Parliament was created. Paragraph 1.1(b) of the Scottish ministerial code says: "Ministers have a duty to the Parliament to account, and be held to account, for the policies, decisions and actions taken within their field of responsibility". So far, so good. Paragraph 1.1(d) says: "Ministers should be as open as possible with the Parliament and the public ... They should refuse to provide information only when disclosure would not be in the public interest." In the chamber on 20 December 2007, when debating class sizes in primary 1 to 3, I asked John Swinney: "Will the cabinet secretary confirm that, in August this year, ahead of the budget, ministers collectively knew that the target could not be met by 2011?" Mr Swinney did not answer that question. He was  then asked by Ken Macintosh whether he would write to me with the information requested. He replied: "I do not intend to write to Mr Henry, because there are no issues that I need to follow up from the answer that I have just given him."—[ Official Report , 20 December 2007; c 4724.] I wrote to John Swinney the same day to ask the same question. He replied 40 days later, saying that he considered that he did not need to follow up any of the issues and that he had nothing to add to the answer. It was a simple question, but there was a refusal to answer, despite the fact that the ministerial code says that ministers should not refuse to answer such questions. On 12 February 2008, following a freedom of information request, I received a copy of a minute of a meeting last year between Donald Henderson, then head of the Government schools division, and Universities Scotland, which stated that "the advice that had been offered to ministers" is that "the scale of the commitment does not allow it to be delivered in the life of a parliament ... With the scale of the plans to reduce class sizes in P1 to P3 ... the commitments will take 8 to 10 years to achieve." We can see why John Swinney was reluctant to give an answer but, in refusing to do so, he clearly breached the ministerial code. Has action been taken by the First Minister? Clearly not, but there is also an issue for the Parliament. As you know, Presiding Officer, I have written to you on the issue. You said that Parliament can hold ministers to account by oral and written parliamentary questions. You also said, on 9 January, that the Parliament's standing orders "do not make any provision for answers" and therefore you have no powers under the rules to challenge what is said. We have a ministerial code that is being ignored and a Parliament that has no power to act. Paragraph 1.1(c) of the ministerial code says: "It is of paramount importance that Ministers give accurate and truthful information to the Parliament". Bruce Crawford said to me that the First Minister always gives accurate information to the Parliament, but I beg to differ. On 5 September, I asked the First Minister whether he could confirm that his promise to reduce class sizes in primary 1 to 3 "will be delivered in the lifetime of this parliamentary session". He replied: "Yes, I can".—[ Official Report , 5 September; c 1378.]  That was clear: it will be delivered by 2011. As the FOI answer that I referred to earlier indicated, ministers had been advised before July that the commitment would not be met by 2011 and, indeed, that it might not even be met by 2015. Ministers knew that the promise would and could not be met at least three months before the First Minister confirmed to Parliament that it would be. I argue that the First Minister has misled Parliament. Nothing has been done and there has been no attempt to retract. As you know from exchanges of correspondence, Presiding Officer, I am concerned that the Parliament has no power to do anything about it. A First Minister can ignore the ministerial code. No action can be taken and very little can be done to hold ministers to account. The challenge is not just for the Administration but for the Parliament. Are we prepared to do something about the situation and to give people in this country the confidence that their politicians will tell the truth and be held to account when they do not?

I could not possibly comment on that. Bruce Crawford raised the First Minister's behaviour. The code of conduct requires any minister who does not give accurate and truthful information to the Parliament to tender their resignation to the First Minister. Does Bruce Crawford agree that the First Minister should resign if he does not give truthful and accurate information to the Parliament?

I welcome the First Minister's comments about tackling drug misuse and I am sure that he agrees that the best way to do that is to prevent drugs from getting into the community in the first place. I hope that the First Minister will reflect on the success of the drug dealers don't care campaign, which led to significant arrests and convictions. Will the First Minister repeat that initiative and will he invite members of the council to join him in running similar campaigns simultaneously in their Administrations so that we have a concerted effort to tackle the drug dealers who cause mayhem and misery in our communities?

Does the member agree that, if we ensure that children do not go into prisons, the funding for secure units must be guaranteed and that there should be no threat to secure units?

It is because the Government was going to lose the vote.

At a stroke, Bill Wilson has managed to destroy the efforts of Kenny MacAskill to develop a constructive argument about dealing with something on the basis of consensus. What we heard from Bill Wilson is what Kenny MacAskill and others really believe and puts Kenny MacAskill's current position into perspective. Fergus Ewing straight-facedly said that the SNP believes in legislation across the UK. However, as Bill Butler pointed out, Fergus Ewing's colleague Kenny MacAskill said in 2005: "The Scottish National Party's position is clear: this Parliament must legislate on firearms and it must do so forthwith." In 2005, there was nothing about asking Westminster for more powers or trying to get consensus across the UK. Ahead of an election, that was the bold Kenny's position: the SNP will act and this Parliament will take action. Fergus Ewing was quite right to say that action needs to be taken across the UK.

Kenny MacAskill said that he has made his position quite clear—far from it. In 2005, he said: "this Parliament must legislate ... forthwith."— [ Official Report , 24 March 2005; c 15673.]  Today, we hear nothing about legislating forthwith—indeed, Fergus Ewing says that action needs to be taken across the United Kingdom.

No thank you, Mr Ewing. We have both inconsistency and bluster—Bill Wilson was right to condemn playing politics with people's safety and to condemn political posturing.

No thank you, Mr Wilson. That is what Kenny MacAskill and others have been doing. My view is quite clear. As Pauline McNeill said, I see no valid reason for anyone in this country to have an air-gun. There might be people who might argue that there are sporting or vermin control reasons for having an air-gun. Someone who lives in a city or a town, however, does not have those reasons and has no valid case to make for possessing an air-gun. Like Pauline McNeill, Bill Butler and others, I believe that we should reflect on whether the current legislation is effective and, if it is not, we should make a case for going further. Bill Aitken was quite right to put the issue in the context of the United Kingdom legislation, because if the current legislation is proving to be ineffective and not guaranteeing safety, further action needs to be taken. It is within those terms of reference that I remain somewhat cynical about what Kenny MacAskill said. If he believes that a summit is the way to advance the argument, why is there no reference whatsoever to the need for such a summit in his motion? His motion is bland in some respects and he has cynically and somewhat cruelly attempted to use emotions in order to make party political—and worse, constitutional—points about a very serious issue.  As Bill Aitken said, if the matter remains with Westminster at the moment, we should be supporting and encouraging initiatives from Westminster, not trying to upstage, pre-empt or undermine its responsibility. Within that context, there is no guarantee that there will be a summit led by Kenny MacAskill because, as Pauline McNeill suggested, he has approached the matter in the wrong way. Indeed, we could have Kenny MacAskill's summit being Kenny MacAskill talking to himself in a mirror. I am told by many that that is his favourite audience, since he will get nothing back that disputes anything that he says. Yes, action needs to be taken; yes, there needs to be more clarity around the issue; and yes, we need a UK-wide debate for all the valid reasons that have been given in the chamber today. It is a disgrace—to echo Bill Wilson's sentiments—that Kenny MacAskill has attempted to use the fears, emotions and sadness that many people feel because of what has happened in order to—if one listens carefully—advance a very cynical political point of view. I support Pauline McNeill in what she says—that is the right way forward.

I presume that the suggestion of hosting a summit has been well thought out and is not just a political stunt. If that is the case, will the minister explain why The Herald reported that the Home Secretary had not received any formal invitation to attend?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to help low-paid workers in the NHS. (S3O-1896)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the furore in the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde area about car parking charges. I welcome the action that the minister has taken so far to curb the proposed charges. However, even with the health board's compromise of limiting the charge to £3 a day, there will be a severe impact on low-paid NHS workers, with £15 a week being deducted from their take-home pay, which will leave many people struggling to make ends meet. Will the cabinet secretary take action to ensure that low-paid health workers are not punished, penalised and left destitute by the health board's proposed actions?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you reflect on whether you have the authority and power to take action when ministers say things in the chamber that are completely untrue? If you do not have that power, will you discuss with the Procedures Committee what can be done to allow you to take action to stop that practice?

The First Minister referred to the delivery of 20,000 extra teachers. On 5 September, he said that the teachers who would be used to reduce class sizes in primaries 1 to 3 would be in place by 2011. Will he confirm that, when he said that, he knew that he and his ministers had previously been advised by officials that that could not be achieved by 2011?

SNP and Conservative speakers—it is sometimes difficult to tell the difference between them—have tried to suggest that there is no difference between this year's budget process and previous budget processes, but there is a significant difference. Whether we like it or not, and whether we want to make political arguments about it or not, the delays in the comprehensive spending review and in our knowing how much we have to spend necessitate the adoption of an approach that is different from the one that was employed previously. Elaine Murray spelled out in great detail why the situation is different this time round. Another issue is the fact that, this time, we do not have what we could describe as a detailed programme for government to scrutinise, so we do not know how much we have to scrutinise. The Scottish Conservatives talk about re-examining the process next year, but by that time the budget will have been set, the decisions will have been made and it will be too late to have any great influence on the process.

There are two different issues. The procedures could be examined and I am sure that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee will do that, but members have a responsibility to deal with the reality that confronts them. As many speakers have said, we are about to enter a budgetary process without having had a stage 1 debate and without a detailed programme for government—we must look at a list of promises that, frankly, are not worth the paper on which they were written. Jeremy Purvis was right to make the point that it was good enough for the Parliament to have a series of themed, portfolio-based debates before the summer recess. It was all right for the Parliament to have such debates when there were no decisions to be made and when there was no detail available, but now we are told that having such debates when there are decisions to be made and when the figures and the budgets are available would somehow be an affront to parliamentary democracy and undermine the Parliament's procedures. There is not only flawed logic but complete dishonesty in that position. An  attempt is being made to avoid any detailed scrutiny of decision making. The biggest difference between this year's budget process and that of previous years is the fact that the present Administration was elected on a specific set of promises, which now need to be examined in detail and costed. We all knew before the election that those promises could not be met or delivered on. Given that the SNP had access to the civil servants just as the other parties did, it would have been advised that those promises could not be met. We all knew the budgetary parameters within which our proposals had to be worked out, so the SNP must have known that it could not sustain its extravagant promises. All those promises persuaded many people to vote in the present Administration but, even so, it is still only a minority Administration. It has only one representative more than the Labour Party and it received very few votes more. Those promises were significant enough to change the result of the election. That is why we need to know exactly what has been going on and why the Parliament and its committees have a duty to look into the details. However, there is something more substantial than all that, and the Parliament will have to confront it. This has not just been the usual broken promises that politicians sometimes offer. This time round, we have to examine whether the SNP knowingly and wilfully told the electorate something that it knew not to be true, and we have to examine whether the SNP has knowingly misled the Parliament with details and statements that were not true. In some of their comments since the election, ministers have wilfully and deliberately misled Parliament. I will come back to that in a minute.

The SNP said that there would be 1,000 extra police, but now, in an answer to a parliamentary question, Kenny MacAskill has said that there are no targets. The SNP also misled us all on class sizes. It is using the freedom of information legislation to hide the fact that officials held meetings with the universities following which ministers were advised that the targets could not be met during this session of Parliament. Despite the SNP's attempts to hide, the information will come out. Following those meetings, on 5 September, after I had asked whether his promise on class sizes in primaries 1, 2 and 3 would be delivered during this session of Parliament, Alex Salmond said that he could confirm that it would, which was why he had made early announcements to that effect.  If the SNP believes that it is on solid ground, let it release the information. I believe that the SNP has been misleading the Parliament.

I commend Stuart McMillan on giving Parliament an opportunity to discuss a tragic and serious matter. It is profoundly disappointing that, so soon after taking decisive action in the previous session to address the injustice for victims of mesothelioma and their families, we must again discuss an injustice that concerns an asbestos-related disease or injury—however we want to describe it. Stuart McMillan and Des McNulty described how pleural plaques come about, and they eloquently described in detail their consequences. There can be no doubt whatever about where pleural plaques originate and who is responsible for them. The Parliament is confronted with the consequences of a House of Lords decision and must now consider what it should do, if it can do anything. I argue that we can do something. I know the dilemma that the minister faces and the type of advice that he is being offered, because I have been there. However, the complexities that are involved ultimately require political resolution and determination. The ruling that has been made cannot be justified in any way, shape or form. As a Parliament, we must ask what we can do, because sufferers of asbestosis, including pleural plaques, have been denied the chance to get justice. I give credit to the campaigning groups that have, with the victims, been responsible for keeping the issue at the forefront of our minds. Those people have been ably supported by individuals and legal firms that have been mentioned. However, I want to pay tribute to the trade unions in particular, which have taken their responsibilities extremely seriously. Not only have the GMB and the sections of Unite echoed and articulated support for the victims, they have invested substantial amounts of money to try to get justice for victims at the House of Lords. The exercise has not been cheap—it has cost £1 million or more—but it has been worth every penny, because it has attempted to address a profound wrong. The trade unions' work is to be commended, although their best efforts have, unfortunately, failed. It now falls to us to consider what needs to be done. Whether the minister can say anything tonight about what will be done is neither here nor there,  but he can do something, and something should be done. I know that the team that is sitting in the Parliament to support the minister consists of very able officials who supported Cathy Jamieson and me in our deliberations on the Rights of Relatives to Damages (Mesothelioma) (Scotland) Bill. They know the law and the issues that are involved, and they care about the subject and the people who have been victims. I hope that I am not embarrassing them. The minister is well and ably supported. The time is right for politicians in the Parliament to step up to the mark. We should do something. We should say clearly on the record that we will do something and that members will unite across party groups, just as they did in the previous session when there was no political dissent or division on the issue, to ensure that people are not again left to suffer alone. We should make it clear that we are behind them and that we will rectify a wrong. I hope that we will do something quickly.

Has the minister been advised that the proposal to cut to 18 the number of pupils in primaries 1 to 3 cannot be met by 2011?

Aileen Campbell questioned Labour's vision. Labour has a vision for education generally but also specifically for early years education. It was because of that vision that we extended the opportunities for parents to send their children to nursery schools free of charge. Because of our vision, we extended opportunities by making sure that play is a prominent feature in primary 1 and into primary 2, as Jeremy Purvis suggested. That was one of the things that I did when I was minister. Our vision is also one of the reasons why Labour's manifesto suggested that there should be a qualified early years worker in primary 1 classes in schools with the lowest attainment.

We can learn from the interesting experiences of many countries. I will return to that in a moment. As Karen Whitefield said, we were careful to ensure that all our policies and pledges were costed and could be delivered. As I pointed out to Jeremy Purvis earlier, the First Minister was very specific on 31 May when he talked about "the commitment to provide a fully qualified nursery teacher for every nursery child in Scotland".— [ Official Report , 31 May 2007; c 317.]  That commitment was far more specific than just giving access to a nursery teacher. I hope that the First Minister will see that commitment through to delivery. If he does not, he should at least explain to us why that will not be the case. Yesterday, we read accusations of shifty auditing; today's debate highlights what is more akin to shifty promises, especially the promise to deliver cuts in class sizes to 18 in primaries 1 to 3. Before I address that issue, I want to reflect on the superficial and inadequate logic that seems to underpin the SNP's thinking on the policy. When I asked a parliamentary question on what international evidence had been considered before deciding to proceed with the policy, I was referred to the student teacher achievement ratio project—the STAR project—in Tennessee. However, a closer examination of that research reveals that, of the 79 schools in the sample, only 40 showed any significant gains in increased educational attainment. That is hardly a ringing endorsement. Worse, as the project could not control movement in and out of the schools, only 1,842 children out of the total of 11,600—just under 16 per cent—remained in the project throughout the time of the study. Recent academic reviews of the STAR project have raised serious questions about the viability of a simplistic blanket reduction in class sizes. Eric Hanushek of the Hoover Institution at Stanford University questions the quality of the STAR project and suggests that its evidence overstates the impact of reduced class sizes. He states: "The one limited and flawed experiment in Tennessee cannot be taken as providing the definitive evidence needed for policy changes that cost billions of dollars annually." Other academics have also questioned the STAR project's approach.

I point the minister to the international evidence. She should perhaps read it at some point.  It is clear that the quality of teacher development, the availability of proper resources and access to teacher support are all more important than crude reductions in class sizes. Normore and Ilon from Florida International University conclude that some of the lessons learned "include the need for adequate facilities, policies that allow flexibility in the use of funds to maintain focus in learning and not just on getting the numbers down, excellent teaching, and directing resources" particularly towards children in minority and low-income families. Again, Normore and Ilon state: "Our results show that lower class size is the least cost-effective intervention for public monies that Florida elementary schools can make." All the evidence has been ignored except one piece of research that fits the prejudice of SNP ministers. Karen Whitefield and others have talked about the consequences of the policy, but I dispute whether the policy can be met. Before the election, the SNP gave a clear commitment that the policy would be delivered and it said nothing about having to rely on others. Those in the SNP who were responsible for formulating the policy before the election had access—as did all the parties—to civil servants to cost their policies and consider their implications. They knew roughly the budgetary parameters and they knew the logistical implications. I believe that they would have been told before the election that such a promise could not be delivered by 2011, yet they persisted with the duplicity. Worse, ministers will also, I believe, have been told since the election that the promise could not be delivered by 2011, yet they have persisted in saying that it could. Three ministers—Alex Salmond on 7 June and 6 September, Fiona Hyslop on 21 June and Adam Ingram on 4 October—have persistently repeated a promise that I doubt can be delivered. What is worse is that they will, I believe, have been advised of that. This issue goes beyond the usual broken promises and failure to deliver. Such is the seriousness of the matter that, given the way in which ministers have behaved, I believe that there should be a full parliamentary inquiry into whether the commitment can be met, whether ministers knew that it could not be met and whether they have tried to hide the truth from Parliament.

As Jeremy Purvis said, no definition of access has been given. Does he accept that what the First Minister and others clearly said was not that there would be access, but that there would be a teacher for every nursery child, which is significantly different?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to ensure access to hospitals for all sections of the community. (S3O-922)

The minister will be aware of the furore among employees and communities about Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board's car parking charge proposals. Does she agree that the proposals discriminate against lower-paid employees and those sections of the community who need treatment or want to visit people in hospital but cannot afford to pay the charges? Will she give a commitment to take action to prevent the health board from imposing this punitive levy on people who will not be able to access hospitals if it is introduced?

I do not disagree with anything that Nigel Don has said. He makes a reasoned and reasonable case about what policing in Scotland should be like. However, does he agree that the thrust of this morning's debate, rather than being about what the police should be doing, is about whether, prior to the election, a commitment was made on delivery of  1,000 extra police officers? Does he agree that it is incumbent on the present Administration to deliver on that highly specific promise?

I note what the minister said about steady progress. Will he confirm that the commitment, that both Fiona  Hyslop and the First Minister have made in Parliament, to reduce class sizes in primary 1 to primary 3 and nursery classes will be met by 2011?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it intends to take to protect historic coastal sites. (S3O-875)

We all recognise the significant implications of climate change and the threat that it poses to many parts of Scotland. When will the Administration bring forward a climate change bill?  If the minister cannot say, why not? Will she reconsider and now offer support to Sarah Boyack's proposed member's bill on energy efficiency and microgeneration? Again, if not, why not?

Will Mr Russell take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I hesitate to say it, but a serious allegation was just made about a threat that we would resort  to electoral misrepresentation and electoral fraud. Will Mike Russell withdraw that serious allegation?

Will the member give way on that point?

Will the member give way?

It is right that this Parliament continues to expose the level of duplicity that was perpetrated on the people of Scotland by the SNP at the last election. We are already seeing a catalogue of excuses advanced by the SNP to try to explain away its failure or unwillingness to deliver what was promised. The most blatant excuse is that everything is down to the spending review and that somehow Westminster is to blame for all its problems. The truth is somewhat different. Before the election, each of the parties had access to civil servants to cost its promises and manifestos. The SNP knew the size of the current budget and like everyone else it could make adjustments within certain parameters about future budgets while waiting to see final details. So, when the SNP came forward with its proposals on education, it would have had been advised of the cost and indeed the consequences. Let us look at a couple of examples. On 29 November 2006, speaking in advance of a speech at the University of Strathclyde, Fiona Hyslop said: "Only an SNP Government will write off the outstanding Student Loans debt". Note the clear language—not servicing or assuming the debt, but writing it off. Fiona Hyslop was not the only one. On 27 July 2006, Nicola Sturgeon, speaking to young people in Edinburgh, said the SNP package "will allow for the write off of existing graduate debt from student loans". Not to be outdone, Alex Salmond, writing in Liberate , the student nationalist newspaper in September 2006, said the SNP would "scrap the student loan debt for current graduates". There was no misunderstanding. On the contrary, a clear line was developed that gave the specific promise that student debt would be written off. Alex Salmond, Nicola Sturgeon and Fiona Hyslop were quite clear that the debt was to be written off. They were told at the time that the £1.58 billion of student debt was unaffordable but not only did they persist, they sought to ridicule  those who pointed out that it was unaffordable. Allan Wilson, then the minister responsible for higher education funding, wrote to The Herald to point out that the SNP figures were bogus. He pointed out that if the debt was to be written off, it would have to be done in one year of the existing budget. He stated clearly that Audit Scotland had advised that once something is no longer held to be a debt, it cannot be held on the balance sheet and must be written off via the operating statement. Even worse, Treasury funding to the Scottish Executive, in the year of the write-off, would be commensurately reduced. It would be a double whammy of monumental proportions. The SNP sneered at Allan Wilson. He was derided and denounced, but now he has been shown to be absolutely correct. Even though the SNP was warned and told that its promises could not be delivered, it persisted. What do we have now? The SNP has made a full-scale retreat to a cop-out—it will provide nothing near what was promised. Instead, it will merely service the debt. Leaving aside the foolishness of that proposal, which will mean that £40 million will have to be diverted from front-line services every year, while nothing is done to reduce the debt, it is a complete U-turn from what was promised. What word should we use to describe people who knowingly make promises that they cannot keep? What word should we use to describe people who continue to repeat something that they know is not true and—worse—which they have been advised cannot be delivered? Some would say that such people are guilty of telling lies; others would call it deception or misrepresentation. What words properly describe those people who engage in lies, deception or misrepresentation? Whatever word one uses, it hardly touches on the breathtaking scale of what was done last May. The same can be said about the promise on the number of teachers that are required to deliver class-size reduction in primary schools and more teachers for nursery education. Alex Salmond and Fiona Hyslop have confirmed to the Parliament that that promise will be delivered by 2011, but they know that that cannot be done. They are already starting to get their retaliation in first. They say that delivery of their promise will require the co-operation of local councils, but there was no mention of that before the election. At the time, we were told that an SNP Administration would deliver more teachers; there was no talk of having to rely on others. Now we have more weasel words, squirming and playing of the blame game. All the advice that the SNP would have been given, before the election and since, would have told it that what it was promising could not be delivered, but it persisted.  Taken in totality, the scale of misrepresentation is truly staggering. We were told that prisons would be taken back into the public sector. The reality is different—even Low Moss will be built by the private sector. We were told that PPP would be abolished, but now it is to be allowed to continue, with the Administration being prepared to pick up the cost. We were told that there would be a council tax freeze, but now we find out that that will happen only if local authorities co-operate. On health, the jury is still out on whether the promises that the SNP made in relation to Lanarkshire and Ayrshire can be delivered and on what the cost of that will be to other services, but people in the Vale of Leven and elsewhere have had no words of comfort. Do they not count? On education, the SNP has made a complete U-turn on writing off student debt and the start of a U-turn on class-size reduction. The Parliament has a duty to expose the scale of what has been done. Each party in the Parliament needs to think carefully about the consequences of allowing such behaviour to continue. We must reflect seriously on whether we can have any confidence in a First Minister and a team who are prepared to behave in such an outrageous fashion.

I understand perfectly what Patrick Harvie is saying and what he says in his amendment. However, does he not recognise that there is a world of difference between the aspirations that he has put forward and the reality of what is being done by the Administration? We are not talking about criticism of the Government's inability to do things because it is a minority Government; we are talking about the deception that has been perpetrated because it has promised things that cannot be delivered.

Thank you for the guidance, Presiding Officer. My question is on Edinburgh: clearly, the principle that applies to Edinburgh will apply to other councils throughout Scotland. Notwithstanding Margo MacDonald's question, and what the minister said about he and his colleague pursuing the matter with the Treasury—indeed, I wish them well in their endeavours—surely the minister should reflect on the fact that, ahead of the housing stock transfer ballots, he and other members of his party encouraged tenants in Edinburgh and elsewhere to vote no, in the full knowledge of the rules that pertained at the time. If the Treasury's answer is that there will continue to be consistency throughout the UK, I hope that the minister will reflect on the moral obligation that this Administration is under to find the money to help those authorities that have been disadvantaged.

I said that you encouraged them.

I, too, pay tribute to Patricia Ferguson for enabling this Parliament to express not only its concern but its anger about what happened in this tragedy. The tragedy affected the people in the factory, but it is not just a Glasgow issue—there are families in my area, Renfrewshire, who also grieve as a result of that dreadful disaster.  As other members have said, one of the factors that has marked what has happened since the tragedy is the dignity of the survivors and the families. Another is their determination—ably supported by Patricia Ferguson and the STUC—to see a number of developments: they rightly want justice for themselves and for their loved ones, but they also want to ensure that such an event never happens again. They want to see lessons being learned so that others will not have to suffer as they have suffered. We can do a small thing to help them get the reassurance that others will not suffer, but we cannot directly and immediately offer them a solution. Robert Brown outlined some of the dreadful things that were done—or not done—in the factory but, unfortunately, the legal remedies are complex. A great deal of deliberation and debate will be required to resolve them. They cannot be resolved by the Parliament or by the Scottish Executive or Government on its own—something needs to be done in partnership with the UK Government. That is why Patricia Ferguson is right to call for a full judicial inquiry. We need to know all the circumstances of the tragedy. We need to know what happened and why it happened. We also need to shine a light on the way forward. We must look into the dark recesses of our legal system to see what can be done and how something can be changed to ensure that others do not suffer in the future. That is easy to say—we all made similar statements when Karen Gillon raised the Transco tragedy. We all said that something like that should never happen again. Not only did it happen again, it happened on a much bigger scale. God help us as to what might happen in the future if we do not learn the lessons and apply our minds to coming up with suitable remedies. Patricia Ferguson is right to say that a full judicial inquiry should be held to give us the framework for looking for solutions to give other workers the assurances that they deserve. I think that that can be done, but it is a matter of will. I am heartened by the support from across the political parties. This is not a party political issue. I am heartened that so many people are speaking with one voice to say that we owe it to those who have suffered to ensure that something comes from this.

To ask the First Minister what the estimated revenue and capital costs are for implementing primary 1 to primary 3 class sizes of 18 across the country by 2011. (S3F-146)

I am bemused by that answer. Regardless of whether the First Minister is holding discussions, he needs to know what the revenue and capital costs of the policy are. As we heard this morning, it is clear that ministers are trying to line up a scapegoat for their failure, in the form of local authorities. How many teachers will be required to deliver the policy and to provide a fully qualified teacher for every nursery child in Scotland, as both the First Minister and Fiona Hyslop have promised? Does he stand by those pledges, and will both be delivered by 2011?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I hear Sandra White's analysis and interpretation of the motion but, if that motion became the will and view of the Parliament, would she and her party accept that the Parliament had expressed a strong view? Would the present Administration reflect on that and come back to Parliament to address the points that the motion makes?

After the euphoria of last night, it is hard to come back to the reality of politics in Scotland. We all celebrate with Alex McLeish and his squad the magnificent victory over France last night—although perhaps not all of your staff will be so happy this morning, Presiding Officer. However, the rest of us still have smiles on our faces. Fiona Hyslop's amendment says it all about the Scottish National Party's attitude. For SNP members, everything has got to wait until the spending review. It does not apparently matter that they made promises and commitments in order to get elected. It does not matter that they could, in fact, deliver many of them without securing a majority in Parliament. It is simply a case of their trying to blame others for their inability and unwillingness to deliver. Some might call it naivety; some might call it plain deception. Whichever it is, the SNP's attempt to blame Westminster is another case of claming that a big boy did it and ran away. No one can doubt the importance of having a highly educated, highly trained, highly skilled and well-motivated workforce, nor can anyone doubt the need for lifelong learning. In the debate on the skills strategy yesterday, we heard a clear call for urgent action from all the Opposition parties. We heard condemnation of the SNP's failure to deliver a clear, coherent, effective strategy, and Parliament voted down the minister's dismal offer. I hope that the minister will ensure that the will of Parliament is reflected and that she will return quickly with a better effort and more detail. Everything that the SNP has had to say so far has fundamentally lacked an explanation of how Scotland's universities will compete with those in the rest of the United Kingdom. The minister's prevarication and delay is causing worry and uncertainty. We have heard this morning from Audit Scotland about the investment challenges that face us. We have also heard about the  contribution that further education colleges can make. Labour, in partnership with the Liberal Democrats, invested heavily in the FE sector. We can see the results, with 21 st century facilities springing up all around Scotland. Now, however, there is uncertainty over capital investment, there are worries about unfair and inadequate funding, and there is deafening silence about what will be done to allow further education colleges to rise to the challenges ahead. Even on its foolish and ill-considered proposal to write off student debt, the SNP is squirming. We can be in no doubt that the SNP said that the debt was to be written off, not serviced or assumed. For the moment, let us leave aside the fact that the proposal would not put a single extra penny into higher education or improve the quality of education. It is a bizarre spending priority. However, it was a promise made by Alex Salmond, Nicola Sturgeon and others. Student nationalists told fellow students to vote SNP on the understanding that it would deliver on its promises. Allan Wilson, a minister at the time, exchanged letters with Nicola Sturgeon to warn her that the SNP's promise was unaffordable. He was denounced by the SNP. Now, however, he has been shown to be correct. The SNP cannot afford the £1.85 billion that would be needed to write off student debt. To use a notorious historical phrase, if you are going to tell a lie, make it a big one. Now, a completely different promise has been made to assume responsibility for servicing student debt. In other words, we would have to spend more than £40 million every year to service the debt without eating into the capital—we would be paying the money for ever and a day. That would divert £40 million from front-line services—and only if the SNP was able to assume responsibility for paying a debt to a third party. Why do we need to wait for the spending review when Fiona Hyslop and others have been so adamant that they will act? Let us consider teacher numbers. The difference between the present Administration and the previous Administration is that the Labour-Lib Dem Executive spelled out what could be offered and what could be afforded, and then it delivered. We said that we would deliver 53,000 teachers to Scotland's schools. The SNP said that we would not deliver them, but we did. We said that we would cut class sizes in primary 1. Despite criticism from the SNP, we delivered. We said that we would deliver smaller classes of 18 pupils for maths and English in secondary 1 and secondary 2. Fiona Hyslop said that the target was not being met but, as Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, she knows that we delivered as promised.

I find that quite staggering. The minister, with access to all her officials, all the statistics and all the information, has not had the competence to go and ask the question. Instead, she is asking me, with the one researcher at my disposal, to go and find out the figures from all around Scotland. What have you been doing, minister? We delivered the money. We delivered the teachers. If you have not got the wit or the ability, move over and let someone else do the job. Despite the minister's persistent criticisms of our decision to allow flexibility in S1 and S2 maths and English, she has decided that flexibility will continue. What a hypocrite. The SNP claims that it will deliver class sizes of 18 pupils in primary years 1 to 3. Let us leave aside for today the questions whether that is the wisest thing to do and whether the international evidence justifies it. Let us instead consider the practical consequences and the matter of whether the SNP will do as it has promised. It is debatable whether it will be able to deliver all the teachers that it says it will for early years and primary schools by 2011. It has failed to assure councils that the money will be available to fund its proposals. That is particularly relevant if the SNP insists on a council tax freeze. Will it provide extra money to ensure that there are no cuts to education services? It has no answers for councils, which point out that the capital investment that is required is way beyond what has been promised. We will see a rash of Portakabins throughout Scotland. Worse, children will be squeezed into accommodation that is needed for other necessary subjects, such as art, drama, music and physical education—and possibly even into dining halls. What about those schools that cannot adapt? Where will the children go in those cases? We already know that more parents will be refused a choice and that more children will be taught in composite classes. In some schools, there will be classes of 36 with two teachers, because that is the only way in which the promise can be met. In other words, there will be larger classes, not smaller classes. That is if the SNP can deliver, as promised, by 2011. So far, however, there is no  detail on revenue or on capital costings, far less any discussion on cost-benefit analysis. There is also no detail on how teachers will be delivered for early years education, as was originally promised. There has merely been backsliding and mumbled generalisations, with no real thought given to what would actually work best. What about the real problem that faces teachers the length and breadth of Scotland? There is a rising level of indiscipline in some areas, allied to wider social factors, which is impacting on the morale and health of teachers, as well as on the ability of other pupils to learn. It often leads to general disintegration and contributes towards wider, longer-lasting social problems. We have heard plenty from the Administration on a wide range of issues, yet it is strangely silent on any action to tackle indiscipline. What about public-private partnerships? We have heard the SNP's views about the evils, inefficiencies and expense of PPP. We heard that the SNP was going to abolish PPP. It promised that, and people voted SNP on the strength of it. What do we have, however? PPP is continuing and is still available to be used, despite its apparently being so bad. What about the so-called Scottish futures trust? No doubt we will debate another day whether it can be delivered and used. For the purposes of this debate, let us assume that it will be available. If the Scottish futures trust is so good and so cost efficient, why leave PPP in place? If the trust delivers better value for the public purse, why should anyone in their right mind—never mind an SNP minister—allow PPP to continue? The SNP has said that PPP is bad and inefficient and that the Scottish futures trust will deliver. Given that, would any minister with any sense of responsibility let councils choose between the trust and PPP? The SNP says that PPP is more expensive and less efficient, yet it is all right for the Administration to foot the bill. Ministers have told us that no big decisions can be made until the spending review is decided, yet they are agreeing to allow councils to use what the SNP argues is a more expensive funding option for building schools and to pick up the bill for it. Is that stupidity, naivety, dishonesty or downright incompetence? We should be told. I will touch on ministers' complacency about new teachers.

Perhaps you should see what I originally wanted to say about SNP ministers and their duplicity and deceit, Presiding Officer. I assure you that the language has been softened.

I do that. I assure you that I have softened my language, Presiding Officer. The SNP agrees to allow councils—

When I consider the language that SNP members have consistently used in Parliament over the years, I am bemused that they are suddenly tender in strange places. The SNP agrees to allow councils to use more expensive options.

I respect what you say, Presiding Officer, and I hope that when you come back to  Parliament you will give us a word that describes people who say one thing and do another. I will touch on ministers' complacency about new teachers. I have heard from teachers throughout Scotland, as I have no doubt Fiona Hyslop has, that the quality of new teachers is far higher than ever before. Other countries are examining as examples of good practice the training initiatives that the previous Administration undertook. I know that Fiona Hyslop's officials will tell her that the problem will even out and that everything will be fine eventually, but that cannot excuse SNP ministers telling new teachers to get on their bikes and move across Scotland—they have obviously learned from Norman Tebbit. Never mind new teachers' families; never mind their commitments. In this brave new Scotland, they will have to move. A solution would not take a huge investment. The sum involved would also reduce as vacancies arose and new teachers obtained jobs. However, instead of giving new teachers jobs, the SNP has decided to scrap the graduate endowment and to fund a range of nice-sounding projects because they give good headlines.

Presiding Officer, I hope that you will reflect on the time that SNP interventions wasted.

Last year, the previous Executive created 1,000 additional posts; 300 is small in comparison. If the political will existed, action could be taken now to create another 1,000 jobs immediately. The Administration could make a difference to the new teachers who are working one or two days a week and are unemployed on the other days. It could keep in teaching the new teachers who are moving into industry. It could do something for Lesley Webster, who e-mailed me to say: "I am a single parent and gave up employment to begin to study ... I have been unable to secure ... work." It could do something for Sharon Boisson from Paisley, who cannot get a job. It could do something for Heather Love from Paisley and Lindsay Moore from Ayr, who are both featured in today's Daily Record . They left well-paid and well-established jobs to go into teaching and they both have to rely on a day here or there. It is clear that there is a lack of political will and an attempt to blame the situation on someone else. Overall, there is unwillingness or inability to show leadership in taking action. The sum total of the story so far is overpromised and underdelivered. Worse, SNP members made promises that they knew they could not keep.  They were prepared to say anything to be elected. Politicians have a bad name, but the SNP has reached new depths in posturing, spin and downright deception. It's time for SNP members to come clean to the Parliament. It's time for them to give the people of Scotland an explanation. Presiding Officer, it's time. I move, That the Parliament regrets that education has not been given a higher priority by this administration; calls for an urgent explanation to be given on funding for higher education and further education; calls for the missing detail to be given on the manifesto commitment to write off student debt; calls for a statement on how the commitment to reduce class sizes for primary 1 to primary 3 which has not been fully explained or costed will be delivered by 2011; calls for more detail on how a teacher will be provided to every early years class by 2011; regrets that nothing has been said about tackling indiscipline in Scotland's schools, and calls for an early statement on how funding will be provided to improve the school estate in Scotland.

I seek to withdraw the amendment.

I might point out to Fiona Hyslop that, far from being ungracious, we are actually accepting the motion. However, we are adding to it and, reasonably, asking for some assurances. I will preface my remarks by reflecting on comments that Iain Smith made in yesterday's debate in the chamber. It is slightly bizarre that we had about one hour and 25 minutes to discuss the programme of government or governance—however the SNP wants to describe it—for Scotland, but have two hours and five minutes to discuss the investment of £1.5 million in one institution, albeit one that is important to the people of south-west Scotland. That is indicative of distorted and skewed priorities.

That was a bizarre comment by Mike Russell.

It is disappointing that, notwithstanding the significance of the Crichton campus to people in south-west Scotland, we can find two hours and five minutes for this debate but there has been nothing from the SNP on new teachers seeking employment, nothing from the SNP about a debate on discipline in our schools, nothing from the SNP about raising attainment levels in education and, frankly, nothing from the SNP about education generally.

No. The SNP is trying to exploit one issue for headlines, instead of addressing fundamental issues of concern in Scottish education. There is no doubt that the matter before us this afternoon is of great concern to people in south-west Scotland. Fiona Hyslop was right to pay tribute to Elaine Murray, to Russell Brown, to you, Presiding Officer, and to other people in the area who have campaigned for the retention of a facility there. However, as the minister knows, there are complexities and difficulties associated with the issue, which she has had to address in her work to arrive at a solution. She cannot say that she wants to see evidence, that she will monitor the situation and that she will take a close interest in demand for the facility at the same time as saying that ministers cannot give guarantees or accept assurances. I acknowledge the work that has been done by many partners to produce a solution, to which the motion refers, but if that solution is to be sustainable, certain issues must be addressed. Jeremy Purvis was absolutely right to raise the issue of future demand, because funding flows from demand and sustainability flows from funding. It is incumbent on the Parliament to ask whether funding will be maintained throughout the session and to seek assurances that this is not a one-off solution. It is right that we should ask for guarantees that funding is not being provided to the detriment of other institutions. I am glad that Fiona Hyslop has acknowledged that.  It is also right that we should reflect on whether some of what has been done, especially in relation to rent, may not make it easy for institutions to walk away from the campus, because they no longer have any responsibility in that area. I recognise the effort that ministers and all the local partners have put in and the anxiety and clear wishes that have been expressed, but I hope that nothing has been done that will frustrate those wishes over the next few years, that people have not been given false hope and that they are getting a sustainable solution. I also hope that people in south-west Scotland will respond and that there will be sufficient demand to enable us to deliver. The minister will acknowledge that we seek not just a facility, but one that delivers quality—not just value for money, but an effective facility that adds value to the educational experience of the students who take up places in it. I acknowledge the difficulties that the minister has had to grapple with and the contribution that many people have made in arriving at a solution. I hope that the solution will be sustainable and that it will work. I also hope that the aspirations of the people of south-west Scotland are met and that their wishes are fulfilled. Finally, I hope that what has been delivered will lead to the long-term delivery of education in that part of the world and that it will make a long-lasting and effective contribution to Scottish education. I move amendment S3M-416.1, to insert at end: "and calls for an assurance that this funding will be maintained and guaranteed and that this is not being provided to the detriment of funding for other institutions, and further asks for a guarantee that none of the institutions will be able to walk away from any aspects of this arrangement."

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will provide an update on which of the Howat recommendations have been accepted. (S3O-485)

When Mr Swinney commented before on the Howat recommendations, he said that the Government would consider every recommendation in the report and he ruled out any change to the structure of Scottish Water. Will he confirm today that there will be no change to the age at which senior citizens can travel for free on buses throughout Scotland?

Tell us which.

The First Minister promised in his manifesto that he would reduce to 18 class sizes for primaries 1 to 3. I know teachers and others who voted for him on the basis of that promise. Can he confirm that his promise will be delivered in the lifetime of this parliamentary session?

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer, when you reflect on the matter, will you also consider Johann Lamont's request that the minister come to the chamber to give an explanation?

When will Fiona Hyslop deliver her manifesto commitment? Before she made her announcement to Parliament, she spoke on BBC radio yesterday about taking a commonsense approach and having flexibility. Until the election, she made great play of there being no flexibility on maths and English class sizes. Will she confirm that there will be no flexibility on having only 20 to a class for maths and English?

Bill Kidd mentioned the increase in hours of provision for all nursery-age children that has been announced. Will that include an increase in hours for those children who attend nurseries that are provided by Glasgow City Council?

Will the member answer the question that I posed earlier?

Does Murdo Fraser agree that it is unfortunate to say the least that a number of local authorities, possibly for cost-saving reasons, appear to be filling vacancies with nothing but probationary teachers? That is not part of a planned Executive strategy, but a choice that has  been made at local level. Should we not be looking at that to ensure that local authorities are not abusing the situation and denying people the jobs to which they are entitled?

I do not think that anyone could dispute what Fiona Hyslop says about the significance of education for the future of our country; nor could anyone dispute the fact that we need to concentrate resources on the areas in which there is most need and on children who are suffering relative disadvantage. I struggle, however, with Fiona Hyslop's outline of what she intends to do. Despite the soundbites and throwaway remarks, there is no focus on disadvantage. After all the spinning that was done and following discussion with people from the Scottish National Party, The Herald 's conclusion was that much of what the SNP proposed would benefit the middle classes rather than concentrate on disadvantage, as Fiona Hyslop has said. There is much in Fiona Hyslop's speech that I welcome. No one could dispute the need for new teachers and the fact that they will make a significant improvement in the quality of learning opportunity for our children. However, if we listen to what Fiona Hyslop said today—frankly, it was lacking in detail in many respects and, to some extent, in substance—we find that it contrasts completely with the promises that were made to people all over Scotland during the election campaign. It bears very little resemblance to what was promised by the SNP. I will start with what Fiona Hyslop said in relation to early years. I believe in its significance and I support what is being done in early years education. In its manifesto, Labour promised an extension in the number of hours of provision per week and in the number of weeks' provision per year. The SNP, which was specific during the campaign, got many families to vote for it on the back of a clear promise—not an extra 75 hours a year, but an extra 200 hours per year. No mention has been made of when that 200 hours of provision per year will be available. Let us analyse what the SNP says in relation to those promises on early years. It mentions an increase in the number of weeks of nursery  provision per year—although there will be no change for those children who are already attending public sector nurseries. Furthermore, as The Herald accepted yesterday, only a quarter of children outwith the public sector would benefit. There will be no increase in the number of weeks per year for those children and there was very little indication of what would happen to the number of hours. If we add together all the figures, we can see that even if the SNP were to meet its manifesto commitment, which the minister has not mentioned, there would still be a gap of something like 42.5 hours per year. The SNP has announced a very small move in the direction of what its manifesto said, which is a lot less than Labour would have delivered had we been able to do so. I do not know what Fiona Hyslop is doing with the resources for early years that we left at the SNP's disposal. Perhaps we will find out eventually what John Swinney intends to do with them. Fiona Hyslop failed to mention other issues when she talked about early intervention. I agree fully that the early years of a child's life are a critical developmental stage. However, Fiona Hyslop said nothing about continuing the progress that Robert Brown and I were making on changing the nature of primary 1, considering purposeful play and changing completely the way in which a child learns in the early years, which is critical for children in areas of disadvantage in particular. It is sad that she has not taken up the opportunity to put a qualified early years worker into every primary 1 class in areas of greatest social disadvantage and lowest attainment; come August, that would have changed fundamentally at a stroke the way in which children learn. That is a wasted opportunity. On class sizes, Fiona Hyslop has again moved far away from the SNP manifesto, which talked explicitly about class sizes of 18 or fewer for primary 1 to primary 3. There were no ifs or buts and it was clear that there would be no staging and no flexibility—the commitment would be delivered. However, what do we have from Fiona Hyslop and the SNP Administration? We have a plan but no end point; no target for meeting the commitment; no details of the costs involved in delivering that promise; and no details of the structure. To be frank, there is no detail whatsoever. Perhaps Fiona Hyslop is listening to wiser counsel when it comes to that ill-thought-through policy. I think that most people would agree generally that a reduction in class sizes can make a significant contribution, but there is a debate to be had about whether crude reductions in class sizes deliver the appropriate increase in educational attainment for the money. The  international research shows that there are question marks over whether swingeing and crude cuts in class sizes deliver such increases and whether they offer value for money. Perhaps Fiona Hyslop is now resiling from the SNP's manifesto commitment. Other questions need to be asked about the SNP's crude policy. We introduced a plan to limit primary 1 class sizes to 25. What would happen to children whose parents cannot get them into the school of their choice? That problem will increase in intensity if and when the SNP moves to limit class sizes to 18. Will families have to be split up?

We will consider any proposal that improves the quality of Scottish education. Fiona Hyslop has not said what will happen to the children who do not get into the school that their parents desire. After eight years of the previous Administration improving the quality of schools and delivering new schools, will we see a rash of portakabins through Scotland as the SNP moves to deliver an ill-thought-out policy?

If Margo MacDonald thinks back and reflects on Labour's manifesto, she will recall that we made significant play of giving headteachers more flexibility and more power. Indeed, Fiona Hyslop and her colleagues criticised the previous Administration for promising to give headteachers flexibility in relation to class sizes for maths and English. I regret that Fiona Hyslop does not want to do that. When it comes to primary 1, we need to exercise caution. I am attracted to the idea of flexibility, but it might not work in some parts of Scotland. Fiona Hyslop has wasted an opportunity to consider the value that is added by support staff such as teacher aides and classroom assistants. International research proves that they make a significant difference, particularly in early years education and for children who suffer from  disadvantage. We need a further debate on how to improve the quality of education. I turn to Fiona Hyslop's comments on the numbers of teachers and probationers. I welcome her announcement that there will be an additional 300 teachers from August 2007, but I contrast that with what Peter Peacock did during the past year. Before the budget last year, he put in enough money for an extra 600 teachers, so 300 is meagre by comparison. After the budget, he put in enough money for an additional 400 teachers. Again, the increase that Fiona Hyslop mentioned is meagre by comparison. Is the extra funding on top of the extra money that was given last year? If so, I welcome that, but it is only a small step in the right direction. Fiona Hyslop mentioned my comment on the graduate endowment fee, but my point was that the money that is there for abolishing the fee—and for other things—could employ 1,000 extra teachers. Indeed, the money is there to employ all the teachers who are coming to the end of their probationary year. There is no reason not to employ them, and I hope that Fiona Hyslop will guarantee that jobs will be found for them in August. The Administration has overpromised and will underdeliver. We will be left with a lot of disappointed people throughout Scotland. What has been announced today is but a small step. It is welcome as far as it goes, but there is much more to be done.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance sight of her statement. However, the statement is meagre and disingenuous and tinkers at the edge of what the SNP promised to students. The SNP talk is all about students, but the statement says nothing about investment in universities and further education colleges; there is no promise of even a single penny of investment in either higher or further education. Labour said that education would be our priority. We promised additional investment, even if it meant squeezing other budgets. Why has the SNP failed to tell the Parliament how much it will invest to allow our higher and further education institutions to compete against the rest of the world and against English institutions in particular? Will the SNP urgently introduce proposals to write off student debt and replace loans with grants? The party received many votes on the back of those promises.

There was no talk before the election of waiting for a spending review—[ Interruption. ]

Even though the SNP was warned—

We should not be surprised that old habits die so hard. As I said, there was no talk of the SNP waiting for a spending review—even though the party was warned that its proposals were unworkable and unaffordable. Last year, Alex Salmond promised to scrap the outstanding student loan debt for current graduates. Today, yet again, it is mibbes aye, mibbes no. The minister's statement is not a first step; it is a fig leaf to cover the embarrassment of a U-turn, a con trick or both. Graduate endowments were set up to provide income to help poorer students. Where will the money come from now? The minister's proposal, despite the verbiage, does not spell out how young people from poorer backgrounds will be helped to gain access to university. Will Fiona Hyslop write to me with details of how that will be done? The minister's proposal claims that all students will be helped equally, irrespective of their financial circumstances, but the statement says nothing about recompensing those who have already paid the endowment. Will that happen? I am dubious about the SNP's figures. All the evidence that I have seen—before the election and since—gives an estimated annual cost of between £20 million and £25 million. If the SNP Administration has money to spare, why does it not add a few million pounds, defer its proposal for two to three years, and create 1,000 jobs in August for teachers who are coming to the end of their probationary period? That would surely provide a more immediate and more beneficial impact for Scottish education. The statement was profoundly disappointing. It badly lets down the many people in Scotland who took at face value promises that the rest of us know to be false.

Would the member apply the same logic to the existing centres of excellence that do exactly that, such as those in Plockton and Knightswood, but which still retain a good comprehensive education? Does he favour their abolition?

Will the member give way?

Do you not want a dialogue?

I congratulate Fiona Hyslop, Maureen Watt and Adam Ingram and wish them well in a portfolio that is critical to Scotland's future. I am disappointed that Labour has had to use its parliamentary time to facilitate a debate on education. I suppose that that reflects the relative priorities of Labour and the Scottish National Party. When Gordon Brown unveiled his budget in March, he delivered nearly £2 billion for Scotland in the next three years. Jack McConnell committed Labour to investing all of that in education. By contrast, the SNP pledged only that the money would be spent on front-line services, with no special commitment to education. During the election campaign, Jack McConnell spelled out Labour's commitment to education. He promised additional resources for education, even if that meant squeezing other budgets. By contrast, the SNP has refused to say whether it will give education that priority. Labour promised an education bill within 100 days if re-elected. By contrast, all that we have had from the SNP is a series of press releases and statements, many of which had no substance—such as that on ship-to-ship oil transfer—or were simply a regurgitation of what was started by the previous Executive. At least today, we have forced the SNP to say something about education. I believe that there is a consensus in the Parliament and beyond that 21 st century Scotland needs a highly motivated and highly skilled workforce if it is to compete in the global market. There is general agreement that we cannot afford to compete on the basis of low wages and low skills. There is also general agreement that, although many of our young people are achieving to high levels, still too many are failing, for a variety of reasons, to develop to their full potential. They lose interest in school, they lack personal ambition or they end up in a depressing environment of bad behaviour and alcohol and/or drug abuse, and they are often lost to society. I am glad that there is now general recognition that more has to be done to prevent young people from reaching that critical point of failure. I acknowledge that, at least in its rhetoric, the new Administration is committed to early intervention, but it needs to recognise that that will require  significant additional investment for the areas that need to be addressed, rather than the application of universality throughout Scotland. If we consider our motion and each amendment, we see that there is probably more that unites us than divides us. There is a broad understanding of the concerns of business and an acknowledgement that there is much that is good in our schools and further education colleges. However, there is also a recognition that the present situation cannot be allowed to continue and that more needs to be done to address the challenge that confronts us. I do not disagree with the amendment in the name of Fiona Hyslop. I accept that we need a strategy. However, we also need action—and early action at that. The scale and severity of the problem has been well documented, so there is no need to dwell on the details. In its manifesto, Labour proposed radical, imaginative and challenging ideas to tackle the problems. For us, more of the same is unacceptable. There are some who bridled at the idea of skills academies, but we wanted better motivation and more relevance for young people who are disengaged from school and for whom academic development holds little interest. We wanted to engage with them to develop the skills that they need to be employable. Frankly, we also wanted to give those young people some interest in life, which would allow them to develop their potential and personality.

We have not been prescriptive about where the centres would develop. There are further education colleges in north-east Scotland and the FE skills and talents that are already available in the member's area could be extended. We wanted to widen young people's choice and study options. We wanted to add significant status and prestige to vocational learning options for pupils and to expand significantly skills for work courses. We wanted to build on the work being done to improve the links between schools and colleges, and we pledged in our manifesto to increase the number of modern apprenticeships to 50,000 per year by the end of the parliamentary session. Our skills academies are intended to deliver that.

The plans were never designed nor stated to involve 100 separate institutions. Had the minister read our proposals in more detail, she would have seen that we were talking about developing much of the infrastructure that already existed. Our proposals should not be dismissed out of hand. We envisage skills academies widening pupils' options. Academies would be located in either schools or colleges, depending on local opportunities and needs. Indeed, as Fiona Hyslop accepted in January's debate on skills academies, if the schools of ambition programme were extended as a means of extending skills academies, "perhaps that would be something else that we could agree on."— [ Official Report , 11 January 2007; c 30937.]  So let us not concentrate on our differences; rather, let us build on what we can achieve together. We should build on our different ideas for a common purpose. The same applies to our proposals for science centres of excellence. We already have centres of excellence to encourage those with special talents in sport, music or dance. We want the same opportunities to exist for those with special talents in science. We want Scotland to lead the world in invention and innovation, so why should we not nurture the special talents that are needed to do so? The centres would concentrate on excellence in science without ignoring broader educational development. They would be within the comprehensive context but would deliver breadth and balance, as our current centres of excellence do. Labour promised a stimulating, radical and challenging agenda. I accept that we are not in government and that it therefore falls to others to progress the skills agenda. I offer our support to Fiona Hyslop in confronting the decisions that must be taken to challenge the depressing reality for too many of our children, but I make it clear that we will challenge the new Administration at every turn if it fails to take the early and difficult decisions that need to be taken to start to make a real difference. I move, That the Parliament recognises the concerns in the business community about the shortage of school leavers  proficient in science and technical subjects; believes that there is a role for academic institutions concentrating on vocational skills and science, and calls for the introduction of skills academies and science centres of excellence as a contribution to improving both the skills needed for 21st Century Scotland and the life opportunities for our young people.

In 2005-06 we invested our highest amount ever in the Scottish school education system, with revenue expenditure of £4.4 billion. Expenditure on education has increased at an average rate of more than 5 per cent per annum in real terms since 1999. Under current expenditure plans, that amount will rise to £5.26 billion by 2007-08. We believe that that sustained and significant investment in staff and classrooms is making a difference. Throughout Scotland, pupils have more books and equipment and they are taught in modern schools by growing numbers of well-motivated teachers and support staff. Throughout the country, pupils, parents and teachers are now seeing the real results that the extra cash brings.

Scott Barrie has spoken to me about the excellent work that is being done at Tulliallan primary school. I congratulate not just the head teacher and teachers there, but all the school staff who have made that possible. Such work can be achieved only with the support of parents, which is increasingly significant throughout Scotland, through a real partnership to improve the life chances of our children. Excellent work is being done at Tulliallan primary school, and excellent work is being done in primary schools throughout the country. I congratulate Tulliallan primary in particular, and I ask Scott  Barrie to convey my best wishes to all the staff and pupils there.

Tricia Marwick will need to take that matter up with Fife Council. The reality is that when Peter Peacock was the Minister for Education and Young People, he allocated money directly to every education authority throughout the country specifically to employ additional teachers. When I became the Minister for Education and Young People, I allocated money to authorities to be provided directly to schools to allow them to make decisions about where it should be spent. More money is going into Scottish education. How the money is allocated and spent locally is a matter for the local authority, but the record is clear. The investment has been made. One thing I know from the considerable record of new builds and refurbished schools in Fife since 2003 is that the promises that have been made by the SNP to build new schools cannot be delivered, because its proposed system of funding is not only unproven but cannot work because there cannot be borrowing. The SNP is still failing to answer the questions about how its programme would be funded. Pupils, teachers and parents throughout Scotland should rightly be worried about what will be done to Scottish education by the SNP's futile argument.

Current plans will see schools continuing to be built and refurbished to the end of the decade, and substantial funding is in place to support that. We recognise that there is still more to be done, although decisions on further financial support for work on the school estate are matters for the next spending review.

Ken Macintosh is right to point out the quality of building that is going on throughout Scotland, including in East Renfrewshire. I visited Carlibar primary school and I really and truly have to say that it is one of the best new build primary schools that I have seen. The design—which is stunning—was influenced by teachers, parents and members of the community  contributing at the design stage. I hope that we can learn from and continue that process. As Ken Macintosh will know, I cannot make specific commitments for individual schools such as Barrhead high and Eastwood high, but we have a building programme in place up to the end of the decade. However, one thing is sure: if the SNP wins the election and cancels PPP, as it has promised to do, the schools that are planned in the programme cannot be built. The SNP's Scottish futures trust cannot and will not work. The SNP cannot borrow in the way it says it can.

We keep saying it because people need to know that the Scottish futures trust can work only through the break-up of the United Kingdom. That is an SNP promise that would devastate communities across Scotland.

Will Adam Ingram give way?

Will the member—

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

How?

Is that a guarantee?

That is nonsense.

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer, I point out to Mr Neil that I was invited to meet children from the Children's Parliament, who wanted to meet the Minister for Education and Young People. The only time we could do that was during the debate. Given that we are talking about our children's future, it was entirely appropriate that I went to meet them.

I look forward to receiving from Dave Petrie a letter that lists the schools in which such problems exist. My experience from going round schools is that the extra money we have given directly to schools is making a significant difference to the provision of the materials and equipment he mentions.

I invite Robin Harper to visit Carlibar primary school in Barrhead, which has a stunning design and is a fabulous environment in which to learn. Where lessons can be learned for future contracts, they should be learned, but it would be wrong to ignore the excellent design work that has already been delivered.

Will the member give way?

Thank you for that. Now, leaving aside that the report to which Mr Neil referred is outdated, that interest rate issues have changed, that the gap has narrowed significantly, and that his figures are therefore outdated, we come back to the nub of the argument: how will Mr Neil use conventional methods to deliver the scale of building that we require in this country within a short period of time? It cannot be done with conventional methods. Fiona Hyslop is reluctant to do so, but will Mr Neil answer the 34 questions that we have posed to the SNP about how it intends to make things work?

I pay tribute to Lord James for the contribution that he has made to public life in Scotland over many years. He has played a distinguished role not only in the House of Commons but here in the Scottish Parliament. It is magnanimous of him to accept that Labour amendments improved greatly the 1995 act that he introduced. Does he recognise that Scottish education has improved significantly since the Parliament was established?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am delighted to open a debate that gives us an opportunity to put on record all the significant developments that are taking place in Scottish education. As Robert Brown and I travel around Scotland visiting schools, we hear a remarkably consistent message: our head teachers are positive and excited about the future; our teachers are engaged in a highly positive agenda and are delivering a superb quality of education; and our support staff, who come in many forms, are making a remarkable contribution to Scottish education. Perhaps the most significant feature of what is happening in our schools is the optimism, excitement and enthusiasm with which pupils of all ages have responded to it. We cannot overstate the change that has taken place in Scottish education since the advent of devolution and the resulting decisions by the Parliament.

The Executive has delivered on its commitment to bring in more teachers. Indeed, by August, we will have met our target of 53,000 teachers in Scotland. As the bald statistics will make clear to Tricia Marwick and others, class sizes in primary and secondary school have been falling year on year. That is the reality of Scottish education, and that is the reason why our teachers have been responding so well. We should shout it from the rooftops: we have a good education system that is already delivering for our children. However, the Executive has further ambitions. We want to be the best in the world, which means building on the system's strengths while continuing to adapt, modernise and innovate to meet the challenges ahead. As Tricia Marwick has demonstrated, there is a tendency to dwell on the negative and to talk ourselves down. The SNP's glass is always half empty, never half full. It moans, it groans, it is full of despair and it never has anything positive to say. It does not sing about our achievements or highlight the positive things that are happening. It  looks for failure, it seeks to criticise and it tries at every turn to be negative. Just for once, the nationalists should try to be a bit more positive, because there is much to celebrate in Scottish education. Indeed, as I said earlier, Robert Brown and I have seen those achievements at first hand. Susan Ward from Juniper Green primary school, who won the United Kingdom teaching award for outstanding new teacher, exemplifies the excellence in our teaching profession. She is one of the new young teachers who are making teaching their profession, making a difference for our children and inspiring others to achieve. I want to do everything that I can to promote such excellence in the profession.

We can address some of the issues that still have to be tackled. The fact is that Scotland's performance ranks in the top third of Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries, and our 15-year-olds are among the best performing in the world. However, we need to address the transition from primary to secondary school. That said, I do not know what schools David Davidson has visited. In the past couple of weeks, Robert Brown and I have met teachers in different parts of the country, and we have not only brought them together and thanked them for their remarkable contribution to Scottish education but thanked the janitors, classroom assistants, cleaners, learning support staff and clerical and administrative staff who are often overlooked as team members. We simply do not do that often enough. This week, we visited St Mark's primary school in Barrhead, which, under its inspirational head teacher and highly motivated teaching team, has achieved the best results from Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education of any primary school in the country. Other schools are beginning to show the same results. For example, Bannockburn primary school has a fantastic head teacher who is carrying out terrific work with children who have emotional and learning problems.

Any such decision—and, indeed, the quality of education in the area—is a matter for the local authority in Moray. However, we are determined to raise standards, which is why HMIE carries out such rigorous inspections. This week, I visited Forthill primary school to celebrate not only the opening of an extension but its excellent education provision. Margaret Jamieson and I visited St Joseph's academy in Kilmarnock, and Alasdair Morrison and I visited the Nicolson institute to find out what was going on there. Tremendous work is also being carried out at Laxdale primary school with children whose first language is Gaelic and with others. The examples are numerous. Cathie Craigie and I went to St Maurice's high school in Cumbernauld, which is trying to encourage excellence in sport. With Councillor Brian Fearon, I visited the ABC nursery in Clackmannanshire, which is stimulating children at the youngest possible age. I could name schools in my constituency that are doing a fantastic job. Excellence is being delivered in Scotland, and we do not want anything to disrupt that or to challenge or stop the progress that has been made. We are not complacent. We want to know how we are doing, so we have asked an OECD team of experts from Finland, Australia, New Zealand and Belgium to come to Scotland to do a country review and tell us what they think, from the outside, about Scottish education. We have nothing to fear from that. If improvements need to be made, we will make them. We will build on the foundations of our system. The Executive has delivered free pre-school education for all three and four-year-olds in Scotland, which is a major step forward. The latest statistics show that 96 per cent of three-year-olds and 99 per cent of four-year-olds take up pre-school education places. We are making progress on the curriculum. The curriculum for excellence programme will produce a single curriculum for three to 18-year-olds that takes into account the significance and importance of early years provision in children's education. We are revising the early stages of the curriculum and considering a child-centred approach in primary 1. Work is being done to build on the investment that we have made and the measures that we have introduced, such as extra teachers, new schools, the 49 schools of ambition and improved standards for headship. We have made huge progress in the eight years of devolution. For example, we have delivered 320 new and refurbished schools and we are on course to deliver at least another 100 by 2009.  I am fascinated by the SNP's amendment, in which Fiona Hyslop yet again points to the weakness in the SNP's proposals. The amendment refers to giving councils "an alternative funding scheme", but the experts say that that funding scheme will not work. The SNP says that it will match our proposals brick for brick, but how will it do that? We are told that it will issue Scottish bonds in its futures trust, but the Scottish Executive cannot issue such bonds. The delivery of the bonds relies on the break-up of the United Kingdom. The SNP talks about trying to borrow money, but how would it do that without ruining economic stability, even if it had the financial wherewithal? The reality is that the SNP's proposals will not and cannot work. We have asked questions about them week after week. Peter Peacock asked questions, but the SNP would not answer. I have asked questions, but it will not answer. The SNP cannot tell us what will happen to the proposed new schools. I say to parents in Dundee that the proposals for eight new schools there are under threat from the SNP, as are the proposals for three new secondaries in Clackmannanshire, eight new schools in Edinburgh, nine new schools in Perth and Kinross, four schools in Falkirk, three secondaries in the Scottish Borders, 10 schools in Dumfries and Galloway, four new schools in Inverclyde, two secondaries in West Lothian, 10 new schools in Aberdeen, six new secondaries in East Dunbartonshire, six schools in West Dunbartonshire, two schools in Moray—I point that out for Mr Lochhead—five schools in the Western Isles, for Alasdair Morrison, and two in Orkney. Proposals for 82 new or refurbished schools are under threat from the SNP. That is the reality of what the SNP says. We have a record of which we can be proud. We can celebrate the success of our children and the excellence of our teachers. The Parliament has nothing to be ashamed of when we talk about education, but we have everything to fear from the SNP. I move, That the Parliament notes the commitment shown by the Scottish Executive and its partners to the most comprehensive programme of modernisation of Scottish education for a generation; recognises that the Executive's investment in over 320 new and refurbished schools, increased teacher numbers, a world-leading induction scheme, reduced class sizes, strong parental involvement and stable industrial relations has rebuilt the foundations of a successful school system; welcomes the significant increase in pre-school education entitlement that has been delivered since 1999; further welcomes the high quality of leadership in Scotland's schools and congratulates the 973 teachers who have achieved the Scottish Qualification for Headship; welcomes the Executive's investment in Scotland's 49 Schools of Ambition, and congratulates staff, teachers and pupils in schools and centres across Scotland  for the contribution they are making to the delivery of excellent learning and teaching.

With three jobs.

No child in Scotland should have to face danger, risk, neglect or abuse, including those children whose lives are blighted by chaotic parental drug misuse. The wide range of actions that we have put in place following the publication of "Hidden Harm—Next Steps" is founded on two child-centred principles: that serious and chaotic substance misuse is incompatible with parenting; and that safeguarding the welfare of children is paramount, even above keeping families together.

We will be carrying out inspections, and the same scrutiny will be given to each local authority as was given to Midlothian Council. I have made it clear to my officials that we  should be reminding local authorities that they should not wait for an inspection to take place but should pay heed to what happened in Midlothian and familiarise themselves with the details of the Midlothian report. I hope that each local authority in Scotland will look closely at its services to ensure that there are no weaknesses in what is being done and that no one is waiting for a report.

I do not have the specific date for the publication of the report, but we will return to Margaret Mitchell with such information as is available. We are looking closely at the circumstances in which methadone—and, indeed, any other dangerous drug—is made available, but we should be careful about our use of words and the actions that we want to be taken. Stringent measures should be taken to ensure that dangerous drugs are not used inappropriately and that children are protected—as Margaret Mitchell will know, criminal actions can follow if something wrong is done. However, we know from experience that there are a number of people whose lives can be stabilised and who can make productive use of such a facility. It would be wrong simply to reject the whole system. We need a balanced approach, so we are looking carefully at the situation. However, we need to ensure that, when drugs such as methadone are dispensed, the protection of vulnerable and innocent young people is taken into consideration.

I made it clear to Midlothian Council that what had been reported was completely unacceptable. To its credit, the council has accepted that. The convener who was responsible for social work services resigned from his post, the director of social work stood down and other changes have been put in place. The council has taken action in regard to personnel and structures, and the chief executive has become directly involved. As Jeremy Purvis knows, I cannot instruct changes at the council—it would not be appropriate for a minister to do that—but I have said that, from a policy perspective, what has been happening is unacceptable. I am pleased that the council has reacted positively, has made no excuses and has taken steps to ensure that improvements are made. Clearly, I want to keep a close eye on the situation. I have instructed my officials both to offer the council whatever advice, assistance or expertise it needs and to keep a close eye on what is happening, so that I can be reassured that progress is being made.

No one can be better placed than the school itself to judge what will best benefit pupils and have a real impact. That is why we insisted that the £40 million extra funding for materials and equipment, which we announced in November, should be allocated directly to schools.

I ask Karen Whitefield to pass on my congratulations to the head teacher, staff and pupils of Petersburn primary school for the work that they are doing, which is exactly the sort of response that we want. I agree that the additional funding is leading to a rise in attainment levels and enhancing the quality of pupils' education and lives, by helping to unearth new talents and give pupils interests that will last for the rest of their lives. On my visits to secondary and primary schools and nursery facilities during the past few months, I have been struck by the difference that the direct allocation of funding is making. Head teachers and staff say that direct funding means that they can make decisions that are important for their schools. They are using the money imaginatively and I have been struck by initiatives that are going on. The approach benefits not just Scottish education in general but staff personal development and commitment, because staff know that the money can make a lasting improvement.

That issue has nothing to do with the question, but I will engage in the debate if the Presiding Officer will indulge me.

It remains for local authorities to decide which staff are relevant in any given circumstances. The early years curriculum must have educational underpinning and I am impressed by the range and quality of the professionally qualified staff who work in our early years establishments, all of whom make a lasting contribution. There can be a direct advantage to having educational input from teachers. In a number of early years establishments that operate from 8 am to 6 pm teachers cannot be available, but staff are performing remarkably well. Each local authority can decide for itself what to do, but there should be no lowering of standards. The curriculum remains fundamental and there should be input from teachers into curriculum development. The issue is to do with partnership and the use of a range of skilled staff. I pay tribute to the skilled staff in the early years sector who are not teachers and who are making a remarkable difference.

We attach a great deal of importance to the matter, which is why, in partnership with authorities, we initiated the biggest school modernisation programme in a generation.

I take note of Irene Oldfather's invitation and will add it to the many invitations that I have received but am unable to fulfil. What she describes is a feature of Scottish education. We have highly qualified, highly motivated teachers who are using very imaginative teaching techniques to improve levels of attainment and results in their schools. They are also using the most modern, up-to-date equipment. I have been struck by the difference that is being made by the new interactive whiteboards—which, I confess, baffle me, as I am a bit of a Luddite. I was particularly impressed when I visited an early years establishment at which an interactive whiteboard was being used by three and four-year-olds in a remarkable way. The teachers told me that the results have been striking. Technology is important and, if we have the opportunity, we will continue to invest in technology as we have done. That will include—as I said in an earlier answer to Karen Whitefield—giving money directly to schools to allow them to make the decisions. However, that cannot have the effect that we want unless we have qualified, skilled and committed teachers, who make a huge difference.

There is always a sting in the tail with Margo MacDonald's compliments. We should not underestimate the contribution that sport makes to a learning environment and to the quality of education that is available to a young person. When Kenneth Macintosh and I visited Carlibar primary school in Barrhead, I was impressed with what the artificial-turf outdoor facility was doing for that school. Last Friday, along with Cathie Craigie, I visited St Maurice's high school in Cumbernauld, where there is a fantastic games hall that has been funded jointly by the Big Lottery Fund, sportscotland, the Scottish Executive and the local authority. The school had invited pupils from all the feeder primary schools, who were thriving on the opportunity to participate in sport. Indeed, I was told how well St Maurice's high school is doing in developing Scottish champions who represent Scotland at international level. Margo MacDonald is right. Local authorities should pay particular heed to sports facilities and to giving their pupils opportunities to engage in sporting activities.

Tricia Marwick and others in the SNP have made great play of giving local authorities flexibility. Had Parliament agreed to give them that flexibility, how would they be able to pay for it under the SNP proposals for a local income tax? The SNP is proposing to cap local authority expenditure, which would result in a cut in local authority budgets. How would the SNP pay for that flexibility?

One marked feature of this country is our poor health record. Our citizens die earlier than do citizens in other parts of the United Kingdom and of the world and our health is generally poorer. Much of that is self-inflicted. It starts from childhood and relates to how our children are brought up, what they eat and a lack of exercise and fitness. In a broad range of matters, we have tried to address that chronic and appalling health record. We took the bold but correct decision to ban smoking in public places, which will contribute significantly. We are considering raising the age at which our young people can buy cigarettes. We are encouraging more exercise and physical activity in our schools. We are encouraging a healthier lifestyle from childhood through to adulthood. As has been suggested, it is clear that the problem starts in the home, but we need to reflect on the significant contribution that schools make to the way in which our children develop. In this country, we are criticised if we do something and criticised if we do not, so in a sense we can never win. Some ask what the point of the bill is, whereas others ask why it does not go further. The bill marks a significant milestone in the approach that we are taking to improving our citizens' health and well-being. Yes, we still need to do something profound with adults and with people who are in their late teens but, while we consider that, it is right to take the first steps to tackle the problem at the earliest age. The bill will do that. Improving the health of people in Scotland is a key priority. In debate on the bill, we have outlined the action that we want to take on several fronts. We can reflect with some pride on what we have done in the past few years—I have outlined some of that. We have set a target of all schools becoming health promoting by the end of the year and the hungry for success initiative has revolutionised school meals. We know that there is more to good health than simply good nutrition. I have spoken about the contribution that sport and physical activity make,  which is why our active schools programme provides for that. I was delighted that, in its stage 1 report, the Communities Committee agreed that the bill was a necessary next step, but not a final step, in our wider health improvement agenda. During the passage of the bill, we have considered carefully the committee's opinion and tried to acknowledge its concerns about the bill as introduced. I thank committee members for scrutinising the bill and for their contribution. I also thank all the people who helped to shape the bill through the parliamentary process. I found invaluable the contribution of the many outside organisations that have good food and good health at the core of their objectives. It was fascinating to learn that, notwithstanding our desire to have the bill passed, good things are happening in parts of Scotland. Our bill is stronger for the work of the committee, its clerks, outside organisations and others. The bill will ensure that schools understand their central role in helping children and young people to make healthy choices through a range of actions and activities. It will make health promotion a central required purpose of schooling rather than an add-on or an aspiration. A school will need to consider health promotion in all its activities and take a whole-school approach to that. The bill will also place a duty on education authorities to ensure that nutritious and balanced food and drink are provided in schools. That is our priority for school food and drink. One of the committee's recommendations in its stage 1 report was that the Executive should more proactively encourage local authorities to consider sustainable development criteria when procuring food or catering services. We heeded the committee's call and lodged a stage 2 amendment that, along with the amendments in the name of John Home Robertson today, has strengthened the bill to reflect the commitment of the Parliament and the Executive to sustainable development and fair and ethical trading. It is to their credit that some local authorities, of which East Ayrshire Council is but one, are already taking those steps. Several external agencies, such as the Soil Association and Oxfam, are also deeply committed to sustainable development and to fair and ethical trading. I welcome the changes to the bill. First and foremost, the bill will ensure that healthy food is served in our schools. It will also ensure that, while that happens, local authorities take account of other sustainability objectives. We understand that improving school food is not enough by itself and that we need to promote healthy eating and school meals actively to pupils. The bill provides for that. In particular, we want to encourage all families who are entitled to free  school meals to take advantage of their entitlement and to do so without the fear of stigma. The bill will require education authorities to protect the identity of those who are eligible. The promotion by schools of healthy eating for their pupils provides the opportunity for lifestyle changes. We have heard anecdotal evidence that some youngsters who have attended primary schools that promote health eating continue healthy eating habits at secondary school. I hope that we have made changes that they will continue with for the rest of their lives. I hope that some of our school pupils will become ambassadors for the message and will take it back into the home to encourage their parents. We have anecdotal evidence that children are placing pressure on their parents as a result of the measures. All of us and our country will benefit from the bill and from the other measures that we are taking. The bill is an important step not only in giving education authorities the flexibility to address local priorities but in helping young people to make life-forming and life-changing decisions that I hope will lead to a healthy Scotland and will change our appalling health record once and for all. I commend the bill to Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Schools (Health Promotion and Nutrition) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

We want authorities and schools to introduce anonymised systems to help ensure that pupils who are entitled to free school meals get the benefit of them. If stigma is a barrier, we want to remove it. Section 8 will tackle that. However, as Patrick Harvie is aware, the bill will not require local authorities to introduce or use any particular system in protecting the identity of those who receive free school meals and nor will it require authorities to collect biometric information. The decision about which anonymised system to use will be for schools and authorities, therefore it is not appropriate to amend the bill to put duties on ministers to publish a code about biometric data when the bill will not require authorities to collect such data. In any case, amendment 27 is completely unnecessary, as the normal rules of data protection—in particular, those in the Data Protection Act 1998—provide safeguards on the collection and use of personal data. The amendment would impose a different set of rules for biometric data that are collected for a particular purpose, even though the existing provisions are adequate and well established.

I would be alarmed if the situation that Patrick Harvie describes actually occurred. If he writes to me setting out a specific incident, I will investigate it. The Data Protection Act 1998 provides safeguards on the collection and use of personal data. On Patrick Harvie's earlier point about how a biometric system would operate at UK level, the guidelines for any system that has UK-wide application would apply here, too. However, if the guidelines are purely for a system in England and Wales, that is a matter for them and we will make our decisions here, which is what devolution is all about, as I am sure Patrick Harvie would agree. When we debated the issue at stage 2, I set out our views on biometric systems and consent, but I will state them again for the record. Our position is that, if an authority decides to use a biometric system, as a matter of good practice, parental consent will be an essential prerequisite before schools collect any biometric information. Children who do not use the system—either because they  or their parents do not consent or for any other reason—should not be disadvantaged. As I said, Patrick Harvie's amendment 27 is not necessary. Section 8 is not about biometric data; it is about protecting the identity of pupils who receive free school meals. Some schools might decide to adopt biometric systems to help them to comply with their duties, but others will adopt different methods.

No thanks. Biometric systems have broader applications than simply protecting identity. I understand Patrick Harvie's views on such systems, but I question whether the bill is the appropriate context for a debate on how the systems should be used. I oppose Patrick Harvie's amendment 27.

We are committed to sustainable development and we affirmed that commitment by lodging amendments on sustainable development at stage 2. We are all aware of the excellent work that has taken place in East Ayrshire Council within the context of the existing non-statutory guidance. However, the bill now provides for statutory  guidance to be issued on sustainable development. That will mean that local authorities will have a statutory duty to have regard to that guidance when procuring food and drink or catering services for schools. The guidance will include advice on objectives such as local sourcing, waste and packaging issues, fair trade food and sustainability assurance schemes. It will also include advice on how to pursue those various objectives while staying within European Union procurement law. Although our overarching priority is to ensure that healthy food is provided, John Home Robertson's amendments 28 to 30 aim to ensure that, in providing it, authorities also take account of relevant sustainability objectives. At stage 2, John Home Robertson's amendment on sustainable development guidance caused me some concern, because it stated that guidance had to include consideration of local produce, and I was worried about EU procurement rules. However, amendments 28 to 30 address the concerns that I expressed, and I am confident that they pose no problem, so I will be happy to support them. I turn now to Patrick Harvie's amendment 31. As a matter of good policy practice, the Executive keeps guidance under review. One of the benefits of having guidance is that it is flexible: we can revise it in light of developments in sustainable development policy, food policy or procurement rules. One of the main reasons why the Executive has supported the introduction of a power to issue guidance, rather than a duty under the bill, is for that very reason of flexibility. Amendment 31 is silent on the circumstances under which it would be appropriate to revise and reissue the guidance. In effect, it would leave ministers in the same position as at present. How the process would be monitored and enforced is also unclear. I support Patrick Harvie's intention that the guidance should be reviewed, and I assure him that that will happen as a matter of good practice. However, amendment 31 is unnecessary and I will oppose it.  Amendment 28 agreed to.  Amendments 29 and 30 moved—[John Home Robertson]—and agreed to.  Amendment 31 moved—[Patrick Harvie].

Amendment 8 arises from a concern—which I share—about children who do not receive a proper breakfast at home. However, the bill provides a tool to ensure that pupils who need a school breakfast can get one, by giving local authorities the power to provide breakfasts and snacks. The new power will give authorities the flexibility to decide on the best approach locally. The bill will also give authorities the power to provide an additional snack at any time of day, for any reason, if it thinks that that is needed.

No. The bill gives the power to provide free breakfasts to local authorities, not to parents. It is for local authorities to decide whether a school should provide free breakfasts. It would be absurd to give parents the power to decide how money is spent, when local authorities have the budgetary responsibility. Our approach is flexible. Authorities will be free to decide on the best methods to suit local circumstances. Particular social or health issues might lead authorities to take measures in part of their area that are not needed elsewhere. Some authorities may take different approaches, perhaps by providing free breakfasts for those who need them or by extending the supply of free fruit beyond P1 and P2. Such decisions are best left to local decision makers.  Schools and local authorities should not assume all parents' responsibilities. Many parents give their children a healthy breakfast before they head off to school and many young people would rather make their breakfast at home than have breakfast at school. Amendment 8 could be interpreted to mean that all local authorities must provide breakfast clubs for all pupils. For the reasons that I set out, such a decision should not be made centrally for every school in Scotland. The bill will give authorities the power to address local priorities and to provide healthy school breakfasts if they think that pupils need them. I oppose amendment 8.

No. Schools are thanking us for providing extra money to make a difference. We are now seeing real improvements in Scottish education. In fact, teachers themselves have commented on the contrast between the situation under the Conservatives and what is happening now. The bill provides an opportunity for the Parliament to change young children's habits and attitudes as they develop and move through adolescence into adulthood.

No. Amendment 8, in the name of Rosemary Byrne, would require local authorities to provide fruit or milk in primary and nursery schools free of charge. The bill already gives local authorities the power to do that, if they so wish. Indeed, the new power gives them the flexibility to decide on the approach that is best for them. If a local authority wants to provide free milk to all primary school pupils or free fruit to all nursery pupils, the bill gives them the power to do that. I am therefore not clear how to interpret Rosemary Byrne's amendments.

No. For example, it appears that if an authority wanted to provide free fruit to some schools because of health or social circumstances, amendments 23 and 24 would require it to extend that provision to all primary and nursery schools. The amendments are simply not clear, and local authorities might decide not to provide free milk or fruit in any circumstances if they feel that they will be compelled to extend such provision to all.  Our flexible and responsible approach will make a real difference to the quality of provision in schools and it builds on our solid and steady progress since 1999.

It is helpful to get it on record that the Scottish National Party wants to take the bold step of running a pilot. "Let's run a pilot and then—mibbes aye, mibbes no—we might or might not go ahead. We are taking the bold step." I thank Fiona Hyslop for that clarification. I will try to address the various points that have been made in the debate. We have discussed at stages 1 and 2 and on many other occasions the fact that the bill is about the content of the food that is provided in schools and encouraging healthy eating. Those who would extend eligibility for free school meals to people who receive particular benefits—

I will come to what the First Minister has said in a minute. We do not need to legislate to extend eligibility for free school meals because we already have the powers to do that. The First Minister has made it clear that the people of Scotland must decide whether they want to go down the route of universal free school meals provision or whether they want resources to be targeted. He has also, on behalf of the Labour party, made a particular offer that will be part of the political process. However, we have made a commitment in the current parliamentary session to change the nature of the food that is provided in schools.

In a second.  We have made a commitment to try to change children's attitudes towards the eating of food and their perceptions of what is good for them. The bill is about healthy eating in schools rather than free school meals.

In a moment. Let me proceed. We have made our position perfectly clear. We do not support universal free school meals. We want to target resources where they are most needed and that is what we are doing. The bill is about improving the quality of meals—

In a moment. The bill is about improving people's understanding so that they start to develop a healthy lifestyle. Many families can afford to pay for their children's school meals. Subsidising such families would use money that would otherwise be used to help those in need. That point would hold equally true in any pilot of free school meals provision. On this issue, the SNP makes David Cameron look like an amateur when it comes to flip-flops. Very creatively, the SNP seems to have developed a different policy for each day of the school week. For Mondays, the SNP can offer its previous policy of free school meals for all. For Tuesdays, its decision is to vote against free school meals. For Wednesdays, it proposes a pilot project for free school meals. For Thursdays, it can offer Christine Grahame's option of extending free school meals to those who are on other benefits. For Fridays, it wants to go down the route that Tricia Marwick has proposed. At least Tommy Sheridan, Rosemary Byrne, Frances Curran and others have been consistent in their arguments. Parliament has already twice debated and rejected the universal provision of free school meals.

I will give way to Tommy Sheridan.

No. The First Minister has said that such an extension will be part of the Labour party's offer to the people of Scotland. In coalition,  we have governed responsibly. We have looked at the resources that are available to us and we have made decisions about priorities. Tommy Sheridan and others suggest that everything in Scotland could be free at all times and for all people. The beneficiaries of that type of policy are sitting in this chamber. We have made decisions that will improve Scottish education and we are seeing the clear results of them. The schools that I have visited have an atmosphere that is completely different from what Dave Petrie described. The people in the schools that I have visited are thanking us for the extra money. They thank us for the decision to allow free whiteboards to be put into every school.

I will come to that point in a moment. Regardless of whether a school would advertise a product that it could not provide, a health-promoting school should promote physical well-being, which the advertising of an unhealthy product clearly would not. I am sure that Patrick Harvie is aware that the Office of Communications has introduced new rules on broadcast advertising for children and that, in the light of that, the Advertising Standards Authority has confirmed that its code will be revised. Proposed new subsection (6)(b), which amendment 21 seeks to insert in to section 1, would require schools not to accept sponsorship from any company that manufactured food or drink that did not meet the requirements on nutrition. That means that a company that produced even one product that did not meet those requirements would be unable to promote any of its products that met the requirements. I do not support that concept, because the bill's purpose is not to condemn or punish manufacturers for producing products that do not meet our requirements; it is about ensuring that what happens in and around schools promotes good health and well-being. It aims to ensure that each item of food and drink offered in schools is sufficiently healthy. I do not think that amendment 21 would contribute to that aim because, rather than targeting products that breach the regulations on nutrition, it seeks—unfairly—to target manufacturers associated with particular brands, as Patrick Harvie suggested in his intervention. Apart from anything else, such a restraint on trade  might not comply with European Union law. However, that is a side issue at this stage. In addition, amendment 21 would discourage companies from developing new and healthy products. If they could not promote such products in schools, they might stop developing them entirely, which is not something with which we would want to associate ourselves. The guidance on commercial activities in schools that has already been issued to local authorities and schools includes consideration of what should be taken into account when sponsorship for commercial organisations is agreed. It notes that commercial activities in schools can be positive, can provide schools with funding, materials and equipment and can build links between schools and the business community. It advises that commercial activity should be viewed cautiously because, in some cases, a company or product might be in conflict with a school's ethos and educational aims. In other words, schools should ca' canny when they make such decisions. My view is that decisions that schools take about sponsorship or any other commercial activity should be taken on a case-by-case basis and should not be legislated against by a blanket amendment such as Patrick Harvie's. Amendment 21 gives undue prominence to an aspect of health promotion that can be dealt with more appropriately and more flexibly in guidance. The requirement that our bill places on schools to be health promoting precludes the provision of food and drink that do not meet the requirements on nutrition. Given that that is the case, it is not clear why a school would wish to advertise such a product but, if it proceeded to do so, it would certainly be in breach of the health-promotion duty and would be inspected negatively as a result. Proposed new subsection (6)(a), which amendment 21 seeks to insert into section 1, is unnecessary. In addition, amendment 21 could have legal complications. I do not think that the bill needs Patrick Harvie's amendment. I hope that he has been reassured by what I have said and that he will withdraw his amendment.

Fiona Hyslop's point that teachers need the time to teach and cannot spend all their time compensating for some of the problems that come from the home and from children's upbringing is valid, although it would be foolish to underestimate the significance of the role that school education can play in helping to shape and develop children's lives.  I understand that amendment 21 was lodged out of a concern about pupils receiving mixed messages on healthy eating as a result of corporate sponsorship in schools, but I do not think that it is necessary because, as Fiona Hyslop suggested, the bill will address that issue. The bill will require all schools to be health-promoting schools. A health-promoting school will need to ensure that any advertising, marketing or sponsorship complies with the health-promotion ethos, and the regulations on the nutritional standards of food and drink will limit what can be sold in schools. It is unclear in what situation a school would advertise a product that it could not even provide.

I thank my parliamentary colleagues, particularly members of the Education Committee, for their constructive and valuable input during the passage of the bill. I also thank the many individuals and organisations who provided the Education Committee and the Finance Committee with evidence and those who engaged constructively and positively with the Executive throughout the bill's journey. A huge amount of work has been put into the bill. I pay tribute to the Executive bill team, who have worked assiduously in responding to many questions and comments and in supporting Robert Brown and me. As I came relatively late to the development process of the bill, I acknowledge Peter Peacock's contribution to constructing and formulating the detail of the bill. I pay particular tribute to Robert Brown, my deputy, for the way in which he engaged with the Education Committee and with voluntary organisations throughout Scotland. He listened to them and worked extremely hard on some of the amendments that we discussed this morning. Robert is due a vote of thanks from all of us for helping to get the bill into its final shape. There is no doubt that that commitment and sharing of knowledge has led to a refined and improved bill, which will deliver a robust and efficient vetting and barring scheme for Scotland. The scheme will ensure that those who are proven to be unsuitable do not get access to children. Significantly, and for the first time, those people will also not get access to protected adults through work or volunteering. We all owe it to vulnerable members of our society to do what we can to protect them from those who would seek to inflict harm or danger on them. The scheme greatly reduces the bureaucratic burden of multiple disclosure checks and allows information to be continuously updated. It also dovetails with measures south of the border, thus ensuring that Scotland does not become a safe haven for those who would abuse vulnerable people. It is right to put on record the fact that the vast majority of people who work with children and  protected adults are committed and caring. They do a fantastic job. In many circumstances, they do work that is above and beyond the call of duty. They enhance greatly the quality of life of those with whom they work. However, regrettably and tragically, there is a minority of people who would do harm to those who are most in need of our protection and, often, those people try to use a job or a volunteering position as a means of gaining access to those vulnerable individuals. The bill's purpose is to stop those people. It provides employers with an additional tool that, used in tandem with other safer recruitment measures, will begin to make a difference. That will help to ensure that they—and the rest of us—can be confident that reasonable steps have been taken to keep unsuitable people out of the workplace. Since the stage 1 debate in January, more than 300 amendments have been lodged that have led to a number of substantial improvements to the bill, including altering the definition of "protected adult" to ensure that it is based on prescribed health and welfare services; giving further assurances and reassurances in relation to fees, which we discussed this morning; and introducing retrospective checking by regulation, using the affirmative procedure. With regard to the sharing of child protection information, the Scottish ministers agreed—with considerable reluctance—to support the amendment to withdraw part 3, but we remain convinced that the provisions in that part of the bill are vital to address information sharing. I hope that the Parliament will return to that issue at the earliest opportunity. We intend to publish a draft code of practice at the earliest opportunity. Although it will be a non-statutory code, it does not preclude information sharing being underpinned by legal duties at a future point. However, the passing of the bill is only one step towards having a modern, streamlined vetting and barring system. The next stages are vital and I want to reaffirm the Executive's commitment to undertake full and detailed consultation on all aspects of implementation and significant secondary legislation. We will do that through a range of forums and groups and through consultation papers and events involving those who have an interest. In addition, we have made a commitment to lay before Parliament an annual report on the performance of the vetting and barring functions. We have no interest in implementing the bill in a way that denies the benefits that should flow from the new scheme. We have no desire to undo all the good work that has been done to promote and encourage volunteering in Scotland. We remain supportive of the sector in policy and financial  terms. We believe that voluntary organisations deserve to have the same confidence in their staff as statutory and private organisations have in their staff and volunteers. The bill will not restrict the number of people who can work or volunteer in the vulnerable groups workforce. It does not require parents who are helping teachers out at a school event to be checked, nor is it intended to curb children's normal, everyday physical and intellectual activities. The focus of the bill is on ensuring that unsuitable people do not come into contact with those who need protection. I think that the bill delivers a robust and effective scheme that is proportionate and sensible and is linked to recruitment processes and local risk assessment. I commend it to the chamber. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The Executive is promoting a variety of initiatives including the home reading initiative, Scotland reads, and number partners. In addition, bookstart Scotland aims to support pre-school children. Good examples in West Dunbartonshire include Aitkenbar primary school and St Peter's primary school, which have set up a joint homework club to develop numeracy skills using technology. The development of literacy and numeracy will be a key theme across the curriculum, with all teachers having responsibility for promoting language, literacy and numeracy development.

I certainly commend the staff for their dedication and enthusiasm and for the results achieved. I am aware of a number of initiatives in different parts of Scotland. We leave it to people locally to decide on how to develop those initiatives. We are willing to learn from good experiences. There are different views in different parts of Scotland about different initiatives and their merits. What has been achieved in West Dunbartonshire is interesting and I will certainly want to reflect on it. I am aware of initiatives such as one in Clackmannanshire that have achieved good results too. The professionals in each local area are best placed to make the relevant decisions for the children in their schools. However, I join Jackie Baillie in commending the significant improvements in West Dunbartonshire.

We established a ministerial action group on Gaelic teacher recruitment, appointed a Gaelic teacher recruitment officer to implement the recommendations of the group, supported new routes into Gaelic teacher training and provided a course to enable Gaelic-speaking teachers to transfer to Gaelic-medium teaching.

I have outlined some of the specific actions that we are taking to encourage more people to take up careers as Gaelic teachers. I join John Farquhar Munro in complimenting the schools that are being developed. I have visited a Gaelic unit in a primary school in Oban and I have visited the new Gaelic school in Glasgow. I confess that the latter was an eye-opener, not only because I saw the clear enthusiasm in the Glasgow school but because I saw the relevance that the people in Glasgow, who did not live in a Gaelic-speaking community, saw in having their children educated through Gaelic. I am aware of the new school in Inverness. We are committing substantial resources to expanding the teaching of Gaelic in Scotland. However, as John Farquhar Munro rightly points out, this is not just about money and commitment. If we do not have the teachers to support it, the initiative will not make progress. I hope that the measures that we are putting in place will build on what has undoubtedly been a success to date.

Western Isles Council is responsible for taking the matter forward. I understand that it is in dialogue with bidders and that it aims to reach a decision on a delivery partner in the next month or so.

I will certainly keep a dialogue going with Western Isles Council. Indeed, I will be in the Western Isles shortly to meet not only council officials but teachers and pupils. Alasdair Morrison mentioned the alternative to PPP. We should take the SNP at face value. It says that it will cancel the PPP projects if it forms an Administration—so the Western Isles project would be cancelled. It says that it will match the programme brick for brick and that it will pay for it through a Scottish futures trust that, as Alex Salmond said, would involve greater use of public bond issues. However, as the SNP acknowledges, the Scottish Executive does not have the ability to borrow or to issue bonds, so there would be no opportunity in the four years of an SNP Administration to borrow the money to pay for new schools. It would have to wait until independence. The new schools in the Western Isles would be cancelled by the SNP, which would have to wait for the break-up of the United Kingdom before it could pay for new schools.

I do think that we are providing value for money. Fiona Hyslop's analysis of the figures is wrong. I invite her, yet again, to tell us very clearly how the SNP would find the money to pay for the PPP projects that it would cancel. It cannot afford it and it cannot borrow. We are very clear that the SNP would cancel those projects and that there would be no schools.

On 29 January we announced the achievement of our commitment to the renewal of 200 schools since 2003. That includes 110 new-build schools.

The possibility of Alex Salmond becoming First Minister is fairly remote. However, in the unlikely event that that happened, Elaine Murray would be right to be concerned. Contracts under our plans—and under the plans that are under way in Dumfries and Galloway—would be cancelled. Peter Peacock wrote to Fiona Hyslop and the Scottish National Party to ask how its projects would work, but there has been no reply. I have written twice, I think, since then, but there has been no reply. Perhaps Elaine Murray's powers of persuasion might enable us to get the information that so far has been refused.

That is just absolute nonsense. The SNP's plans are not only uncosted but unproven. We have no way—and nor does the SNP—of knowing whether those plans would work. Many questions remain unanswered. The SNP's proposals are asking people in Scotland to take a great leap in the dark. Like many others things about which the SNP is trying to kid the Scottish electorate, it will be not only a leap in the dark but a leap into danger.

Local authorities are responsible for the delivery of education in a safe and secure environment for both staff and pupils. It is for authorities to decide what technologies best support the achievement of those objectives.

Patrick Harvie might have been at a different meeting of the Communities Committee than the one that I was at, given the reference that he made to fingerprinting technology. However, there was a discussion at that meeting about anonymised systems for school meals payments. We have made it clear that the issue is a matter for the schools to determine. We have made clear what we expect to happen with regard to good practice and we have made clear how we expect the law to be applied. Nothing has changed between Tuesday and today that I can add.

Lord James Douglas-Hamilton is absolutely right to put safety and security within the context that he mentioned. Not only would we be shocked and horrified if something were to happen that we had done nothing to prevent, but we would all be held to be guilty of neglect. It is incumbent on us to take steps to ensure that technology that is relevant and appropriate is used to encourage a safe and secure environment in our schools.  I appreciate the contribution that CCTV can make in town centres and outside schools in diminishing vandalism, and so on. However, we do not recommend CCTV as a measure to monitor or reduce indiscipline in schools. There is a different context there, and a number of other measures can be used to alert parents to the fact that their child has not turned up for school. Albeit that mistakes can sometimes happen—I heard of one such case today—we should do what we can to ensure that our children are well protected.

The Executive is committed to improving literacy and is promoting a variety of initiatives, including the home reading initiative, Scotland reads and bookstart Scotland. Last week, the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport committed an additional £1.5 million to bookstart Scotland to encourage parents to read with their children. As part of a curriculum for excellence, literacy skills have been identified as a key factor in ensuring that our young people become successful learners, effective contributors, confident individuals and responsible citizens. The development of literacy will be a key theme across the curriculum, with all teachers having responsibility for promoting language and literacy development.

I welcome the initiatives in Karen Whitefield's constituency. Indeed, such initiatives are being introduced all over Scotland. We cannot overestimate the significance and value of parents reading to and communicating with their children. Such activity has a beneficial educational impact on the child's learning ability, not only when they enter nursery school but as they progress through primary school into secondary school. Communicating with children at the earliest possible age not only benefits them at the time, but stays with them for life, and we must  encourage anything that can be done to support that. In that respect, bookstart Scotland is a very imaginative initiative. However, we can build on it. I want our children to have the best possible start in life, and I worry about children in families and households in which the value and effectiveness of reading and communication have not yet been established. While that situation remains, we have more to do.

I am not familiar with the specific situation in Fife, but sometimes there are reasons for closing facilities. For example, the population might have changed or there might be a lack of demand. That said, I know from my area that underused facilities can be closed for one reason and then reopened to provide other opportunities for communities. In my constituency, a community learning facility that has been established in what used to be a library is making a remarkable contribution to the community's life not only by helping adult learners but—more important—by allowing young parents to learn skills that they might otherwise not have had a chance to develop.

All national health service boards have drawn up local plans with their local authority partners that identify priorities such as speech and language therapy for children and young people, including nursery-age children.

Kildrum is one of many excellent early years facilities throughout Scotland that aim to give our children the best start in life. I agree whole-heartedly with Cathie Craigie that early intervention is critical. When a child has difficulties of any nature, we must ensure that help and support is provided as early as possible. I know that Kildrum and other nurseries provide a high-quality service. It is incumbent on us to encourage parents to support and assist their children from as young an age as possible. The earlier that children are encouraged through their parents talking and reading to them, and playing, singing and playing music with them, the better those children will develop. All too often, we have to deal with the consequences of a failure, for whatever reason, to intervene at an early stage. That failure can then manifest itself in difficulties when the child is in primary and then secondary education.  All power to the staff at Kildrum and other places. I hope that their excellent practice will continue.

Two separate issues arise. The early identification of additional needs must be undertaken, irrespective of what else might be happening according to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton. Teachers are critical to the development of the early years curriculum. Their influence and involvement is important. However, we should remember that a range of other members of staff also provide first-class services for children in the early years. It would be wrong not to question the impression that Lord James has given that somehow the early years services in Glasgow and West Dunbartonshire are of anything less than high quality. I know from experience that facilities in those authority areas operate to very high standards, with dedicated nursery staff from a variety of backgrounds. We should celebrate the contribution that they make, while also acknowledging the contribution that teachers clearly make to early years education.

Following yesterday's welcome and productive debate on the bill's principles, the Executive will consider lodging amendments at stage 2. If amendments are considered necessary, they will be lodged within the usual timescale.

We have never specified how an anonymous system should be introduced. That is a matter for local authorities, as we have made clear. We encourage local authorities to engage with and involve parents. Despite what Patrick Harvie says, there are powerful arguments for anonymous systems. There is conflicting evidence on the matter, as we heard during yesterday's debate. There are people who hold diametrically opposed views to those of Patrick Harvie. The systems that I have seen operate very well, and they have the support of the teaching staff. They also find a great deal of favour with the pupils concerned. They can make a contribution beyond the issues of anonymity and the security and collection of cash. I urge Patrick Harvie and others not to close their minds to the wider issues. I recognise that there are questions of confidentially and of security of personal information, but the picture is not always as extreme as Patrick Harvie portrays it. Local authorities are well placed to take the appropriate decisions.

The Parliament had an extensive debate on that very point yesterday, and I see no point in adding anything further to what was said.

Anna Fowlie, who is on secondment from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, will work closely with chief executives and senior officials in each local authority to identify what more needs to be done to improve educational outcomes for their looked-after children.

It might be difficult to have specific targets and timeframes at this stage. It is generally recognised that we as a society collectively fail children in care. All of us—local authority staff, councillors, MSPs and ministers—must take our responsibilities for those children seriously. Too many of them start their young lives disadvantaged, and that disadvantage continues when they go into care. It is not good enough that many of them are more vulnerable to failure at a relatively early stage in life. We need to do something about that. We are determined to ensure that we all face up to our responsibilities. The financial contribution that we have made is part of that, but we are also asking the various inspectorates, including the Social Work Inspection Agency, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education and the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care, to undertake specific inspection work to ascertain what is happening in each local authority area, to go into schools and ask questions and to inspect care homes. We are working with local authorities to improve data collection and the reporting framework, so that we can be confident of having robust evidence about what is happening locally. Anna Fowlie, as the new senior executive who has been appointed to this area, will report twice a year to Cabinet on the progress that has been made. I hope that the Parliament will continue to take an interest in the issue and debate it.

I listened with interest to the roll-call of those who support free school meals. The one organisation that was absent from the list is the SNP. It does not support universal free school meals; it supports pilots. If the SNP believes in universal free school meals, why bother with a pilot? The SNP should make up its mind and stop kidding people, although, of course, that is par for the course from the SNP. There were a number of interesting contributions this afternoon, in some of which a number of interesting paradoxes became apparent. Fiona Hyslop might want to clarify something for me—I may be the only one who did not understand the point. It was something she said about Finland. She was talking about choice, but it was unclear whether she wants to restrict choice, as Finland does, or to extend choice, unlike Finland. Fiona Hyslop should let us know what she meant to say. She needs to make up her mind. If she wants to  extend choice—unlike Finland—doing so will have significant implications. Finland did not go down that route.

Frances Curran spoke about the Executive wanting to extend the law to make it illegal to provide free school meals. That is not true. In the bill, we are extending the powers of local authorities in relation to snacks. Frances Curran also raised a bizarre notion when she criticised the idea that the wealthier someone becomes, the more they oppose universality. I thought she would welcome the fact that the wealthier someone becomes, the more they want resources to be concentrated on those who are less well-off. I suppose that I should not be surprised at what she said.

No, thank you. Karen Whitefield and David Petrie talked about vans. We are considering what East Renfrewshire Council and West Dunbartonshire Council have managed to do by using their existing powers and we have said that we want to ensure that all local authorities are aware of what can be achieved through those powers. We will circulate that information. There are issues to do with the extent to which we can prescribe what goes on beyond the school, but there is an issue about what is provided in vans and nearby shops. Karen Whitefield and others talked about the independent and early years sectors. Powers that are available to HMIE and the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care could ensure that what is sought could be achieved in those sectors. We are not convinced that the bill could be extended as easily as the Communities Committee suggested, and we think that there are other ways of achieving the objective. However, we are aware that members are concerned to ensure that the approach is extended to the independent and early years sectors and I will reflect on what members said. Jamie Stone was right to say that the more we involve pupils, particularly upper-school pupils, in effecting culture change, the better, because pupils can be a powerful influence for change. As some members said, an attempt to change habits and behaviour early can benefit not just the young person but the family at home, by encouraging parents to engage with their children and begin to change practice. There is evidence, as Charlie Gordon and others said, that early intervention can influence the behaviour of children as they progress through primary school and go on to secondary school. That becomes evident in the choices that children make as they get older.  David Petrie and Patrick Harvie talked about anonymity. Patrick Harvie said that there is no evidence that young people regard anonymised systems as a major issue, so such systems are not needed. The bill imposes no system on anyone, but encourages local authorities to ensure that there is anonymity and leaves the choice to them. I spoke to young people who welcomed the anonymised system in their primary school, which is simple and fun and means that they do not need to handle cash. One pupil told me that the system helps her to find out whether her younger brother has inadvertently purchased food that might be harmful to him as a result of his medical condition. Conversations with young people can demonstrate the opposite of Patrick Harvie's experience.

No, I need to make a number of points.

No, I am sorry. This is a summing up of what members said. David Petrie and other members talked about the provision of water. There are positive changes in Scotland in the context of access to and consumption of water. Nanette Milne rightly mentioned the changing habits of young people in Scotland in that regard. Shona Robison was worried that under EU rules healthy cereal bars might be categorised as confectionery. We do not want that to happen, so we are looking into the issue and we will see what we can do.

Yes, if it is on that point—[ Interruption. ]

Unlike the other member who sought to intervene, Ken Macintosh had not already spoken in the debate.  Our procurement directorate has issued to local authorities and public bodies guidance that shows how fair trade can be encouraged and supported in public procurement without breaching procurement law. Our officials are working with members of the fair trade working group to consider whether the guidance needs to be revised. We encourage local authorities to consider the guidance when they are awarding contracts for school food and catering services. Charlie Gordon raised issues of local flexibility and spoke about the experience in Glasgow, but the experience beyond Glasgow has not been the same as Glasgow's and it would not be right to frame legislation solely on the Glasgow situation, which contrasts with what is happening elsewhere. To reassure Charlie Gordon and the councillors who have written to him and others, I say that the timescale for the implementation of the bill should be sufficient to allow Glasgow City Council and the other councils that have asked for more time to make the changes that they need to make. The bill will not come into effect immediately. I hope that the timescale will enable Glasgow City Council to adjust as it has said it needs to. David Davidson made a contradictory speech. He said that parents need help, but he then complained about the nanny state. He needs to make up his mind: does he want parents to be given help or would that be a nanny state? Which is it to be?

I do not have time—sorry. Mr Davidson asked why the Parliament does not promote healthy eating, but we need only read the title of the bill—the Schools (Health Promotion and Nutrition) (Scotland) Bill—to see that we are promoting it. It is clear. Cathie Craigie was right to talk about early intervention and issues that relate to behaviour. Those are important, because what children eat affects their behaviour. By encouraging children to eat different food, their behaviour can be influenced for the better. Also, children's eating behaviour in school can influence the choices that they make outside school. John Home Robertson talked about the phrase "Ministers must endeavour to ensure". I will endeavour to ensure that I take all his points into account. The phrase is a well-tried form of words and I am not sure that being more prescriptive would be helpful. Like John Home Robertson, I praise East Ayrshire Council for its work. I am interested in the DVD that Iain Smith mentioned and I would like more information on that.  The Parliament should embrace the bill, as it will lead to short and long-term health benefits for our young people. We will promote healthier attitudes, but the issue is not only about promotion; we will take specific measures as a result of the bill to ensure that our children eat healthily in our schools.

Improving the health of people in Scotland is a key priority for the Executive. We are taking action on a number of fronts to tackle our poor health record. The Schools (Health Promotion and Nutrition) (Scotland) Bill is but one important step that we are taking to improve the health of the nation. Scotland is at the forefront of making health promotion and healthy eating a priority of school life. Our active schools programme has increased pupils' opportunities to engage in a healthier lifestyle. Hungry for success and our health-promoting schools initiatives have gained international recognition. Parents and children are already reaping the benefits, and we are committed to building on that success. We owe it to our children and young people to go further than just trying to influence and encourage. We must accept our share of the responsibility for ensuring that schools give them the best possible start in life.

I will touch on that later. Before discussing the bill in detail, I thank the many pupils, parents and professionals from the education sector, health services and the food and drink industry who all contributed to the consultation on the bill. The bill will ensure not only that health promotion is integral to the curriculum but that it pervades the atmosphere and ethos of schools, their policies and their services. A health-promoting school must address the physical, mental and social well-being of pupils as well as encourage healthy lifestyles and healthy eating habits. That will help to produce confident and healthy individuals who can develop to their full potential. Good health is essential to the well-being of Scottish society.  The bill will make health promotion a central purpose of schooling, rather than an add-on. It will amend the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000 to place a duty on education authorities to set out strategies in their annual statement of improvement objectives to ensure that schools are health promoting. That will flow through into school development plans and subsequent progress reports. A health-promoting school will need to consider health promotion in all its activities. It should adopt a whole-school approach and should involve pupils, staff, families and the wider community in efforts to promote health. The bill will place a duty on education authorities to ensure that the food and drinks that they provide meet nutritional standards as set out in regulations. That will go beyond the achievements of the hungry for success initiative and will include what is on offer at the tuck shop or in the vending machine. It is fitting to take this opportunity to thank the expert working group on nutrition for all its hard work and for its proposals for the food and drink regulations. I am grateful for the contribution that it and many others who have had an interest have made. The regulations will guarantee that school lunches are a healthy option, but we also want to increase the number of pupils who benefit from them. This is why the bill will require education authorities to promote school lunches and to encourage pupils to take them. It is particularly important that we encourage all families to take advantage of any entitlement to free school meals. It is every child's fundamental right to access food in schools without the fear of stigma, so the bill will also require education authorities to protect the identity of those who are eligible for free school meals. Finally, the bill will give education authorities the power to provide pupils with free or paid-for healthy snacks throughout the school day. That will allow education authorities the flexibility to address local priorities and the freedom to tailor provision of healthy snacks to those whom they feel are most in need. I thank the Communities Committee for its detailed consideration of the bill's principles and its subsequent report. I note the committee's concerns about extending the bill to cover independent schools and the pre-school sector. Problems would arise in implementing what the committee has asked for. I will need to return to that, as I do not have time to develop the arguments in full. However, I will examine the committee's proposals closely. As I have said, improving the nation's health requires action on several fronts.  As the independent regulator of care services in Scotland, the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care already has a role to play, not only in improving standards in the early years sector but in taking action when services fail to improve. Building on the achievements of hungry for success, we have issued guidance to the sector that provides advice on good eating habits, nutrition and menu planning. The guidance underpins the national care standards for early education and child care, which the commission takes into account when inspecting services. The bill will require education authorities to consider nutritional standards when they place a pupil in an independent school. Beyond that, we will share the health promotion and nutrition guidance with independent schools and we will certainly encourage them to adopt it. We believe that those arrangements will achieve our aims. If, in time, more seems to need to be done in those sectors, we will consider further action. I move to the amendments to the motion. Parliament has considered and rejected the principle of universal free school meals. The bill is not about universal free school meals but about the quality and content of food that is provided in our schools. We must do what we can to improve the uptake of free school meals by those who are currently eligible for them. It is important that the bill addresses that matter because we have still not ensured that everyone who is entitled to free school meals takes them. Providing universal free school meals is not an effective use of resources. We want to target our resources where they are needed. Many families can afford to pay for meals. Providing free school meals to the children of members of the Scottish Parliament, the children of doctors or the children of lawyers, for example, would use money that could otherwise be used to help those in need. Universal free school meals would, in effect, make children in the poorest families no better off than they currently are.

I did not say anything about reviewing proposals for universal free school meals at a later date. As I explained, I do not accept the principle behind providing universal free school meals.

No, thank you. As I said, universal free school meals would make children in the poorest families no better off than they currently are. Ensuring that children are healthy, that they eat healthy food and that schools promote healthy eating to their pupils does not mean that free food should be given away; the issue is to do with educating young people about why healthy eating and healthy lifestyle choices are important.

No. Frances Curran's amendment is not factually accurate. The research in question is independent research, not research by Hull City Council, and I have been advised that it revealed significant flaws in the programme. There are plans to end the pilot scheme for the same reason that we do not propose to introduce a pilot—namely, that resources could be targeted to better effect.

Frances Curran talks about independent research, but her amendment states that the research was done by Hull City Council. Perhaps she can clarify for us at some point who did the research. Hull City Council does not intend to progress the pilot scheme. Our bill will build on the success that we have already achieved, make health promotion a central purpose of schooling and embed in law the culture that we seek in schools for the benefit of our children's health and our nation's future. In order to ensure that such things are achieved, I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Schools (Health Promotion and Nutrition) (Scotland) Bill.

Yet.

I begin by reflecting on why vetting is undertaken. Every one of us would be appalled if children in Scotland were being taught by a sex offender or if care staff in homes for the elderly were serial violent offenders. No one in Scotland will forget the tragedy of Dunblane and the more recent horrific murders of the two little girls in Soham. In both those cases, the perpetrators had substantial access to children through work or regular volunteering activities. Both cases exposed critical deficiencies in employers' knowledge about their workers. Vetting is the means of closing off that gap. The Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Bill is about ensuring that, when we drop our children off at school in the mornings or when members of our family go into hospital or receive care services at home, we can be confident that the people with whom they come into contact do not have a history that indicates that they are not suitable to enjoy the trust that we place in them; confident that, if someone becomes unsuitable to work or volunteer with our loved ones, that information is passed on to and shared with the organisations with which they work or volunteer; and confident that those who are proven to be unsuitable to work with children and protected adults are prevented from doing so. The introduction of the bill does not imply that we do not trust or value the hundreds of thousands of committed individuals who work and volunteer with children and protected adults every day. On the contrary, we know that the vast majority have their best interests at heart and play a valuable role in their care and development. However, we also know that a small number of people would do them harm if they could and would use the workplace—or the opportunity to volunteer—as a means of gaining access to their prey. The Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Bill is about ensuring that all reasonable steps have been taken to keep such people out of the workplace, that our processes are robust and that we do not make Scotland's vulnerable groups a target. I have not been deaf to the comments that there must be an easier way of finding a needle in a  haystack than subjecting every piece of hay to microscopic analysis. A magnet would certainly do the trick if all that was required was to identify the needles, but there are three key dimensions to robust protection. First, it is necessary to identify the information—conviction and non-conviction—that is indicative of unsuitability and/or may be relevant to a particular post that involves working with vulnerable groups. Secondly, there is a need to link individual members of the workforce to specific organisations, but we must recognise that people may have more than one role—for example, someone may be a teacher and a volunteer netball coach—and may move around the sector over time. Thirdly, there must be continuous updating to remove the bureaucracy of multiple disclosures and ensure that new information is reviewed. The vetting and barring scheme is designed to offer the most streamlined and efficient way of delivering on all those dimensions. We do not start with a blank sheet of paper. In the past decade, we have used part V of the Police Act 1997 to establish a system of vetting the workforce, which has been delivered through Disclosure Scotland since 2002, and the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003 to establish a disqualified from working with children list, which went live in January 2005 and now includes 131 names, with a further 39 people under consideration for listing.

I dispute the implication that the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003 is anything other than robust. In the past three and a half years or more there have been no criticisms of it and no suggestions about how it might be improved. If Fiona Hyslop has any such suggestions, we would certainly listen to them. The fact that we are at the end of a parliamentary session is not the key point. The issue is whether this is the right thing to do. I think that the bill builds sensibly and proportionately on the strong foundations of our existing vetting and barring processes. Last year, there were 310,000 enhanced disclosure checks. The bill does not introduce vetting and barring; it strengthens the existing regimes and minimises bureaucracy, thereby providing more robust and more efficient safeguards and protections. We want parents and carers, as well as children and vulnerable adults, to be confident that the individuals who work with  them are safe. The bill should make it easier for everyone—employers, employees, voluntary organisations, volunteers, parents and children—to ensure that that is the case. I recognise that there would have been some merit in auditing the existing disclosure regimes before proceeding, but the gaps in the existing system are well known and understood. The bill implements the key recommendation of the Bichard report, which is underpinned by a solid and comprehensive analysis of the contributory factors which led to the tragic event at Soham. There seems little advantage in postponing action to address those factors when the safety of Scotland's children and protected adults is at stake and when we now have an opportunity to drive forward improvements in protection and cut bureaucracy. I am clear that we will keep the implementation and operation of the new vetting and barring scheme under close review and evaluate it at an appropriate point. We must also ensure that Scotland does not fall behind. Westminster recently passed the Safeguarding Vulnerable Groups Act 2006, which makes similar provision for England and Wales and, eventually, Northern Ireland. We cannot allow cross-border loopholes to develop, thereby making Scotland a safe haven for those who would abuse vulnerable people. The bill will ensure cross-border integration, while ensuring that Scottish ministers are accountable for the new system. We need to progress the bill now to ensure that Scottish stakeholders can help to shape cross-border elements of the new system to meet our specific needs. The bottom line is that the bill will make a real difference. It will create, for the first time in Scotland, a list of individuals who are unsuitable to do care work with adults. Once implemented, the bill will bring an end to the excessive bureaucracy of multiple disclosure checks, which have been the subject of much criticism in the existing disclosure regime. Employees and volunteers will be able to move around the workforce and the voluntary sector with much greater ease and without the need for form filling at every turn. Employers and volunteering organisations will know that, once someone becomes a scheme member, the central barring unit has reviewed any relevant information and considers that the person is not unsuitable. They will also have the reassurance that, if new information comes to light that suggests that there is cause for concern about one of their workers, they will be notified and issued with guidance about what steps to take. The public, and parents in particular, will know that more robust procedures are in place for ensuring both that everyone who, through work, comes into contact with vulnerable friends and family does not have a history of behaviour that suggests that they are  unsuitable and that the information is continually updated. Successful implementation is the key to realising those benefits. We have engaged extensively with the full spectrum of stakeholder interests thus far and will continue to do so until implementation is complete. I know that there have been particular concerns about the possible impact of the bill on the voluntary sector. During deliberations on the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003, the voluntary sector called for a single high standard of checking and safety for everyone who works with vulnerable groups, whether they are paid or unpaid and whether they are working in the voluntary, private or statutory sectors. I concur that a two-tier system is undesirable and could leave the voluntary sector vulnerable to becoming a hiding place for those who might harm vulnerable groups. That is why I fully support not differentiating the protections offered. Having said that, I recognise that particular care is required in implementing the bill's provisions in the voluntary sector, given the wide spectrum of voluntary organisations. The voluntary sector can be reassured that we have no interest in implementing a system that proves unworkable. That is why we will continue to engage closely with the sector to ensure that key concerns about implementation are addressed.

I understand that retrospective checking has caused concern in some quarters of the voluntary sector. I further understand that, at a meeting that was held by Robert Brown earlier this week, it was made clear that no decision had been reached on how retrospection might be progressed and that the issue will be subject to further comprehensive consultation in due course. It was also made clear again that a process would not be adopted that was unduly accelerated or would be likely to have an adverse impact, in financial and administrative terms, on any particular sector. In relation to scope, it is not the case that every person who volunteers will need to be checked. The scheme is for people whose normal duties involve access to children and protected adults. I am fully committed to ensuring that the right information, guidance and training are made available to support all sectors to implement the bill successfully. I am grateful to the Education Committee for its endorsement of parts 1 and 2 of the bill. Although I recognise its concerns about part 3 of the bill, I was disappointed that the committee felt unable to support it. Given that the focus of the provisions was children at risk of harm, I strongly supported proceeding with provisions that make explicit what  is currently implicit good practice. However, I recognise the decision reached by the committee and intend to withdraw part 3 from the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Bill by lodging an amendment at stage 2. However, I am firmly of the view that the criticality of this area necessitates early action by a future Parliament and I hope that Parliament returns to the matter. With the removal of part 3 at the request of the committee, I firmly believe that it is our duty to say yes to the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Bill, yes to a robust vetting and barring system and yes to those who need our protection most. I commend the bill to Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Bill.

We have learned that Scottish education is a success story. We are in the top third of the countries in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, and we have shown steady improvements in literacy and numeracy. According to PISA—the OECD's programme for international student assessment— our 15-year-olds are among the best performing in the world. Scotland is in the mainstream of educational thinking and policy in the European Union and worldwide, and we are recognised as leading the way in several areas such as curriculum reform, assessment, self-evaluation, enterprise education and school meals policy. Furthermore, following a commitment in the ambitious, excellent schools programme to benchmark education in Scotland against international standards as a basis for bringing about further improvements in performance, we have taken forward a suite of benchmarking activities, including initiating a series of ministerial conversations with some EU member states and a country review by the OECD, to showcase Scottish education on the world stage and to share and learn from world-class experience.

Interestingly, over the past week or so I have spoken to ministers from New Zealand and Canada. Both those countries report problems similar to ours with that particular group, and both report similar difficulties in trying to make progress. There are things that we can do to make headway, and others will look to learn from our experience. If we can improve by learning from the experience of others, I see no problem in doing so.

There is no chance of that happening. Purposeful and structured play is important, and we can learn from countries such as Finland how play can help to develop a child's education and learning experience at a later stage.  Good teachers are important in our schools. An educational underpinning of the curriculum in the early years is essential and teachers can contribute to that. Our nursery nurses and other staff also make a phenomenal contribution in our early years sector. They are part of a team effort to develop and deliver excellent standards of service. We will look to ensure that resources are available, but we also need to ensure that training is available. The curriculum for excellence allows us to put a structure around that to enable teachers to identify the best way of imparting knowledge and learning experience to children. Everyone recognises that that more flexible approach in the early years will provide definite results later in a child's development.

I do not know, John—sometimes I wonder. The integrated community schools concept is now mainstreamed into the wider integrated children's services agenda. Some £25.8 million is made available each year to local authorities to provide support for that broader framework at school and neighbourhood level.

What Jeremy Purvis proposes is certainly interesting, although it could be somewhat complex. However, the model that a local authority wishes to adopt is a matter for local decision making. We have already seen some benefits from local trusts in the provision of leisure facilities. I hesitate to be more definitive, because I do not want to do anything that would impact on the current relationship between local authorities and schools. However, I know that several local authorities are considering imaginatively how they can access funding and get better use of facilities. Jeremy Purvis is right to say that it is incredibly frustrating to see community assets closed in the evenings when communities want them. We provide substantial amounts of money to local authorities for education and other services, and it is for each local authority to determine how best to use that money. Local authorities tell us that they prefer funding not to be ring fenced, but often there is pressure when local authorities either cannot afford to use their facilities in the evening or find some bureaucratic impediment to their doing so. I encourage local authorities to work with communities to come up with a solution that is best suited to local needs.

Education already takes precedence in our schools, and head teachers have considerable responsibility and flexibility. In a recent announcement, I allocated more capital and  revenue money to be paid directly to head teachers for use in their schools, so we have considered the idea sympathetically over the years. However, we could find ourselves going beyond a situation in which head teachers are responsible purely for the management of education in schools and into one in which we ask them to become business managers. In some local authority areas, we have seen the development of business managers who are responsible for the management of the physical infrastructure and the non-essential education responsibilities. In all cases, a proper balance needs to be struck.

The Scottish Executive carries out a teacher vacancy survey each February. The last annual survey showed that 1.5 per cent of posts were vacant and 0.4 per cent were vacant for more than three months.

I am not aware of the specific situation at that school, but everything that I hear about the guaranteed year's employment for probationers indicates that it is a proven success, which has resulted in many more young people coming into the teaching profession and many people returning to teaching or coming to teaching from other activities. Clearly, a project of such scale will always have some implications and in some cases there will be difficulties with how it is managed. I cannot respond on the particular case now, but the fact is that more teachers are coming in and we are spending more money not only on the school infrastructure but on bringing in teachers. We are on target to meet our commitments for new and additional teachers in the relevant subjects. If there is an issue in one school in Brian Adam's constituency, I urge him to discuss the matter with the local authority.

The bill is important. In some respects, it is complex. It is timely and worthy. We can take credit from much of the way in which the Parliament has handled the bill. I pay tribute to the committee for its work to bring Parliament to this stage and to Robert Brown for the work that he has done during discussions not just with the committee, but with others. As Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and others said, Robert Brown made himself available to discuss fairly sensitive and important issues. We are all the better for that communication and deliberation and we now have a bill of which we can be proud. Adoption is a crucial way to provide stability and security for some of Scotland's most vulnerable children. The current law on adoption is almost 30 years old. Since the Adoption (Scotland) Act 1978 came into force, much about adoption has changed, as have the circumstances of children who need to be adopted—they have changed not only since 1978, but during the past few years. We have all heard the stories about the impact on many communities of alcohol and drugs. Sometimes, children need to be taken into care. Adoption needs to be sought for many such children. We must rise to the challenge that confronts us. As a result of several factors, very few healthy babies are given up for adoption. It is much more common for an older child to be removed from his or her parents because they cannot provide the safe and secure home that every child deserves. As a result, fewer children are being adopted. In the past 20 years, the number of adoption applications has fallen from about 1,000 per year to about 400 per year. It is unfortunate that the current legal framework often fails to meet children's needs. That reality poses challenges for everyone who is involved in adoption. We need to act on several fronts. We need to encourage more people to adopt. We have heard today a vigorous and somewhat passionate debate about who we encourage to adopt. Robert Brown has put on record the significance of marriage in our society and our desire for more married people to offer to adopt children. We recognise that there are others who  are equally loving and caring and who are in stable environments, whether or not they are married, who wish to adopt. We need to reflect that in our legislation. We need to provide better support for adopted children and their families and we need to provide greater security and stability for children who are not adopted for whatever reason. I think that the bill does that. It comprehensively overhauls adoption to provide a modern and robust system that meets the varied and complex needs of children. It improves support for people who are affected by an adoption by giving clear access to adoption support services, which can be vital in helping an adoption to succeed and in helping adopted people to cope with the experience in the short term and throughout their lives. Such support can also help other people who have been affected by an adoption: not just the child, but the child's parents, members of his or her birth family or other members of the adoptive family. The provision of support is not time limited. The bill makes it clear that people who have a need for adoption support services will be able to access them whenever they need them. As I have said, and as others have discussed, the bill provides for a wider range of people to adopt than is currently possible. We have had a vigorous debate about that and I believe that the decision that the Parliament has taken is correct. We need to reflect the circumstances in which many people now live their lives. We need to recognise that many people are capable of providing a warm, loving and supportive family environment for children, irrespective of the differences in their circumstances. It is right that we do not insist that joint applicants for adoption must be married couples. We allow married couples to adopt jointly, but we need to recognise that other people in partnerships should be allowed to adopt jointly, too. I think that that will have positive effects. It will provide children who have been adopted into the families concerned with greater legal protection, because both adults will have full parental responsibilities. That is indeed important for the adults, but it is equally important for the children. We should not overlook the psychological benefits of the child having a strong legal relationship with both adults. I hope that the overall impact of the bill will be to encourage more people to come forward to adopt children. It is right that we do all we can to support children. The bill will improve the lives of children who cannot live with their birth families but who are not adopted. Most important, the bill provides a new court order, the permanence order, which Robert Brown has valiantly tried to describe in delivering to the Parliament a better understand of  that complex subject. All those things we have now put in place. There is much that the Parliament has delivered since 2003 from which we can take satisfaction. Because of the work that we have done, many groups in society are far better off now than they were. In some respects, one of the defining themes of the Parliament in the past few years is what we have done for children, across a range of portfolios. Rightly, we have tried to consider the interests of children and to deliver what is best for them. I think that the Adoption and Children (Scotland) Bill fits very neatly under that key priority. The bill will deliver for some of Scotland's most vulnerable children. It is long overdue. It recognises the reality of 21 st century Scotland. I hope that, as a result of the bill, there will be an improvement in children's quality of life, and better rights and support for children who badly need it. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Adoption and Children (Scotland) Bill be passed.

As Robert Brown said, the Executive is neutral on the issue. However, I hope that I can clarify several matters that have been raised. [ Interruption. ] I will attempt to do so as an ordinary member. Indeed, I have the right to do so. It has been suggested that the national care standards should not apply. Some people want them to be abolished. However, we must be clear that the debate is not about abolishing the national care standards—they will still exist and will ensure that what Michael McMahon's amendment 86 suggests should be done will be done. A slight difference is involved, however, with respect to the duty to refer people who cannot be assessed to another adoption agency. Michael McMahon has suggested that we should go further than the standards in saying that we should ensure that a person shall be referred to another agency. That addresses the point that Patrick Harvie made about it being right to refer people on.

I do not see any unintended consequences. Robert Brown gave assurances on the consequences at stage 2. Michael McMahon seeks to clarify matters and to ensure that people shall be referred to another agency—I refer to the point that Patrick Harvie made. The opportunity for an agency to discriminate will be avoided. The question whether discrimination had occurred would depend on the reasons for the referral.

Will the member take an intervention?

If I could perhaps address the point about the national care standards and why Michael McMahon thinks it is important for the matter to be covered in the bill, there is a slight difference of emphasis, because he is addressing some of the concerns that adoption agencies might not be able to—

Sorry.

Okay.

Scottish Screen promotes Scotland as a great place to make films. It has supported projects in Renfrewshire, most notably the TV series "Taggart", "Rebus", "Dr Finlay's Casebook" and "Naked Video". The film "Young Adam" was filmed in Renfrewshire. Scottish Screen has also supported a number of films including "An Anarchist's Tale" and "Homage to History", made by Johnstone-based company, Pelicula Films.

Scottish Screen works with a network of local authority funded film offices. The regional film offices make a vital contribution to attracting film-makers, who are then supported during filming. It is evident that Scottish Screen finds it easiest to organise filming in areas where there is a local film office. I hope that it would be evident to those concerned that the availability of such local offices can enhance an area's status and attract more filming. I also hope that Renfrewshire Council and East Renfrewshire Council, which were mentioned by Wendy Alexander, will consider enhancing what is already happening in the area.

There is no better place to speak about, Presiding Officer. Jamie McGrigor raises a complex issue. He asks what it is that determines where a film is made. It is a variety of things. It is about the suitability of the location, the financial support and the availability of the personnel and technology to make the film. Scottish Screen has been given approximately £3 million of Scottish Executive grant in aid and £2.7 million of lottery funding to distribute each year. It uses the money to develop screen industries throughout Scotland. Although Scotland has been successful in attracting films to be made here, an exciting expansion is that we are promoting, creating and developing our indigenous film makers, who are showing a great deal of talent and who offer great hope for the future.

I am not familiar with the detail in relation to that film, but it will be a matter between Scottish Screen and the film makers. I am not sure that it would be appropriate for the minister to intervene in decisions about how that money is used and who receives the money. I will certainly pass the matter that has been raised by Stewart Maxwell to the minister.

We have no plans to review the use of setting or streaming. The management of schools and the organisation of learning and teaching is a matter for schools and education authorities.

What the First Minister said is entirely consistent with my reply. There is a place for setting and streaming, but the determination of how it is used in any specific instance is a matter for local decision makers. They need to decide what is appropriate for individual schools and for groups of pupils within those individual schools. There is a lot of debate in education about the value of setting and streaming—there are strong views for and against. The Executive is determined to ensure that children who are failing for whatever reason or who need extra support to reach their full potential are given appropriate support. At the same time, we want to ensure that children who are capable of developing further are helped to reach their full potential. No child in Scotland should be held back and no child should be held down.

In the two weeks in which I have been in post, I have visited a number of schools, including Leith Walk primary school in Edinburgh, which I visited at lunch time. Among the things that have impressed me are the enthusiasm and excellence of the teachers and the pupils' sheer enjoyment of their good learning environments. We have confident pupils who want to learn and who are contributing to schools' excellence. How pupils are taught in any class in any year group at any time is best left to the person responsible. Fiona Hyslop is right to say that a range of methods are used throughout Scotland. It would be wrong of us to try to dictate a simple or single formula to be used everywhere in Scotland, because that would not be appropriate. As long as we set the correct parameters, know what the standards are and have a challenging curriculum—which I believe we do—I have every confidence that the excellent teachers that we have will respond to the challenge and use teaching methods appropriately in the best interests of their pupils.

The local action fund provides £5 million a year to help voluntary sector, sporting and cultural organisations that work with young people to provide interesting and attractive activities as alternatives to antisocial behaviour. The youth crime prevention fund and the intensive support fund have provided investment of more than £20 million over a four-year period to enable local authorities and voluntary organisations to improve their services, including widening the range of crime prevention projects for young offenders, increasing the support that is available for their parents and victims, increasing the level of community-based supervision of young offenders and supporting those returning to their communities from secure accommodation.

As Sarah Boyack said, a complex range of issues affect antisocial behaviour. She is right to focus on the need for effective diversionary activities. We take seriously the question of secure accommodation places, and we have expanded the secure estate. I look forward to the new and  improved facilities making a major impact throughout Scotland. Diversionary activities are best designed and delivered locally. Our commitment should be to provide the necessary funding, which we have done. In Edinburgh, there has been a range of activities, such as arts activities, youth agency activities and outdoor education activities. There is a lot of support for young people. All of those activities have a contribution to make, but Sarah Boyack is right to say that local agencies, local providers and others whom we fund should examine carefully how effectively the funding is used. We should always strive to ensure that we get better outcomes for the money that we invest and, where necessary, obtain additional funding.

Communities the length and breadth of the country have benefited from the national drug dealers don't care campaign, which was funded by £1 million recovered under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 and resulted in 175 arrests and the seizure of a total of £1 million in cash and drugs. This year, the six local authorities hardest hit by serious violent crime will benefit from a further £2 million of reinvestment, which includes the provision of twilight basketball, localised drug dealers don't care, do you? campaigns, evening and weekend sports initiatives, vehicles such as closed-circuit television vans and graffiti clear-up vans, after-hours clubs and youth outreach work.

We will continue to consider imaginative ways of ensuring that the communities that are worst affected by drug dealing see some tangible benefits from the assets that are recovered. There is nothing worse for a community than seeing known drug dealers not only persist with their trade but, sometimes after conviction, continue to lead a life of relative luxury. As the Solicitor General outlined, we intend to ensure that such people are punished through proceedings in the criminal courts that affect their luxury lifestyle. We will think imaginatively about how that money will be used. The worst-affected communities can be assured that there will be tangible benefits from the results of police activity and from the tremendous amounts of information that members of the public have provided through Crimestoppers. I thank all the courageous members of the public who have helped to make arrests a reality.

The use of dispersal orders is monitored on a six-monthly basis. The most recent statistics covering the period to the end of September will be available shortly. We are currently aware of dispersal orders having been used in eight locations across Scotland.

I certainly welcome the recruitment of additional police officers. As the member knows, police numbers in Scotland are at record levels. I am delighted that this Government has been able to deliver that. However, I do not agree with the member's other conclusion. Yes, visible policing in communities can make a difference, but I know from talking to people in the areas where a dispersal notice has been used that the communities are absolutely delighted and that the local police see dispersal orders as an effective means of tackling a persistent problem. A combination of action is needed to make improvements and visible policing is but one component of that.

Average waiting times are not regarded as a particularly effective measure of the accessibility of drug treatment services. However, the most recent figures from the waiting times framework show that, in the north-east, more than 80 per cent of clients entered prescribed drug treatment within 14 days of being considered ready for that intervention. The figures for rehabilitation show that 79 per cent of those who entered rehabilitation did so within 14 days.

I suppose that grudging praise from the Tories is better than no praise at all. I am pleased that, despite her mean words, Nanette Milne admits that progress is being made. However, we have much more to do. The issue of the central register has been raised on several occasions, and answers have been given on it. We are seeking to get as much information as we can about the facilities that are available throughout Scotland. Nonetheless, a much broader range of initiatives is required. We are trying to get behind the figures, and we need to ensure that there is better integration of services. Yesterday, along with Lewis Macdonald, I launched an initiative on improvements in quality standards. Better integration and understanding of services, better communication and better information all have a part to play.

Stewart Stevenson has raised a more complex issue. In fact, in suggesting that we expand the number of places while at the same time pointing out that some of the existing places are lying vacant, he has highlighted one of the contradictions at the heart of the matter. One problem is that the decision about when to send an addict to residential rehabilitation must lie with the professionals who are responsible for that individual. They assess the person's needs at the time and decide on the most appropriate course of action. We must ensure that when someone is offered the opportunity of residential rehabilitation not only are they ready for it but the support facilities are available when they come back out. Some of the stories that my officials have heard on this matter are heartbreaking. For example, one individual had been in residential rehabilitation seven times, which clearly indicates that, in their case, it had failed. Indeed, it is a very expensive failure, and that use of resources probably means that other people were denied the opportunity of treatment. I have even spoken to people in Stewart Stevenson's constituency who have been in residential rehabilitation two or three times. It is clear that other aspects of this very complex problem need to be taken into consideration.

Attendance at the antisocial behaviour roadshow exceeded our expectations. We are delighted that the roadshow enabled more than 6,500 people in communities across Scotland to seek face-to-face advice on antisocial behaviour from local experts. That resulted in more than 800 referrals for action in specific cases.

Margaret Jamieson raises a number of issues. I agree that the introduction of wardens throughout Scotland has been an outstanding success. Despite the criticisms of other political parties that are represented in the chamber, we have been proven right in pursuing that option. Local communities have responded positively and wardens are welcomed wherever they are deployed. I regret that if people vote Conservative at the next election there is a danger that wardens in Scotland will be scrapped. In the real world, in South Ayrshire, there is a Conservative administration, and people need to know about the dangers of voting Conservative. The member raised the issue of powers to award fixed-penalty notices. Over the coming years, we need to have a debate about the evolution of wardens, which have proved to be a  success. It would be inappropriate to think that in five or 10 years' time, wardens will be doing exactly the same job that they do at the moment. We need to build on the success that has been achieved. However, there needs to be a mature, detailed debate about the best way of moving wardens on to the next phase of their activity, once they have achieved initial success in their local communities.

Margaret Mitchell shows a considerable degree of confused and muddled thinking. On the one hand she says that she does not want new laws, but on the other she wants new requirements to be placed on parents, presumably through new laws. She should make up her mind about what she wants to do. We have made available considerable additional resources. There are now well over 1,000 extra police in Scotland. We have introduced wardens and have invested extra money in tackling antisocial behaviour and youth disorder. The member may criticise our failure to meet certain targets, but we have at least started to measure the extent of the problem, so that we can deal with it. The Conservatives were never prepared to do that.

Kenny MacAskill raises an issue that he has raised consistently in the past. He is right to say that we need to examine some of the issues that underlie antisocial behaviour. However, I also disagree with him. As Cathy Jamieson and I have said time and time again, some of the worst manifestations of antisocial behaviour do not come from young people who are unemployed. It is a disgrace to suggest that simply because someone is deprived and  unemployed they will behave in an antisocial manner. If a young person is unable to access a job, they should be helped. However, in the past couple of weeks my colleague Allan Wilson has referred the Parliament to some of the statistics relating to youth unemployment, which has fallen dramatically throughout Scotland. There are now more opportunities than ever for young people to get a job. Although some are still struggling to get one, the fact that so many young people come from Poland and elsewhere to work in this country shows that jobs are available at record levels. There are people with underlying literacy, numeracy and addiction problems. We need to work with them.

Local councils, the police and other agencies have a responsibility to work together, using the powers and resources that have been made available to them, to prevent and tackle antisocial behaviour, including youth disorder. I expect agencies to redouble their efforts to make joint working a reality. There is a good range of multi-agency action in place in the Springburn constituency, including in Springburn park and Dennistoun, where joint work since last November has helped to improve the situation.

It would be inappropriate for the Parliament or the Scottish Executive to specify in law what should be done on that locally. However, Paul Martin touches on an important issue. Local government is responsible for telling people in local communities exactly what is available to them. Local authorities should consider imaginative ways in which to communicate that information, such as websites, text messages to target groups or leaflets and posters. There is no point in developing a range of facilities throughout Scotland if people do not know about them. We need to tell people about the facilities and give them the opportunities, but, as Paul Martin said, if people persist with antisocial behaviour despite those opportunities, action must be taken.

Legislation is already in place to regulate the subdivision of property. The Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003 provides a framework to assist the owners of properties that are to be subdivided. Using those rules, an owner can impose conditions on a subdivided property, covering matters such as maintenance and repairs. The Tenements (Scotland) Act 2004 provides default rules for all flatted property, including subdivided property, on the maintenance  and repair of common parts of the building. There are no plans to introduce further legislation on that.

The issues that Pauline McNeill raises cross portfolios. There is a requirement under planning law to examine the overprovision of certain types of accommodation in some areas. Houses in multiple occupancy need to be considered carefully. As far as building regulations are concerned, owners can take steps with the interiors of their properties, subject to planning permission, building warrants and restrictions in title deeds. In some parts of Scotland—particularly in the major cities—people with responsibility in local authorities need to work co-operatively using the existing powers, taking into consideration the best interests of the community. Unfortunately, there is no easy solution. What Pauline McNeill describes often takes place within the existing rules. I am sure that, whatever rules are introduced, there are those who will seek to use them as imaginatively as possible. Unfortunately, that often impacts adversely on the local community. I hope, however, that the local authority can continue some of the work that it has already started.

Our desire, which I am sure is shared throughout the Parliament, is to create a justice system that is clearly understood. That is why we are putting the law on bail in statute and making it clear that public safety is a key consideration, which is in the public interest. We want judges to explain to all those who are granted bail the conditions that are placed on them and the effect of breaching them. We believe that we need to place some responsibility on the accused. We want tough penalties for those who breach bail conditions to be understood. We want the public to have confidence that action will be taken against those who do not respect the position of trust that bail creates. We want a system that is flexible, which is why we are proposing changes that will allow the summary system to live up to its name, as Pauline McNeill said. We want it to speed up court processes, help reduce reoffending and help create capacity in the system. We also want a system that is innovative and which will provide  the right interventions at the right time at the right level, which are robustly enforced. That is why we believe that alternatives to prosecution are appropriate in some cases. However, we want enforcement—that is a key issue for us. We want options that involve less process. As I have said, we want the right process at the right time. The bill will mean smarter justice, which will deliver results that—I hope—will lead to a cut in offending and a more efficient system. We want a community-focused system that responds to the needs and interests of local communities and involves people from those communities. We believe that lay justice is important; indeed, I want to put on the record our commitment to the lay justice system. We are not attempting to let lay justice wither on the vine; the bill clearly shows that we are committed to the development of lay justice. We also want a community-focused system in which people are prepared to stand up for their justice system and to work together to tackle the scourge of low-level offending, which takes place in communities throughout Scotland. Members have raised many issues in the debate, some of which will be attended to at stage 2. Stewart Stevenson talked about the presumption of innocence and fiscal fines. It is important to understand what will happen if the accused does not receive or is unable to respond to an offer, for whatever good reason. He or she can apply to the court to have an offer withdrawn at any time—not just within 28 days. To avoid any doubt about the matter and ensure that there is complete clarity, we will lodge an appropriate amendment at stage 2.

That is obviously a slightly separate matter, on which we will have to reflect. No doubt we will have further discussions about it at stage 2. Mike Pringle talked about only justices who are currently sitting being offered another contract. Complex issues are involved in that matter. The Justice 1 Committee made the point that he made in its report. We are taking legal advice on whether a proposal along those lines would be ECHR compliant, and we will carefully consider the matter and go back to the committee with proposals at stage 2 if that is necessary.  Pauline McNeill mentioned the letter from the Sheriffs Association. I thank her for giving us a copy of that letter; we will carefully consider the issues that it raises. She also mentioned issues relating to undertakings. We have established the outline of a process for recording and sharing information on conditions and ensuring that the information is deleted when conditions have been superseded by bail conditions that a court has imposed. Pauline McNeill was right to mention concerns about resources. I assure members that resource issues will be fully taken into account when we roll things out. Christine Grahame mentioned alternatives to prosecution and discounts. We have reflected on what the stage 1 report said and will make proposals to remove provisions from the bill. David Davidson spoke about the procurator fiscal adopting a quasi-judicial role. It must be emphasised that we are not necessarily talking about a determination, but about an offer that can be rejected. A person can choose to take the matter to court. I am convinced that we are talking about a useful addition to the system that will give an accused the option of having their case heard in court. Mr Davidson mentioned witness protection. We have paid considerable attention to that issue in previous legislation, and we have considered resources and training. We take the issue seriously. However, as members have said in the debate, two matters have to be addressed. A witness can be genuinely scared and vulnerable, and can need to be protected; we will move heaven and earth to support such a witness. However, there are also witnesses who are determined to obstruct justice for whatever reason, and it is right that we reflect on what needs to be done to protect the interests of justice from the arbitrary actions of such witnesses. Mary Mulligan spoke about undertakings and mentioned her visit to Linlithgow. Some of the details that she gave were very useful. It is important to acknowledge that the greater use of undertakings does not necessarily increase the number of cases. However, it should speed up the process by which cases come to court. We accept that undertakings can be only part of the answer to making cases speedier, but they would make a useful contribution if they were properly managed. Donald Gorrie spoke about the visibility of work orders and I welcome his support on the issue. I agree that it is important for a community not only to have reparation but to see people making amends by whatever means. I look forward to such measures being implemented. Patrick Harvie mentioned public interest and  public safety. We have sought to clarify our position. The fundamental test is public interest, which goes much wider than public safety. The committee made the point that there might be a lack of understanding and that people might feel that public safety was not being addressed. In this bill, we are ensuring that public safety is encompassed by the broader definition of public interest. Considering the public interest gives us a much wider opportunity to ensure that the public are protected. Mr Harvie's suggestion of peer justice for young offenders could cut two ways. There could well be cases in which some young people went much further than the courts would go. Mr Harvie's idea might seem superficially attractive, but I would hesitate before introducing some arbitrary justice that might not be pertinent to the level of offence. Marlyn Glen is right to say that people who attend court need to understand what is going on. We will look closely at comments made by Scottish Women's Aid. Marlyn Glen also made a useful suggestion that could be looked into much more deeply than it has been—the use of e-mail and text to remind people to turn up at court. A number of organisations and systems could use such suggestions to cut down on unnecessary waste. We will reflect carefully on the idea. Colin Fox mentioned the debate in 2004 and his concerns about rights being compromised. I have to say that there is no evidence of that happening. The system is working well. Mr Fox also talked about the "crass stupidity" of allowing those who cannot afford to pay fines to go to jail. I agree with that—but I hope that Colin Fox would also agree that it is crass stupidity to allow those who can afford to pay fines to go to jail. The Minister for Justice is saying clearly today that those who can pay, will pay.

I am sorry that I cannot take the intervention—perhaps there has been another policy shift in the SSP, I do not know. A number of useful contributions have been made in today's debate; the Parliament is genuinely together in wanting to ensure that we have a justice system that is fit for purpose. I look forward to the bill, having been passed, having some of the same impact as the changes that the Parliament has made to the High Court system. I look forward to a vigorous and detailed debate at stage 2 and I welcome the breadth of support for the principles of the bill.

Bill Aitken confuses a number of issues. If someone in the line of work that he has outlined behaves wrongly and is guilty of serious negligence, the person affected should have the right to seek compensation, no matter whether the lawyer took on that work out of the goodness of his heart. We would be talking about a serious act of omission.

We want a Scottish justice system that is fit for the 21 st century. It must meet the changing needs of families and communities in today's Scotland. We want laws that meet the needs of our society and we need to recognise the high expectations that consumers have of public services. We also need to acknowledge the demand for accountability and transparency in the delivery of those public services. The Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Bill is yet another part of our modernisation of the justice system. It seeks to ensure that we build on the excellence of our legal services while responding to the demands of 21 st century Scotland. By doing that, we will improve access to the justice system for everyone. The bill proposes a number of significant measures. To improve the access that I mentioned, the bill will enable the Scottish Legal Aid Board to fund non-lawyers who have expertise in specialist areas. The bill already provides for those advisers to access case-by-case funding, and I am happy to confirm that at stage we will introduce 2 proposals for the board to provide block grant funding as an additional route. I am grateful to all the representatives from advice and information services who have given evidence supporting that change and who have talked with us more informally about how it would work. We have listened and believe that the additions to the bill will bring further improvements to how we meet unmet legal needs in future. The bill also provides for new rights of audience in court. Section 42 paves the way for commencement of sections 25 to 29 of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1990. That will open up rights of audience in courts and rights to conduct litigation to members of professional organisations other than legal professional bodies, subject to a rigorous vetting process. That will increase access to justice and increase competition. As well as improving public access to legal services, it is right that the bill should reflect public demand for the accountability and transparency  that I mentioned. We want complaints against the legal profession to be dealt with quickly and we want lawyers to deal with complaints at source wherever possible. However, when dialogue breaks down and agreement is not possible, the public must have confidence that complaints will be resolved effectively and impartially. I acknowledge the efforts that the Law Society of Scotland and the Faculty of Advocates have made in recent years to improve the complaints system, but the idea lingers in the public's mind that, in investigating complaints against lawyers, the legal profession is neither impartial nor transparent. The bill therefore provides for the creation of the Scottish legal complaints commission to deal with consumer complaints. Its board will have a non-lawyer majority, so consumer interests will be well represented at the organisation's heart. Appointments will be made by the Scottish ministers and the appointments process will be subject to oversight by the Scottish commissioner for public appointments, which will ensure that appointments are made on merit.

I will give way after I finish the next section of my speech, which is on the same issue. We believe that our proposals comply with the European convention on human rights and will allow the commission to be independent, but we recognise the concerns that have been expressed. To underline our commitment to the commission's independence, we will lodge amendments at stage 2 to remove ministers' power of general direction in relation to the commission; to create a role for the Lord President in the removal of commission members; to provide security of tenure for commission members, who will serve a fixed term of four to six years; and to restructure the commission's decision-making procedures to ensure that formal determinations of complaints are made only by commission board members.

That is a new ECHR argument that has not been raised with me before, but we are convinced that the bill is ECHR compliant. Ministers have satisfied themselves and the Presiding Officer has been satisfied that the proposals are ECHR compliant. The further measures that we have taken will provide further  confidence that the bill is completely ECHR compliant. The complaint-handling reforms that are proposed in the bill have their roots in the recommendations that were made by the Justice 1 Committee in the previous session, but some of the changes that I have mentioned and some other changes build on work that was done by the Justice 2 Committee, which I thank for the thorough job that it did and the report that it produced. The paper "Reforming Complaints Handling, Building Consumer Confidence Regulation of the Legal Profession in Scotland Consultation" attracted more than 500 responses and our consultation paper "Advice for All: Publicly Funded Legal Assistance in Scotland—The Way Forward" also attracted a significant number of responses. From the responses that we received, it was clear that lapses from high professional standards—however rare—could have severe consequences for people. We concluded that an independent system was needed not only to resolve disputes but to achieve consumer confidence. The bill will therefore empower the commission to investigate and adjudicate on complaints about service that can include an element of negligence. The commission's services will be free of charge to complainers. The bill will increase the financial compensation that is available when a complaint is upheld. The maximum compensation level for service complaints will rise from £5,000 to £20,000. I stress that the new level is a maximum award and not an average payout. It is intended to cover cases of significant loss that was caused by negligence. The bill will leave the investigation of conduct complaints with the professional bodies but will give the commission some oversight powers. The bill will also introduce financial compensation of up to £5,000 for conduct complaints. That strikes a balance between recognising the professional bodies' role in regulating their members and boosting public confidence in their regulatory procedures.

I give way to Mike Rumbles.

The £5,000 figure that I mentioned in my latter point is the proposed new maximum compensation for conduct complaints. The £5,000 that I mentioned earlier, which is the figure to which Mike Rumbles refers, is the current maximum compensation for service complaints. We want to achieve a situation in which the commission can deal with as many complaints as possible without having to resort to court action. That provision in the bill reflects the nature of many of the complaints that are received. The bill provides for the potential to award a significant amount to cover loss and injury, but the amount proposed is not, in today's world, out of order with what people might be expected to pay. When I consider the Financial Ombudsman Service, I am confident that the new commission will use those powers appropriately. Returning to conduct complaints, I can also say that, in addition to the other points that I have made, we will increase the non-lawyer membership of the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal to 50 per cent.

I will just make this final point before giving way to Mr Swinney. The funding for complaint handling will continue to be provided by the legal profession but with a two-levy system of funding: an annual general levy will be payable by all practitioners and a specific levy will be payable by practitioners when a complaint is made against them. Having listened to the evidence presented to the Justice 2 Committee regarding the complaints levy, we will lodge an amendment at stage 2 so that the levy will apply only to upheld complaints. That amendment will reinforce the polluter-pays principle.

That is a fairly substantial question, but I do not have time to go into the details to do it justice. I will write to Mr Swinney on that issue and copy the correspondence to the  Justice 2 Committee for its information. The legal aid provisions in the bill are part of a broader programme of work to improve the delivery of publicly funded legal assistance. The Scottish Legal Aid Board has worked in partnership with local authorities and advice providers to explore different models for delivering advice. The board has also shown its willingness to explore new methods of working to improve access and to achieve better use of scarce public resources. The Public Defence Solicitors Office is an example of that. At present, I am considering proposals—this relates to a point that Jim Wallace raised earlier this afternoon—to expand the network of PDSO offices. Such an expansion could, I believe, allow the provision of advice and representation to people at a number of further locations throughout Scotland. In doing so, I will bear in mind the point that Jim Wallace made about Kirkwall.

Maureen Macmillan has pre-empted the next point in my speech. I recognise the concerns that she, along with Jim Wallace and others, have raised. On a number of occasions, Maureen Macmillan has written to me about the problem that exists in remote rural areas. Today, I am pleased to announce that the Scottish Legal Aid Board will develop a similar network of publicly employed solicitors to provide extra help to the public in matters of civil law in areas where there may be unmet demand. Such a development represents a major step towards our goal of having a well-planned system in which people get the advice they need from whoever is best placed to provide it.

A great deal of work has also been done to improve publicly funded advice in Scotland. A number of changes have been made to the legal aid system to reflect and underpin reforms such as those dealing with High Court procedures. We are considering proposals for the extension of eligibility for civil legal aid. We have also authorised the Scottish Legal Aid Board to extend the payment period for instalments of contributions in civil cases, thereby making it  easier for people on modest incomes to benefit from legal aid. The bill proposes a package of reforms that is intended to promote high standards in legal services and to ensure access to those services for all of Scotland's people. I believe that the bill reflects the will of Parliament. More significantly, I believe that it serves the best interests of those whom we represent. I have pleasure in commending the motion to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Bill.

The use of quad bikes on roads is illegal under existing road traffic legislation. Using a quad bike in an antisocial manner off-road is covered by powers under the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004.

What Jean Turner proposes would be a matter for Westminster if it is to do with the sale of such goods or if it impacts on road traffic issues. However, I make the point that the use of such bikes on the roads is already illegal under existing United Kingdom legislation. There are powers to deal with those who use such bikes inappropriately and it would be a matter for the appropriate agencies to use those powers.

Paul Martin makes a welcome suggestion about ensuring that parents are aware of the dangers of these machines. Parents certainly have a responsibility to ensure that their children are protected. As far as the seizure and disposal of vehicles are concerned, the law in Scotland is similar to the law in England and Wales and the owner must be given the opportunity to retrieve the vehicle before it is destroyed. It is certainly within ministerial powers to determine how long the period should be during which the owner may recover the vehicle. Any change to that would require primary legislation, but it is certainly open to ministers under regulation to determine how long a person should have to retrieve the vehicle. On the use of the powers to warn and to seize vehicles, I have the figures only up to the end of the previous formal monitoring period, which was to the end of March 2006. For vehicles generally—not specifically the vehicles that we are discussing—almost 1,000 warning notices were issued and more than 50 vehicles were seized throughout Scotland. Both Paul Martin and Jean Turner raise an issue pertinent to Strathclyde. The information that I have been given is that, by the end of March 2006, every police force in Scotland had used the available powers with the exception of Strathclyde. I do not know the reason for the powers not being used in the Strathclyde area. Paul Martin and Jean Turner might wish to raise that with the chief constable.

Of course, it would not just be ASBOs; the existing charge of breach of the peace could be used in those situations if the police believed that that was appropriate. I do not have the specific figures on ASBOs. If Christine Grahame wishes to write to me about the matter I will look at that, but I know that, throughout Scotland, the new powers under the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 are being used effectively. I have spoken to police in Fife, who have been active in taking measures to protect the public, and also to police in Grampian. I am  encouraged by what they are doing to protect those whom they serve.

We are concerned to ensure an adequate supply of criminal legal aid services throughout Scotland and we are keeping the position under review.

I do not wish to pre-empt the next debate, but during it I hope to refer to an initiative that may well give some satisfaction to Jim Wallace and his constituents.

One of the key pillars of our justice strategy is to create communities in which people can live together in safety and mutual respect. The Scottish ministers have backed the police, to ensure that record numbers of police officers in Scotland are preventing and detecting crime. Backed by much-needed reforms that allow officers to spend more time on front-line duties, the police, alongside a range of other agencies, play a vital role in delivering safer communities.

We have demonstrated our commitment by providing a record number of police officers. In a sense, we have gone further, because other initiatives that we have supported, on escorting duties for example, have allowed up to 300 additional police officers to be deployed on front-line duties. We have supported other initiatives that have taken some of the back-room, administrative work away from officers so that more front-line police officers can be deployed. It is for chief constables to account to police boards for how they use the record number of police officers and the additional resources that have been freed up by our other initiatives. We need to demonstrate to the public not just that we are employing more police officers but that we are employing officers strategically and effectively, so that the public can see the benefits of having a record number of officers.

I do not have those figures to hand, but they can easily be supplied if Margaret Mitchell writes to request them. All that I can do is to repeat what I said about there being a record number of police officers. In 1997, when there was a change of Government, we inherited a specific number of police officers from the Conservatives. Since 1999, when we set out our partnership agreement, we have added to that number. Unlike the party of Margaret Mitchell and her colleagues, we have recognised the need for more police officers on the beat in Scotland and we have demonstrated our commitment.

Jeremy Purvis raises issues of operational independence. A number of points must be considered. First, having had discussions with the police in my own area, I know that they are considering shift patterns with the aim of deploying officers at the times when they are needed. They recognise that there are many times when a substantial number of police are on duty but there is very little activity or crime. We would wish to support that trend of applying resources when they are most needed. Secondly, Jeremy Purvis touches on the key issue of accountability. The councillors who represent their councils on police boards need to engage in dialogue with chief constables about how resources are used. If there is to be proper accountability, if police boards are to continue to have a future, and if people think that the present structure is appropriate and effective and that we should continue with it, we need to ask those who are responsible—those who sit on the police boards—how they are carrying out their functions and duties and how chief constables are accounting to police boards for what is done in each area.

I am grateful for the cross-party support for action. Des McNulty, who has worked tirelessly to promote the issue, as have a number of members, says that taking action on the matter is about doing the right thing. Today, parliamentarians are doing the right thing and in doing so we are reflecting the efforts of the campaign groups that have been mentioned. We should remember that the members of those groups are not just people who believe passionately in justice on the issue—

Sorry. Campaigners are suffering from the effects of asbestos. They have a terrible disease and they are determined to do the right thing, not just for themselves but for other people and for future sufferers, given the time lag in the onset of the disease, which John Swinburne mentioned. It is therefore a privilege for the Parliament to be able to do the right thing. The trade unions gave phenomenal support to the campaign by providing advice and resources. The campaign's advisers worked diligently to help to progress Des McNulty's proposal for a bill on improved compensation for asbestos victims and to provide off-line briefings, which added clarity and were appreciated.  Jeremy Purvis asked whether the Compensation Bill should contain an application clause. I assure him and other members that we will provide any clarification that is needed to ensure that the provisions apply to the law of damages in Scotland, so that there will be no disadvantage to litigants in Scotland. Duncan McNeil made a passionate speech, in which he reminded us of the history of the issue and the tragedies that have happened. He talked about the prevarication and delays caused by people who considered profit margins rather than human suffering. It is right that members of the Scottish Parliament and colleagues at Westminster have been able to make a small contribution. Duncan McNeil also mentioned the action that had to be taken in relation to Chester Street Insurance Holdings and rightly reminded us of the Coulsfield procedure for fast tracking claims, which was introduced in Scotland. We will reverse the House of Lords decision and introduce a bill on damages, so our action today represents only a small contribution to a much bigger issue. Kenny MacAskill was right to point out that although a relatively small number of people have been affected by asbestos, the issue has had profound implications for them and for their families. It is moving to meet people who have suffered from the effects of asbestos and who are determined to secure justice. I cannot begin to understand the efforts and the suffering of those people and their families. As I said, it is a privilege for me and for the Parliament to be able to do the right thing.

I hope that this debate will show the Parliament's commitment to taking swift and decisive action to secure changes in the law when confronted with a pressing human need. In this case, the subject matter could not be more serious. Mesothelioma is a terrible disease. A rare form of cancer that attacks the inner lining of internal organs, it is almost always caused by exposure to asbestos. It takes an average 20 years to develop and, once it has developed, it kills fast. Victims rarely live longer than 18 months after diagnosis and often die within just a few months. There is no known cure for the disease and victims spend their final months in considerable pain and suffering. Many of those victims develop mesothelioma after being exposed to asbestos at work; indeed, the highest incidence of it is in the construction and shipbuilding industries. A particular problem for mesothelioma sufferers and their families is that, at the moment, the law prevents relatives from making a claim for compensation for their own grief and suffering if the sufferer has settled his or her own claim before death. As payments can be higher if the executor and relatives claim after the sufferer's death, most sufferers do not claim compensation to ensure that they do not disadvantage their families. That is completely unacceptable. It means additional worry for families at an exceptionally difficult and distressing time and we intend to take action to address that problem in a bill that will be introduced in the coming year. At this point, I wish to record my appreciation of the actions of a number of MSPs, in particular Des McNulty, who have raised this issue and have given a voice and hope to those affected. I also pay tribute to the support groups and their advisers for their tireless work in bringing the matter to public and political attention. We have listened to their voices, and we will act. While considering the problem, we were faced with another serious issue when the House of Lords ruled in the case of Barker v Corus. Victims must be able to claim compensation from employers who, in the past, wrongfully exposed them to asbestos. However, because of the limits of science, in many cases it is impossible to  establish precisely which employer's wrongful exposure led the victim to develop the disease. Sometimes employers or their insurers have become insolvent or are simply untraceable. However, victims should not have to be concerned about that. Justice demands that they receive full compensation, no matter where they contracted the disease through wrongful exposure. Unsurprisingly, victims and their families were left extremely concerned about the House of Lords decision in early May in the case of Barker v Corus. The Law Lords were called on to decide several cases in which workers had more than one employer, each of which had wrongfully exposed the worker to asbestos. In none of the cases could the scientific evidence prove which exposure had caused the onset of mesothelioma. The Law Lords decided that an employer's liability to pay compensation should be assessed in proportion to the period of time that the employer exposed the victim to the risk of contracting the disease. The decision dealt with issues that were left unresolved in the Fairchild case in 2002, in which the House of Lords decided that a worker who contracted mesothelioma after wrongful exposure to asbestos at different times by more than one employer could sue any of them, even if the worker could not prove which employer had caused the disease. However, the case did not resolve the precise nature of the employers' liability and whether they should be held jointly and severally liable or whether liability should be apportioned among them. The decision in the Barker case, which came down in favour of apportioning liability, can be expected to have two main effects. First, because the process of bringing an action will in many cases be significantly delayed by the need to trace all liable parties, or will lead to multiple claims, legal costs are expected to increase significantly. Secondly, victims will get less compensation if some of the liable parties are insolvent or untraceable. Victims would therefore, effectively, be expected to bear the risk of employers or their insurers going out of business. That is an unacceptable situation in an area where the primary concern of the law ought to be to provide full compensation to victims who are wrongfully exposed to deadly asbestos. Although the Barker case was English, it has repercussions for Scotland. It is highly likely that the Scottish courts would be persuaded by it in cases brought here, particularly as it is a House of Lords decision and as the development of Scots and English law in this area has been identical to date. On 20 June, the United Kingdom Government announced its intention to legislate to reverse the effect of the Barker judgment for England and Wales. The Government has said  that it intends to do that as quickly as possible, by introducing an amendment to the Compensation Bill, which was introduced to the House of Lords, on 2 November 2005 and has just completed its committee stage in the Commons. I thank our colleagues in the UK Government, who have pulled out all the stops to ensure that we can debate the motion with a draft of the proposed amendment to the Compensation Bill before us. I make it clear to members that the amendment before them is a draft and that, although the UK Government has announced its intention to legislate in that way, there is a possibility that the drafting may change before it is tabled in the House of Commons. The effect of subsections (1) and (2) of the clause that the draft amendment will insert in the bill is to provide, in mesothelioma cases, that negligent persons are held jointly and severally liable for the damage caused by the disease. That means that the position will be as it was before the Barker ruling, and that claimants can claim for all damages from one liable party. Subsection (3) affirms the current position relating to contributions from other liable parties and to contributory negligence. The defender against whom damages are awarded can claim contributions from other liable parties as determined by the court. In considering the award of damages, the court may take any contributory negligence by the claimant into account. As I said, that provision is a reflection of the current position and does not change the law in those areas. The extent to which those provisions should have retrospective effect is still under discussion in light of European convention on human rights considerations. If the amendment that is tabled to the Compensation Bill goes further in its purpose or effect than the draft that is before us this morning, the consent that I hope this Parliament will grant will fall. We would then have to address the problem through our own damages bill. I am sure that members will agree that it is vital to ensure that victims in Scotland are left no worse off than their counterparts in England and Wales when it comes to compensation for mesothelioma. Bearing in mind the speed with which mesothelioma can kill and the urgency of ensuring that sufferers gain full compensation, we need to seek the quickest way of reversing the effect of the Barker judgment. Had it been the case that the damages bill that we propose would have offered a speedier solution and would not have left a gap between sufferers in Scotland and those in the rest of the United Kingdom, we would have used our own legislation. However, introducing a bill to the Scottish Parliament and its receiving royal assent would mean a delay, and we believe that it is appropriate to use the speediest possible  solution to resolve a tragic set of circumstances. I believe that what we are proposing today can achieve that. Today's motion gives us the chance to legislate without delay, and in agreeing to the motion Parliament will ensure that action is taken on the Barker judgment quickly and compassionately. It is the right thing to do, and we owe it to the victims of mesothelioma to use the procedures available to us to best effect. I was encouraged by the support of members on all sides for the Minister for Parliamentary Business's statement on 22 June, when she announced that we would introduce legislation to reverse the effect of the Barker decision in Scotland. As I said, we plan to go further than that to support the victims of mesothelioma. Today's debate is only the first step in that direction, but it is a vital one. I hope that members will consider today's motion in the same supportive spirit as was articulated last week. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the UK Parliament should consider those provisions of the Compensation Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 2 November 2005, which will legislate in the devolved area of damages law in respect of joint and several liability, as laid out in LCM(S2) 8.1.

The Scottish Executive does not collect information centrally on incidents of vandalism at constituency level. In the city of Glasgow as a whole, in the three-year period 2002-03 to 2004-05, there were 45,790 recorded incidents of vandalism, reckless damage and malicious mischief.

It is not for me to tell chief constables how they should deploy staff operationally—the chief constable in an area decides on relative priorities. I know that Paul Martin is not trying to do this, but I do not want to minimise the significance of the damage that is caused by drug dealing. However, Paul Martin is right to highlight the insidious way in which vandalism affects a community's morale, brings down the look of a place and destroys the fabric of  life in a local area. He is therefore right that vandalism needs to be tackled. We have increased fixed CCTV capacity in Glasgow, with contributions from Glasgow City Council and the Executive, and we have increased the number of mobile units. I have seen such units in operation, so I know that they are successful and can contribute to tackling vandalism. Glasgow City Council has rapid response units to tackle the consequences of vandalism in certain areas. If we can maintain the fabric in an area, we can keep up morale and, I hope, deter further vandalism. Paul Martin is right that everybody must take seriously the need to tackle vandalism head-on and to ensure that the perpetrators are caught and that they pay a relevant price, including being made to reverse some of the damage that they have caused.

There is no specific requirement made by the Scottish Executive for the provision of security equipment to those who have experienced domestic abuse. However, significant funding is made available through the community safety award programme and the violence against women fund for use by local partnerships and individual projects, a number of which will make use of personal security equipment such as personal alarms. In addition, there are specific  projects that aim to make people's homes more secure.

Local authorities have a responsibility to make people aware of what support is available. Presumably, the women that Mary Mulligan identifies have the support of social workers, and it is incumbent on social workers to ensure that the proper information is made available. There should also be close liaison with the police because it is not simply a question of ensuring that appropriate equipment is installed—where a woman is vulnerable and where there is a potential danger, the police should also be notified. There should be close liaison between social work departments and the police, but the women concerned also need to be given advice and information, and the local police should be made aware that there is a potential risk so that they can respond appropriately.

The European Union's proposals are not yet finalised but, irrespective of those proposals, there is a strong case for increasing the threshold for small claims.

I cannot disagree with John Home Robertson's view that an inordinate length of time is being taken to resolve the situation. As he knows, it is not simply a question of small claims. Other complicated matters need to be addressed. We have been trying to find a resolution to the matter, and negotiations with a range of organisations have been taking place in order to seek a potential solution. He also knows that the matter has been raised in the Parliament on a  number of occasions—indeed, it was raised before I became a minister—but it has foundered on a lack of parliamentary support. However, I cannot disagree with him about the case for change. It should happen, and I will do what I can to move the issue forward.

The Scottish Court Service has targets for the throughput of civil business in the courts, including reparation actions. As I announced during the civil justice debate in April, we are in discussions with the senior judiciary about a judicially led review of the civil courts. One of the aims of the review will be to identify how to improve further the efficiency of the civil courts.

I share the frustration of Jeremy Purvis and his constituent. Anyone who must wait more than eight years for justice to be delivered clearly has not been served well. However, it would be wrong of me to comment on or intervene in individual cases. I am not aware of the circumstances that have led to the delay. We share the view that justice should be delivered speedily. That was one of the reasons why we set up the new procedures, to which Jeremy Purvis referred, which from all reports are working well. I confirm that we have analysed the new procedures, which have been independently evaluated by the University of Edinburgh. We expect to receive a report in the summer but, from what we have heard so far, the new procedures are working well. However, I do not think that we can be complacent. Even if the new system is  shown to be working well, there are clearly still problems, as Jeremy Purvis indicated, that we need to address.

I cannot comment on the number of cases that are delayed or, indeed, ultimately dropped. However, the intention of the civil justice review is to consider the processes, how the courts operate and how people can get better, easier, speedier and more cost-effective access to justice. I have been heartened by the discussions that we have had so far. I think that everyone shares the view that if sensible improvements can be made, they should be made. The Parliament has invested a huge amount of effort in tackling many of the problems in the criminal justice system. It will be incumbent on the next Parliament to consider the need to address problems in the civil justice system.

No, it has nothing at all to do with reparation. I suspect that Margaret Mitchell has simply seen an opportunity to raise a different issue. We believe that supervised attendance orders and other disposals make a contribution. We will work to ensure that they are used effectively and we will consider the efficiencies of measures at all costs. However, those matters can be considered in other debates at other times.

I wish to thank a number of people as well. I thank the committee for a thorough investigation of the process, particularly during stage 2, when a number of refinements were made to the bill that reflected the views of the committee. That helped to strengthen the bill and I commend the committee for that. I also want to thank Bill Barron and the bill team, who did a tremendous job in supporting the Minister for Justice and me through a long and complicated process. Sometimes, we underestimated the scope of the bill. We are aware of the huge amount of work that was put into the bill. I would like to pay specific tribute to a young member of the bill team called Ian Ferguson, who I think will go far. Normally, when we say that someone will go far, we are talking about their professional life—I am sure that Ian will go far in that regard too—but, on Saturday, Ian emigrates to New Zealand. I wish him well in his future life. I just hope that there is no truth in the rumour that New Zealand was the furthest away that he could get from Cathy Jamieson and me. I did not intend to comment on the DNA issue, but I must pick up on the point that Stewart Stevenson made. I thought that that was an ill-considered contribution—which is unusual for Stewart Stevenson—and that he might be trying to secure a political fig leaf for himself on the question of DNA. If he had listened—and he can check this in the Official Report —he would have heard that I said that I sympathised with many of the points that Paul Martin made in relation to the young people who go into the children's hearings system in situations involving violence or sex offences. However, I also said that what Paul Martin was proposing would not work. The amendments are technically deficient. To give himself some political protection, Stewart Stevenson was asking the Parliament to support a technically incompetent amendment that would not have delivered what many speakers around the chamber want to happen. I gave a commitment to speak to the Minister for Education and Young People. I did so at lunch time and can say that we  will go and look at some of the issues that have been raised in the debate. Not only was Stewart Stevenson at it, he was trying to inveigle us into an incompetent conclusion. As a number of speakers have said, the bill is a significant piece of legislation. Members across the chamber have expressed their abhorrence of knife crime and their determination to do something about it. Like Charlie Gordon and others, I hope that the bill will make a significant contribution in that regard. However, we are determined that if anything else needs to be done in the future, we will return to the legislation. In addition to the work in relation to the bill and the guidance from the Lord Advocate, the work of the violence reduction unit is already beginning to show some significant results. I wish the unit well. Others have spoken about football banning orders and parades and marches. Drug testing has not featured in the discussion, but it is a significant issue. Queen's evidence and the need to encourage people to give evidence and the need to reduce some of the waste that exists in the court system are also important issues. One of the issues that relates, to an extent, to the DNA debate is the issue of dealing with sex offenders. Given the acknowledgment that certain measures need to be taken against people who pose a significant risk to the community, I am glad that Parliament agreed to amendment 200, in the name of Bill Butler. Moreover, I am glad that the Parliament has now accepted the principle that in certain circumstances innocent people's DNA can be retained to protect the wider public. On the other hand, we need to assure people that the provision will be used appropriately and that safeguards will be built into the process. As Cathy Jamieson said, this bill represents an important part of our wider agenda to reform the criminal justice system. We want to ensure that all its aspects meet our communities' needs, and Parliament can take some satisfaction in the knowledge that it is passing a bill that will make a difference and provide our communities with additional safeguards and protection. I look forward to seeing its direct results not only for the people whom I represent but for communities throughout Scotland.

The purpose of section 74 is to enable the police to use mobile fingerprint readers to establish whether somebody is who they say they are. Mobile fingerprint readers will allow officers to do that quickly, effectively and without needing to take the person to a station for fingerprinting, which is resource intensive and time consuming for the officer and the individual. Furthermore, mobile fingerprint readers will help the fight against crime by enabling police officers to ascertain quickly whether people are suspected of other offences and whether there are outstanding warrants against them. As Stewart Maxwell said, we need to enable police forces to use new technology to best effect for the purposes of preventing and solving crimes. Section 74 gives the police the powers to do that, and it would not be in the interests of effective policing to remove it from the bill. I hope that Colin Fox will withdraw his amendment, given what was said not only today but at stage 2. If he does not, I ask the Parliament to oppose it.

Amendment 166 is purely technical. It adds a new subsection at the end of section 84 that makes it clear that someone who has been fined can be regarded as still serving a sentence if the fine has not yet been paid in full. As currently drafted, section 84 states that a sentence can be referred back to court only "if ... the offender is still serving the sentence". It is not clear whether that would catch fines, many of which do not have a set period for payment by instalments but simply fall due in total as soon as the sentence is passed. Amendment 166 places the matter beyond doubt. Amendment 167 is also purely technical. We have had cross-party support for a rigorous approach to confidentiality when an offender gives information about an offence other than the one for which he is on trial. Confidentiality is in the interests of justice and it is necessary to protect the individual. However, it is clearly important that the lower courts should be able to pass text information to the High Court where an appeal to which that information is relevant is lodged. Amendment 167 makes clear that nothing in the confidentiality requirement in section 87(3) stops the first-instance court disclosing that information to the High Court when a relevant appeal is lodged. Amendment 168 substitutes an expanded version of section 87A for that which was inserted at stage 2. It makes detailed provision for confidentiality in relation to information that is given by an offender under section 87 when an appeal is made to the High Court to which that  information is relevant. This is also a technical amendment that does not reflect any change in policy. The principle remains that the protection afforded to an offender by confidentiality should apply during appeal provisions as it did during first-instance provisions. The new provision simply ensures that all forms of appeal or reference back to the High Court and all stages of an appeal are covered by appropriate confidentiality requirements. Further, the new provision makes it clear that the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission can receive text information where that is relevant to its consideration of a case, but that it is under a duty not to disclose the existence or content of that information. Finally, we have substituted the power to make rules of court that was introduced by the amendment at stage 2 with a power for Scottish ministers to make further provisions in relation to the area by an order subject to negative procedure. It is appropriate to have parliamentary scrutiny of any provision spelling out further the processes that are to be followed. I move amendment 166.  Amendment 166 agreed to.

These amendments are simply tidying-up amendments to ensure that the order-making powers that were introduced at stage 2 are subject to affirmative resolution procedure. I move amendment 10.  Amendment 10 agreed to.  Amendment 11 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.

Schedule 1 to the bill provides that the Scottish ministers must appoint at least two police force members and at least two police authority members of the Scottish police services authority on the nomination of the relevant representative bodies. The purpose of the amendment is simply to make it clear that if the body in question fails within a reasonable time to put forward nominations as requested by ministers, the duty to appoint at least two members from the category in question no longer applies. Otherwise, there would be at least a theoretical risk of ministers finding themselves under a statutory duty that they could not discharge simply because the body in question, for whatever reason, had not put forward the required number of nominations. I move amendment 169.  Amendment 169 agreed to.  Amendments 170 to 177 and 55 and 56 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.

Amendment 189 makes a minor adjustment to the requirement that paragraph 3(2) of schedule 3 imposes on police authorities and joint boards to consult the authority and the director general of the SCDEA before making a staff transfer scheme. The effect of the amendment is to make it clear that the director general need be consulted only in respect of constables who are being transferred to relevant service with the SCDEA and not in respect of constables who are being transferred to relevant service with the authority. Amendment 190 inserts a definition of local authority into the bill. I move amendment 189.  Amendment 189 agreed to.  Amendment 190 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.

These minor tidying amendments replace the obsolete references to the Royal Ulster constabulary in the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 with the police service of Northern Ireland. I move amendment 191.  Amendment 191 agreed to.  Amendments 192, 14, 193 and 107 to 119 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.  Amendment 194 not moved.  Amendments 120 to 129 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.

Amendments 163, 164 and 9 will make some slight changes to sections 72C and 72D. Amendments 163 and 164 will make technical amendments to section 72C of the bill. The amendments will enable regulations that are made under section 96 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 to make different provision for different purposes. It may be that that the basic information about a registered sex offender that should be given to the police differs from the information that is given to other specified persons, or that different information may be given to specified persons when an offender is released from prison or hospital as opposed to when an offender is transferred. Amendment 9 will amend the definition of "sexual offence" in new section 96A of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 to include references to the offences at paragraphs 59A to 59C of schedule 3 to that act, which were inserted by the Protection of Children and Prevention of Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2005. I move amendment 163.

Pauline McNeill asked about inferences from the presence of DNA on a database. I assure her that absolutely no inference will be drawn from the presence of DNA on a database. An innocent person has nothing to fear from having their DNA kept on a database. As the First Minister said, that can help to clear someone of a crime. Furthermore, if a person's DNA suggests that they have been at the scene of a crime, it does not automatically mean that they are guilty; rather, it gives them an opportunity to clear their name.

No, thanks. It is worth saying, however, that people are convicted because of the use of DNA. Today, doubts have been cast on the validity and value of DNA sampling. However, the Farah Noor Adams murder in Glasgow was cleared up by the existence of a DNA sample that had been randomly taken from someone for another purpose. The murder of an old woman in Maryhill was cleared up by the use of DNA. DNA sampling works and is proven to work. No one has any cause to fear it. Pauline McNeill asked for assurances in relation to storage. There are secure facilities and a limited number of people have access to that database. I guarantee that the DNA storage facilities are exceptionally sound—

There has been no recorded incident of DNA being stolen or misused. The DNA that we are talking about using, from a limited number or people, will sometimes make a big difference, as Paul Martin and others have suggested. Kenny MacAskill is right to raise the issue of rights. People in society have rights, but people in society have nothing to fear from the use of science connected to DNA. However, on the subject of rights I must say that although people in wider society have rights, so do the victims of violent and sexual crimes. I know whose rights I want to protect when it comes to helping those  people, helping to prevent crime and helping to solve crime.

To be fair to Paul Martin, he brought his substantive amendment to the committee at stage 2 when there was a full discussion. I took from what he said this morning that the amendments that we are debating today come from further deliberation on and consideration of what was said at stage 2. Bill Aitken seems to suggest that we add another stage to the parliamentary procedure. I will clarify a point raised by Bill Aitken and others this morning about application to the sheriff.  Subsection (5) of the proposed new section that amendment 207 would insert in the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 states that the process is one of "summary application", which is an existing form of civil court procedure set out in the summary application rules that apply to a number of civil court procedures. The rules set out in detail the process of application and include provisions for notification and participation of all parties. The person whose DNA is under consideration would therefore have the opportunity to make their case.

Ministers have profound sympathy for people suffering from asbestos-related illness and for their families. I have met asbestos groups, trade union representatives and Des McNulty to discuss their concerns. They have made a compelling case for change to section 1(2) of the Damages (Scotland) Act 1976. The Executive accepts that legislation is needed to deal with the problem. Although I cannot at this stage give a firm commitment on timing, I assure members that every effort is being made to find a prompt and effective solution.

I will answer the last point first. I have discussed with the Minister for Parliamentary Business and ministerial colleagues how we can best take the matter forward. That will entail making some difficult decisions about a very full legislative programme, but no one could fail to be moved by the plight of those families. The groups that represent them have made the case very well. There is an understanding within the Executive of the problem and a commitment to try to do something about it. We will continue to reflect on what we can do. Obviously, Des McNulty will pursue his bill with the parliamentary authorities and we will see what comes from those discussions. Pauline McNeill raised the issue of joint and several liability. We are still reflecting on the implications of the judgment. As Pauline McNeill said, it poses significant questions about the understanding of and the prevailing view on joint and several liability in Scotland. If, once we have had time to consider fully the implications of the judgment, we decide that a change in the law is required to solve the problem, we will consider whether such a change could easily be accommodated in a damages bill—if we managed to find space for such a bill—or whether Des McNulty's bill is sufficiently wide to address the problem.

The evaluation of the Dundee families project reported improvements in the behaviour and life skills of three out of five of the particularly troubled and troublesome families that the project actively worked with. The evaluation also identified considerable cost savings because of reduced evictions and homelessness.

I look forward to the project in Falkirk making the same significant and positive contribution to the quality of life in the Falkirk area as the Dundee project made for people in Dundee. Cathy Peattie is right to suggest that integrated working by professional staff with different skills is necessary if the project is to give the relevant support. We need to break down barriers and ensure that everyone pitches in as part of a team effort to support the families. However, Cathy Peattie is right to pose questions. We need to ensure that the project is effective and that the families demonstrate an improvement, so there needs to be proper monitoring and supervision. Equally, we need to put on record the responsibility of the families  involved to address the behaviour that they are manifesting. They need to show that they are willing to change their ways, because the behaviour that they have demonstrated has a severely adverse effect on the people who live around them. Although professionals, working together, can make a huge difference, the commitment of the families in the projects is absolutely necessary.

I will give way in a second. We can imagine circumstances in which a charge is made and taken to court but a conviction is not obtained. Sometimes a case collapses and sometimes witnesses are intimidated and a case is unable to proceed. It might be useful to retain DNA in cases in which the police believe there an imprisonable offence was committed but no conviction has been obtained.

Yes. Having considered the matter, we believe that amendment 207 is ECHR compliant. Indeed, the position in England and Wales, which is more extensive than what is proposed for Scotland, was deemed by the House of Lords to be ECHR compliant. I know that that is being challenged further in the European courts, so it will be a matter for them to determine. However, as the law in this country stands, what is proposed is ECHR compliant. We believe that the more limited, more focused and more proportionate proposal from Paul Martin is worthy of support. The police may believe a  person is a risk and arrest them because of a suspicion, and the procurator fiscal may believe that there is sufficient reason to proceed with the case. If such a case were to collapse for whatever reason or the person was not convicted, there would remain good reasons for the police wanting to retain any DNA. Paul Martin has added further safeguards in that samples would be retained only for three years. If the police wanted to retain them beyond that time, they would have to go to a sheriff, who would be able to make a determination on that. We believe that those safeguards are important. Indeed, even those such as GeneWatch UK, which is opposed to proposals in England and Wales for the retention of samples, say that the Scottish Parliament is taking a much more thoughtful approach and that amendment 207 acknowledges that there may be carefully justified exceptions in respect of which the police could benefit from keeping DNA profiles on the database for longer. GeneWatch said to the Justice 2 Committee that there could be circumstances in which the DNA of violent and sexual offenders might well be retained.

We absolutely will—that goes without saying. Not only would we have to reflect on the decision but we would need to consider carefully whether the law in Scotland was sufficiently different to justify our continuing with our approach.

That is a different issue. I am talking about amendment 207, which was lodged by Paul Martin; I have dealt with risk of sexual harm orders and I cannot go into detail about how RSHOs are obtained in England. As I said, if an RSHO in Scotland was, because of concern about their potential to commit a sexual offence, applicable to a person who had come to Scotland, DNA could be taken from that person. If an RSHO order had been imposed in England on a person who subsequently came to Scotland, we would want to take DNA from that person. Amendment 207 is proportionate and focused and represents a helpful contribution to a serious matter. We did not accept Paul Martin's proposal  at stage 2, which was to retain the DNA of all people who are arrested for imprisonable offences in order to bring the approach in Scotland into line with that in England and Wales, but amendment 207 represents a more appropriate approach. We will oppose Paul Martin's amendments 204 and 205 and hope that he will not press them, although we understand what he was driving at in lodging them. He has raised a serious issue about which many people are concerned. Sometimes people who are under 16 and who have committed violent or sexual offences are dealt with by the children's hearings system rather than by the courts, for whatever reason. The amendments highlight the problem that arises because the police cannot retain DNA samples from young people who have been dealt with by the children's hearings system and are not charged with or convicted of a violent or sexual offence. Amendments 204 and 205 would create significant problems for the children's hearings system. However, in lodging the amendments Paul Martin has highlighted an issue that is worthy of serious consideration. I am sure that other members will express the same concerns and I will report those concerns to Peter Peacock, the Minister for Education and Young People, because we need to reflect on the matter when we consider how the children's hearings system works.

I have dealt with amendment 207. We are not opposed to the principle behind amendments 204 and 205, but the amendments would cause practical difficulties for the children's hearings system. As I said, I will take the matter back to Peter Peacock. When we consider the children's hearings system we must explore how we deal with young people who are involved in violent or sexual offending. I give a commitment to Paul Martin and Parliament that we will consider the matter. However, amendments 204 and 205 would not have the desired effect and, more important, could cause more problems. The youth justice improvement group, which deals with the risk management of young violent and sex offenders, is doing considerable work on the issue. Its  proposals, which are to be published in July, will impact considerably on that group of young people. I want to wait and see what the suggestions are. We will return to the issue.

I thought that I was clear about that but, for the avoidance of doubt, I repeat that we support Paul Martin's amendment 207. At present, DNA can be taken from people who are arrested for an imprisonable offence, but it is destroyed if they are not convicted. Under Paul Martin's proposal, which we support, if a person is arrested and then charged—which means that the police and the procurator fiscal will have considered the matter—but is then found not guilty, or the case collapses for whatever reason, their DNA will be retained for up to three years. It will be possible to retain the DNA beyond that period, but only on application to a sheriff. Members should be under no illusion: we support Paul Martin's amendment 207, which is clear and proportionate and will be beneficial. I turn to the amendments in the group that are in my name. Under section 72A, the police will be able to take DNA and fingerprints from a registered sex offender who is arrested or detained for an offence that relates to the sex offenders register, provided that the police do not already hold those data. Amendment 161 will enable the police to take DNA and fingerprints from a registered sex offender who is arrested or detained under suspicion of committing any offence. Amendment 162 will make it clear that, if the police decide to exercise their powers under section 72A when a registered sex offender is arrested or detained in custody for any offence, the police must explain that fact to the offender. A section in the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003 accidentally removed the requirement on the police to destroy DNA samples that are taken by mouth swab if the person is not convicted. Amendment 14 will correct that mistake. I make it clear that, despite that oversight, the police have continued to destroy DNA samples that are taken by mouth swab from persons who are not convicted. If Parliament agrees to amendment 206, which is in the name of Paul Martin, I will not press amendment 14 because the police would therefore be able to retain all DNA that they take from suspects. However, if amendment 206 is not agreed to, I will press amendment 14 in order to correct the oversight from 2003.

There are a number of significant amendments in the group, but I will deal first with amendment 208. I fully support what Bill Butler said and what he seeks to do. He has identified a loophole that we believe it is important to close. The additional powers would allow the police to take and retain DNA and fingerprints from people in Scotland who are considered by the courts to pose a danger to children. The provisions would also give the police the power to take data from individuals who are subject to risk of sexual harm orders in England, Wales and Northern Ireland and who have moved to Scotland. I emphasise that the taking and retention of DNA and fingerprints raises European convention on human rights issues about the right to privacy, particularly because a person does not have to commit an offence to be made subject to an RSHO. I believe that the measures can be justified as being necessary for crime prevention and the protection of others, especially children, if a court has determined that an individual poses a risk to society.  Bill Butler's amendments also contain a number of safeguards that make them proportionate. For example, the police would be unable to use reasonable force to take prints and samples and  any data that were taken would have to be destroyed when a person was no longer subject to an RSHO. The provisions would help to protect the public and they can be justified in ECHR terms, so we give them our whole-hearted support. I turn now to Paul Martin's amendments. We support his amendment 207, which represents a sensible balance between those who believe that the police should retain all the DNA that they take and those who argue that police powers to keep DNA should be limited. The focus on violent and sexual offences is welcome, given the seriousness of those offences. It would only be helpful for the police to hold the DNA of those who were proceeded against for serious offences but who were not convicted. That would involve cases in which a person had been arrested and the procurator fiscal thought that there was sufficient reason for a charge to be laid, although a conviction was not obtained, for whatever reason.

The debate has been useful. It has highlighted our concern about a significant problem in many parts of Scotland and more particularly in the west of Scotland. It is clear from the measures that are proposed in the bill and from the comments that the Lord Advocate made this week that we take knife crime seriously. It would be remiss of us—indeed, we would be failing in our duties—if we did not respond to the type of situation that Charlie Gordon has described. Amendment 159 has enabled all parties to put on the record their detestation of knife crime and their determination to ensure that those who carry knives are effectively dealt with. Kenny MacAskill and Charlie Gordon raised important issues. In Scotland, the concept of the judiciary's independence is important—David Davidson mentioned that—but we also want judges to know what we have said in the chamber in passing legislation so that, in making independent decisions, they are aware of the context in which it has been passed and can reflect on the seriousness with which we, on behalf of the public, have reached a considered view. That is why it is right that we give out clear messages in the bill and in other measures that we are taking. Our participation in this week's knife amnesty should be seen as a public expression of our determination to do something about the problem.  We are not pretending that the knife amnesty will be a solution by itself; we want people to have a debate and to think about and reflect on what is happening. We want them to know that the knife amnesty is a public expression and warning of what is to come. The police have made it clear that, once the knife amnesty ends, severe and significant measures will be taken against those who carry knives. We support the amnesty—there has not been, as Stewart Maxwell suggested, some kind of conversion—and we have committed resources for the purchase of 1,000 new hand-held metal detectors, which will be deployed throughout Scotland and particularly in areas with the worst problems. We have proposed measures in the bill to double the maximum sentence for carrying a knife in public or in a school from two years to four years. The bill will also remove current restrictions on police powers of arrest for such offences. We want all such offenders to be taken directly into police custody. There are new stop-and-search measures to allow the police to tackle such problems more effectively. The Lord Advocate has announced tough new guidelines for prosecuting knife crimes under which repeat offenders will be held in custody and, where appropriate, prosecuted before a sheriff and a jury, which will enable sheriffs to impose a more severe punishment.

Whether bail is granted will remain a matter for the sheriff. We are currently considering wider bail and remand issues, which we expect to debate in the Parliament. This week, the Lord Advocate made it clear that he expects procurators fiscal to oppose the granting of bail in circumstances in which a person has been convicted previously of carrying a knife or has a record of serious violent offending. The Lord Advocate's commitment to ensuring that bail is restricted is clearly on the record but, ultimately, decisions will be for sheriffs.

Yes, the proposed sentencing bill will be an opportunity to reflect on the way in which sentencing in general is carried out. As I understand it, Jackie Baillie's concern was not so much about the proposals that Jeremy Purvis made as about the context in which he introduced them into the debate today. That is a matter between Jackie Baillie and Jeremy Purvis. As Jackie Baillie outlined, the reason why the amendments in the name of Jeremy Purvis were rejected at stage 2 was not lack of determination on the part of Labour members of the committee—nor, indeed, on the part of SNP members or Conservative members. The committee clearly took the view—which is shared by the Parliament today—that something significant had to be done to tackle knife crime. I understand that those amendments were rejected because the committee did not consider their content and what they proposed to be relevant, effective or the best way forward. The issue was, therefore, one of principles rather than some members trying to be seen to be tougher than others. I have no doubt that we will return to that debate. Amendment 159 has triggered a useful discussion and Charlie Gordon has reflected an anger that is felt by many members. Frank McAveety, for example, has highlighted the problems in Glasgow on a number of occasions. I understand the anger not just of the politicians but of the families whose lives have been turned upside down because a son or someone else in the family has been a victim. I understand the anxiety of those who fear for the safety of their sons or grandsons when they go out in our towns and cities at weekends, and it is right that we should do something about it in the bill. Many good arguments have been advanced as to why the case has not yet been made for mandatory sentencing, given its implications and consequences. However, Charlie Gordon made an important point. When we pass legislation, we should not simply leave it and regard it as the finished product; we should continue to reflect on whether the legislation is having the desired effect. Is it making a difference on the streets of our towns and cities? If the bill, the measures from the Lord Advocate and the signal that is going out to the judiciary are not having the effect that we hope that they will have—if people are still foolishly and wantonly carrying knives—then Charlie Gordon is right: the Parliament must consider what else we need to do, even though we might, at the moment, consider further measures unpalatable. Although we are determined to return to the bill in that way if necessary, I hope that we do not have to do that. I hope that the measures that we agree today will  have the effect that we think that they should have. I will not dwell on amendment 160, in the name of Colin Fox. The same amendment was dealt with at considerable length by the committee at stage 2. The committee rejected it then and I see no reason for Parliament to return to it now. I hope that Colin Fox will not move amendment 160, but if he does, I hope that Parliament will oppose it.

Amendment 157 amends the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 to clarify the circumstances in which constables who are engaged in specified categories of relevant service, including service with the authority, are to be treated as if they were members of a Scottish police force for the purposes of representation by the Scottish Police Federation. Amendment 193, although substantial in length, makes consequential amendments to the arrangements that are set out in sections 59 to 63 of the Police Act 1996 as regards the Scottish Police Federation, the Police Negotiating Board for the United Kingdom and the Police Advisory Board for Scotland. The amendments simply insert appropriate references to the authority and agency into the existing provisions of the 1996 act in relation to those three bodies and ensure that constables who are seconded to the authority and police members of the agency are put on a similar footing to constables serving in police forces in that regard. I move amendment 157.  Amendment 157 agreed to.

It is important to clarify that what we propose will not remove the ability of a complainer to take a complaint to the police complaints commission. We are talking about situations in which an individual has persisted in making complaints to a police organisation but has never approached the police complaints commission. Our proposal will give the police the opportunity, if they have already carried out investigations and believe that they can go no further, to refer the complaint to the commissioner, who will consider the complaint and decide either that there is further work that the police body could carry out and so send the complaint back or that reasonable steps have been taken, the procedure has been exhausted and they will now look at it and come to a conclusion. That will be the case even if the complainer has never referred the complaint to the independent police complaints commissioner.  Amendment 141 agreed to.  Amendment 142 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.  Amendment 143 not moved.

I confirm that the Parliament will be kept informed about the matter, because we will be required to lay before the Parliament the commissioner's annual reports on the carrying out of his or her functions, which is a common arrangement with public bodies. As Stewart Maxwell and David Davidson laid out, Colin Fox's amendment 195 would undermine fundamentally the need for ministerial accountability to Parliament. To an extent, I can understand the amendment because, when people start from the perspective of suspicion and conspiracy, they have no confidence in anything that anyone does. However, amendment 195 would not allow anyone to make progress.  In some of Colin Fox's remarks in speaking to his amendment, he sought, perhaps unintentionally, to undermine the positive move of establishing a police complaints commissioner. I hope that he will withdraw his amendment.

This has been an interesting, useful and informed exchange. It will be useful if I remind members why we are establishing the office of commissioner. The commissioner will  oversee how police bodies in Scotland handle complaints, will provide support and guidance and, critically, will be an independent body to which dissatisfied complainers can turn. A number of members have emphasised why we need such a body. There is a public expectation that complaints should be seen to be handled appropriately, effectively and objectively. I believe that the work of the commissioner will lead to increased public confidence in the handling of police complaints. The functions could not readily be carried out by an existing office-holder. All members have recognised that police complaints are different from other types of complaint and require a distinct approach that takes account of those differences. I understand fully the point at which Jackie Baillie is driving, ably supported by John Swinney. It is true that a debate is emerging about how commissioners operate, their relationship with Parliament and how they relate to the public. I noted John Swinney's points about the work that is being carried out by the Finance Committee and I do not want to prejudice that developing debate. However, notwithstanding my sympathy for some of Jackie Baillie's points, her amendments are not the best way to address those concerns. As Kenny MacAskill said, it is a matter for another day. I give John Swinney an assurance that we fully intend to adopt a shared services arrangement. He ably made the point that certain services could be provided jointly with other agencies and there is no reason for duplication. I hope that that possibility is considered in all that we do. I also hope that costs will be offset by the more efficient handling of complaints within police forces but, as John Swinney correctly said, we need to be careful about how we use scarce public resources to best effect. Jackie Baillie's points are indeed relevant to a wider discussion, but points made by all members emphasise clearly that the Parliament is committed to the establishment of an independent police complaints commissioner. We are doing that in the most appropriate way. It is for Parliament to return to the matter and to others as it deems appropriate in future.

Amendments 141 and 142 enhance the commissioner's ability to help police organisations to deal effectively with complaints. If a complainer keeps taking a complaint back to a police organisation, it would be useful for that organisation to be able to refer the matter to the commissioner. If satisfied that the organisation has taken reasonable steps to address the complaint before referring it, the commissioner will be in a position to bring the matter to a conclusion. That will help to avoid police time being spent fruitlessly on the same issue. I move amendment 141.

The Scottish ministers' powers to make regulations in section 21 are modelled on the enabling powers in section 26 of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967, but the bill does not currently place an obligation on the Scottish ministers to consult the Police Advisory Board for Scotland in the same way as they must consult it on regulations that are made under section 26 of the 1967 act. Amendment 1 addresses that gap and ensures a consistent approach throughout the Scottish police service. Similarly, the Scottish ministers have powers to modify the provisions in the 1967 act, and amendments 175 and 188 ensure that the use of such powers must also be subject to prior consultation with the Police Advisory Board for Scotland. I move amendment 1.

The amendments in the group are purely technical amendments that are intended to tidy the various references in the bill to the eight Scottish police authorities and the joint police boards. They are simply intended to make the drafting more consistent and do not change the meaning of the provisions in question. I move amendment 2.  Amendment 2 agreed to.   Amendments 3 and 4 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.

These amendments set out in more detail the circumstances in which information may be disclosed by and to the Scottish crime and drug enforcement agency and the police complaints commissioner. Amendments 137 and 138 will enable the agency lawfully to disclose any information that it obtains in the exercise of its functions to any person in the United Kingdom or elsewhere for certain permitted purposes. The amendments also enable any person lawfully to disclose information to the agency for use in the exercise of its functions. Amendment 130 inserts certain subsections of what was section 17 into section 2, to make it clear that it is a function of the agency to disseminate information that it holds to a list of specified persons, at its discretion. Amendment 136 removes section 17 from the bill to avoid any duplication in the provisions on the disclosure of information. This change is consequential on amendments 130, 137 and 138. Amendment 155 is a general provision to allow the police complaints commissioner lawfully to disclose information to other public bodies or office-holders for the purposes of fulfilling their  official functions or enabling the commissioner to fulfil his or her functions. It also allows persons lawfully to disclose information to the commissioner to enable the commissioner to fulfil his or her functions. The provision will ensure that there is no unintended bar to the kind of disclosure of information that will be necessary for the commissioner or another public body or office-holder to fulfil their functions effectively. The onward disclosure of information that has been disclosed by the agency or the commissioner will be subject to restrictions. The information cannot be disclosed without the consent of the relevant body. I move amendment 130.

I can confirm that, under that proposed change, there will be no such blanket disclosures. The imposition of conditions will be considered. Colin Fox asked about DNA, but I am not clear about what he was driving at because certain conditions apply to the use of, and access to, the DNA database. Scottish ministers could not simply  access that information for whatever purpose they wanted. Not only are Mr Fox's fears misplaced, I am not sure that they are relevant to the context in which he raises them. In relation to the onward transmission of disclosed data, any organisation that had information disclosed to it would be subject to the usual legal constraints, which are clearly defined. Information would be passed on only within a specific context and there would be clear legal safeguards on when it could be used.  Amendment 130 agreed to.

Amendments 131 and 132 relate to the definition of one of the police support services that the authority will be under a duty to provide. Section 3(2)(d) will impose a duty on the authority to carry out the functions of the Scottish ministers under part V of the Police Act 1997 other than those that relate to the making of regulations or orders on ministers' behalf. The amendments seek to clarify that the authority will be under a duty to carry out only the functions that are delegated under section 121 of the 1997 act. Section 3(8) of the bill will amend section 121 of the 1997 act to make it clear that the authority may perform functions under part V of the 1997 act other than those that relate to the making of regulations or orders. We seek to remove that exclusion from section 3(2)(d) because it is no longer necessary as a result of the link to section 121. I move amendment 131.  Amendment 131 agreed to.  Amendment 132 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.

If you insist, Presiding Officer, I will speak to each one individually. We listened carefully to what the Justice 2 Committee said about the status of the director of  the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency. When I gave evidence to the committee, I set out a number of reasons why I considered the rank of deputy chief constable was appropriate. I hope that that, along with my written response to the committee on the same matter, gives the committee some reassurance that the bill creates clear and modern arrangements for accountability and corporate governance under which the director will enjoy a very close relationship with the eight chief constables in Scotland—one that is based on mutual interdependence. However, when I wrote to the committee earlier this month, I acknowledged the views of the committee, and of Jackie Baillie in particular, and undertook to lodge the necessary amendments to change the title of the post of director to that of director general in recognition of the status of the post. Unfortunately, the renaming of the director, and the renaming of the deputy director as the deputy director general, necessitated an extensive number of amendments. Schedule 2 to the bill makes provisions for the first director general of the SCDEA to be the person who is, on commencement, the director of the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency. Amendments 178 and 179 amend schedule 2 to make provision for the first deputy director general to be the person who is, on commencement, the deputy director of the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency. Amendment 182 is necessary to ensure that the provisions in schedule 2 enable anything that is authorised by the director general to be done by any other member of the agency, if so authorised by him. The provision does not extend to authorisations for property interference under part III of the Police Act 1997 or to authorisations for intrusive surveillance under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Act 2000. Those authorisations concern highly sensitive surveillance techniques that can be authorised only by a chief officer. The specific arrangements for the authorisation of those activities in the director general's absence are set out the relevant pieces of legislation. I move amendment 15.

The amendments in the group relate to various provisions for the appointment of members and staff to the authority and the agency. When we consulted on the bill in "Supporting Police, Protecting Communities: Proposals for Legislation" in February 2005, we sought views on ways in which to enable police officers from outwith Scotland to be able to undertake a period of secondment to the Scottish crime and drug enforcement agency. The suggestion was met positively and the amendments in the group enable officers from throughout the United Kingdom to be directly seconded to the agency. In particular, the amendments provide that such seconded police officers will have all the powers and privileges of a Scottish constable during the period of their secondment to the agency. That will widen the pool of suitably experienced police officer talent that is available to the agency and will be of benefit both to the agency and to the wider UK police community. Where necessary, we are working with our counterparts in Whitehall to ensure that, where further changes to legislation that is outwith the competence of the Scottish Parliament are required, those will be achieved. The amendments also relate to the powers of the authority under schedules 1 and 2 to the bill to provide for the terms, conditions and remuneration of constables who are seconded to the authority and of the director general, deputy director general and police members of the agency. The amendments have two main purposes. The first is to make it clear that, in exercising its own powers, the authority must act within the framework of any powers that are exercised by Scottish ministers under the bill, once enacted, in respect of the terms and conditions of seconded constables or police members of the agency. The second purpose is to allow the authority, if it wishes to do so, to set terms and conditions and to determine remuneration for its staff by reference to provisions that are made from time to time by or under regulations that the Scottish ministers make in respect of constables who serve in the police forces. That will enable the authority to keep the arrangements for seconded constables and police members of the agency aligned with those that apply to constables in police forces.  I move amendment 133.  Amendment 133 agreed to.  Amendments 134 and 135 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.

Bill Butler is to be congratulated on helping to stimulate an important and significant debate. The speeches have reflected the serious way in which we address the issue of sectarianism. Most decent people throughout Scotland are sick and tired of bigoted and sectarian behaviour. They are fed up with individuals who hide behind what Patrick Harvie and others described as a warped sense of tradition that manifests itself in abusive sectarian behaviour. It does not matter whether that is associated with football, a marching tradition or a bogus affiliation to organised religion, as Murdo Fraser said. It is all unacceptable when it has a crude and callous impact on other people. Most people in Scotland want their children to grow up in a society that is based on mutual respect and care and in which we work together to make Scotland a better place and eliminate sectarianism. Much of the debate has been devoted to football-related issues, which are important and I will return to them, but sectarianism is not just about the crude working-class manifestation of bother that results in some of the mindless, gratuitous violence that Bill Butler and others talked about, although that is still a feature. For example, in the past week or so we have read reports in the papers about someone who broke away from a march to abuse a priest who was standing on the steps of his church. Let us not kid ourselves—such things still happen, which is why we are determined to do something about the problem. However, sectarianism is also about those who would prefer people of different religions not to be able to join their bowling club or golf club and about those who seek to use their attitudes or allegiance to a certain religion as an excuse not to employ someone of a different religion. That can overlap with racism and manifest itself in outrageous  slogans on synagogues and mosques in Scotland. Such things—which manifest themselves particularly, although not exclusively, in the west of Scotland—are unacceptable signs of intolerance in our society. Sectarianism is sometimes associated with football, but it is often associated with marches by people of certain traditions. When alcohol is consumed on such marches it can result in minor violence or violence that scars or maims for life or—tragically—kills people. We must do something about the problem, which is why the Scottish Executive has been so determined to take action. I recall the comments that were made when Jack McConnell first raised the issue of sectarianism. It was said that he was foolish to do so, that it was inappropriate to use his position to raise such an issue and that he was venturing into an area that he did not properly understand and over which he would have no control. I also remember the comments that were made when Cathy Jamieson convened meetings involving people from different backgrounds. It was said that such meetings were futile and that we would never solve the problems. I agree that we still have much further to go, but we should consider the strides that have been made in the past months and the past year. People from the republican and Orange traditions sat down and signed a joint declaration. They openly and honestly confronted the problem, they admitted that there is a problem and they are willing to sign up to tackle it. It was right to confront the problem in the first place and we are making progress. It would have been easier to hide away and kid on that we did not have a problem or to kid on that things would somehow improve as the years went by. Bill Aitken was right: the problem is possibly nowhere near as bad as it used to be, but the fact that it still exists is a shame on all of us. We need to be robust and courageous and say that sectarianism is an unacceptable stain on our society. Many comments have been made about Celtic and Rangers and the contribution that people associated with those clubs unfortunately make towards encouraging sectarianism. However, both clubs have taken significant steps to try to address the problem of sectarianism. I will not pretend that they have eliminated every sectarian element from their supporters, but they have taken decisive measures. They have made public statements and banned people from their grounds. Those are the right things to do. I welcome the way in which Celtic and Rangers fans have responded to the debate. They have approached it in a mature way. At long last, I have listened to radio programmes on which people from different perspectives and backgrounds have  talked sensibly about the problem and how to address it. I am pleased that people see sectarianism as being not much different from xenophobia and racism and that they recognise that it must be tackled. I was pleased that Celtic Football Club and its supporters invited people from the asylum-seeker community in Glasgow to the unveiling of the statue of the founder of the club, Brother Walfrid, for which Celtic supporters got together to raise money. Because of their background and the things that they had gone through, those supporters recognised that there were still people in Scotland who were subject to the type of behaviour that I have described. It is shameful when we see people who have come to this country from whatever background—as immigrants or asylum seekers—turning on others who are less fortunate than themselves who have come here a wee bit further down the line. We recognise that things are moving on, and I am proud of the part that the Executive has played in addressing the problem. Bill Butler spoke passionately and eloquently. Patrick Harvie raised some philosophical notions about religion and wider aspects that are worthy of further debate. The fact is that while we have a problem—however small it is and however successful we have been in tackling it—we cannot rest until it is eliminated. It is a shame on us all if our children are still growing up believing that somehow someone of a different faith is an enemy. It is a shame on us all if we encourage people to believe that that should be expressed in violence. It is a shame on us all that there are families in this country who are still mourning and grieving because their sons—and it is, in particular, sons—have been brutalised or murdered as a result of someone's distorted behaviour. We can take pride in the fact that the Parliament is, at last, confronting the issue and in the fact that we have said that we are prepared to do something about it. I hope that all of us—the churches, the fans, the football clubs and the politicians—can sign up to saying that we will not rest until sectarianism is eliminated.  Meeting closed at 17:57.

Stewart Maxwell has secured a useful debate on an important and significant issue. It is right to draw attention to the fact that the number of fire-related fatalities in Scotland is far too high. We must do all that we can to minimise risks. It is recognised that smoking is the most preventable cause of death and ill health in Scotland. It causes 13,000 deaths each year—that is, 250 a week or 35 a day, with around 1,000 deaths arguably associated with passive smoking.

I referred to 1,000 deaths a year arguably being associated with passive smoking. I acknowledge that there are huge cultural issues to be addressed. Jean Turner mentioned the dangers associated with drinking alcohol and smoking, and Stewart Maxwell described some of the problems. Smoking reduced ignition potential cigarettes could be one way of addressing the problem. If someone is going to fall asleep in their armchair with a cigarette in their hand, such a cigarette is less likely to start a fire. If that is the case, so much the better. At the same time, we should keep the debate in context. Far more people die from smoking-related disease and we could do much more by discouraging people from smoking in the first place. That is why we introduced our smoke-free legislation, which is regarded as the most comprehensive legislation of its kind anywhere in the world. At one point, when Brian Monteith was talking about not being keen on being in areas where people are smoking, I thought that he was about to endorse that legislation. However, he quickly reverted to type and disabused me of that notion.  We cannot ignore the danger to some people from fires that are caused by smoking materials: I accept that. I also accept that for those who persist with the smoking habit—especially those who mix the habit with drinking alcohol—we may need to consider different ways of addressing that danger. That is why the Fire (Scotland) Act 2005, to which Stewart Stevenson referred, shifted the emphasis in our fire and rescue services from response to education. We need to educate people about their lifestyle choices, not only to improve their long-term health, but to make them more aware of the immediate risks that are associated with the way in which they choose to live. Alcohol is clearly an issue. Up to 60 per cent of fire-related deaths can be attributed to a person smoking while intoxicated. Indeed, that is one of the reasons why we have spent nearly £250,000 on a series of adverts that highlight the fire risks associated with drunkenness. Those include chip pans being overfilled or left on, grill pans being left unattended and lit cigarettes being allowed to fall out of someone's hand or being put in a bin. I accept that any move that would help to reduce the number of fire fatalities in Scotland deserves serious consideration. I have no doubt that, purely from a fire safety perspective, such a move might have an impact; however, there are other things that we need to be aware of. I am not using this as an excuse to do nothing, but Brian Monteith highlighted the problem of illegally sourced cigarettes and, although it is no reason not to take action, given the number that come into the country already—not counting the number that might come in in future—that is an issue that we would need to reflect on. If we want an informed debate and to make an informed decision, we must consider all the relevant facts. Again, this is no reason for not acting, but we must also consider whether reduced ignition potential cigarettes require a deeper draw from the smoker. If they do, the concerns that have been expressed about people inhaling more deeply and that leading to a greater incidence of lung cancer and heart-related disease would have to be factored into the debate. We cannot blithely ignore that aspect.

That would have to be factored into any debate. I raised the point and although I am not sure that the arguments are as conclusive as that, nor am I saying that I have a closed mind on the matter. However, if by trying to reduce the number of fatalities among people who fall asleep with a cigarette in their hand, we increase the potential for disease and death by other means, that must be considered.

Any move in such a direction needs to be carefully considered. We must reflect on all the relevant factors and, where possible, avoid the unintended consequences that might flow from any decision. Stewart Maxwell, Jean Turner and others would agree that by far the best way for people to avoid ill health and death is for them not to smoke in the first place. That must remain our default position, but we recognise the seriousness of the debate, which is not simply about politics. Stewart Maxwell said that we could just go ahead with legislation, but I cannot avoid saying to him that, notwithstanding Stewart Stevenson's comments about taking cognisance of technical progress, product safety is not a matter for the Scottish Parliament. It is reserved to Westminster, along with product liability and labelling, to ensure a level playing field for business in the United Kingdom within the framework of European law and international trade agreements. On European law, I refer to the European directive 2001/37/EC on the manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products, which was adopted by the United Kingdom Government through the Tobacco Products (Manufacture, Presentation and Sale) (Safety) Regulations 2002. Lives are at stake and that means that the issue deserves a serious, considered and proper debate which, I hope, will result in proportionate action that is in everyone's interests. That is one of the reasons why I am so delighted that action on the issue that I first raised as a backbencher six or  seven years ago came to fruition and that, at 6 o'clock on 26 March 2006, Scotland's public places became a smoke-free zone.   Meeting closed at 17:34.

The debate has been useful. Several members have mentioned the cross-cutting nature of the issue and the fact that it covers several portfolios. We take that seriously, which is why three ministers feature in and give their support to the report and why the document is a product of joint work between the departments. It is important to emphasis that, although Cathy Jamieson and I have a justice responsibility, there is a health element to many of our considerations of and dealings with people. There is also an education element for us to consider, just as there is a justice element for the other ministers to consider. The fact that Cathy Jamieson opened the debate and I am closing it does not imply that the other departments are not involved; they have been involved intimately in the production of the report. Stewart Stevenson asked where was the voice of the children. I refer him to Cathy Jamieson's opening speech, in which her first words were "Every child". At the heart of her speech was the need to consider the interests of children. Stewart Stevenson also asked about the consultation. The report, "Hidden Harm—Next Steps: Supporting Children—Working With Parents" does not repeat the first "Hidden Harm" document, around which there was extensive consultation, which involved listening to the voices of children. It is not intended  to duplicate the work of voluntary organisations such as the Aberlour Child Care Trust, which work with children, listen to them and allow them to express themselves. Having said that, I put on record the fact that we consulted children and families directly when we developed the report. It is important that children's voices influence what we are trying to do.

It is clear that we cannot consider children's needs in isolation from the parents' behaviour and needs, and the needs of the wider family. Equally, we cannot put the needs and interests of others before the interests of the children. It makes absolute sense to say that a complex integration of relationships influences what needs to be done in relation to children. I will return to that point. The question was asked whether the report is an action document. We have said deliberately that it sets out the next steps. We do not see it as the final product, but nor do we see it as simply the starting point. If members care to refer back to the document, they will see that specific actions are set out in relation to a number of issues. Those include: "invest a further £1m in workforce development establish incentives for GP practices establish key performance indicators". The document refers to legislation, preparing guidance and a number of things on which we are acting and will continue to act. There have been many useful and thoughtful speeches. When Jeremy Purvis spoke about the young person whom he met at Wellington school, he used a word that sums up what we are talking about. He said that he found the issue heartbreaking, which it is. If we strip away all our political differences and the fact that sometimes we try to score points and advance our own political interests against those of others, when it comes down to it we are talking about children who are living in desperate circumstances, facing daily danger in some cases, whose futures are blighted and whose lives are at risk. That is heartbreaking. I can cite examples that I have come across, as Bill Aitken did. I remember the joy that my family felt when my first grandchild was born. We were in the hospital at a time of joy and celebration. In the same ward as my daughter was a young girl whose baby was already addicted, because of her circumstances. That baby had to be put into  immediate isolation with support and the mother had to be given intensive support. They had to be isolated for the sake of the child and for the safety of those around them. The father, who wanted to visit the child, came into the hospital ward full of drugs, shouting at the nurses, making demands and wanting to take the child away to God knows what fate. I wonder what happened to that child. The comment that I and others in my family made was, "God help that child." We wondered what was in front of the child and whether it would live through to adolescence, even if it made it out of hospital. That was heartbreaking and tragic to see. It is an example of why we need a measured response. Kenny MacAskill and others were right to say that mistakes are sometimes made. We should not punish workers who do a job fantastically well in extremely difficult circumstances. I would not like to do that job. Rather than punish people for making mistakes, we should correct their mistakes and help them to move on. People who are guilty of deliberate inaction or who go beyond the guidelines and do something that is harmful should be punished, but those who make mistakes should not continue to attract opprobrium. If they do, we will not be able to get people to work in such jobs.

That is a farcical point. It is absurd to try to substitute some of the points that have been made with a point about information technology systems. In any case, we have made progress with such systems. We have piloted IT child protection systems in Lanarkshire, which will be rolled out more widely. In a few days, an update on all the recommendations that are contained in "It's everyone's job to make sure I'm alright" will be presented to the Education Committee. There are issues that we must face up to. Scott Barrie spoke about the importance of focusing on the needs of children; he also mentioned the need to make the best use of current resources. Although substantial resources have been provided, they are not always used wisely. We need to know why that is the case. Scott Barrie was right to say that there should be no presumption that children will be left at home. Something that has attracted no comment is Cathy Jamieson's suggestion that parents could be tested to find out whether they are addicted. We must take some fairly drastic steps to provide  the protection to children that members agree is necessary. Trish Godman was one of several members who mentioned kinship and the need to support families. She was right—families must be supported.

I will develop my point and if the member still wants to intervene once I have done so, she can. Trish Godman and others were right to highlight the fact that the children of drug-abusing parents often live in social isolation and have to assume the responsibility of adults. It is tragic that they are scared to find out what will happen when they go home. Such children could benefit from the support that grandparents can provide, although I recognise that grandparents sometimes struggle to support children financially. Local authorities have the responsibility and the resources to take action on that. Trish Godman mentioned that some of them already do. Given that councils have that responsibility and the necessary budgets, and that they know we believe it is a matter on which they should act, Cathy Jamieson will take up the issue with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities if they fail to do so. She will ask COSLA to introduce a national scheme to ensure that there is consistency throughout Scotland. If that does not happen and councils continue not to fulfil their responsibilities, the Parliament will need to revisit the issue. A number of useful points have been made in the debate. We recognise that kinship carers play a fantastic role but, ultimately, we must do something that protects children who live in tragic circumstances, whose futures are blighted, whose lives are at risk and who are suffering, sometimes in silence or in heartbreaking circumstances. Those children demand our help and we should pledge it to them.

We do not.

Will the member take an intervention?

I share the member's sentiments, but would he say that politicians in this Parliament and elsewhere have a responsibility? If he believes that judgment calls can sometimes go wrong and that their dong so should not lead to  people being stigmatised, politicians here or elsewhere should not call for an inquiry every time a mistake is made.

David Davidson, on behalf of the Justice 2 Committee, raised specific concerns about the legislative consent motion, which others have echoed. As far as having improved lines of communication is concerned, I accept that problems were caused for the committee. We are keen to ensure that that does not happen in future. There has been a learning process and the new system's administrative arrangements have had to bed in. We will consider how we can avoid problems in future, if possible. David Davidson and other members raised the issue of representation on committees. Assurances have been given that any concerns in Scotland will be addressed, that ACPOS will be specifically engaged and that the Scottish police services authority will be consulted. There is a requirement for the UK Government to obtain the consent of the Scottish ministers before any strategic priorities for the national policing improvement agency that will impact on Scottish police are set. The Home Office has assured us that there will be Scottish representation on any committees the agency sets up to consider specific work streams where there is a Scottish interest.

Even if there were such a guarantee, I would expect those responsible for policing in Scotland to be vigilant and scrutinise what is going on. I would not want to rely on others to determine what might or might not be a specific issue for Scotland. Although we are assured that matters will be addressed in the way that I outlined, I would expect representatives of Scottish police and our officials to keep a close eye on what is happening. I will now consider the broader issue, which all members who have spoken have raised, of extradition.

I do not think that Patrick Harvie was here for my opening speech, in which I addressed the specific issues that the LCM covers that it is appropriate for that mechanism to deal with. I will leave aside the political comments Stewart Maxwell and Kenny MacAskill made, which were more a nod in the direction of the SNP's selection process than anything else. Other than those comments, members made well-constructed points, but the issues that they raised are all to do with the UK Government because they relate to extradition matters, which are not the responsibility of this Parliament. Specific issues have been raised about double jeopardy. The issue was explained earlier by the Lord Advocate and the situation has been clearly outlined in relation to prosecution. However, when there is no prosecution in this country, the Scottish ministers, the Lord Advocate and anyone else are constrained by the Extradition Act 2003. We are bound to follow the law as set out under the Scotland Act 1998, which stipulates that extradition is a reserved matter. Ministers must comply with the UK's international obligations. That has been recognised by the courts in both Scotland and England. I acknowledge that all members who have spoken in the debate expressed concerns about the process at Westminster, but that is nothing to do with this Parliament, nor is it the responsibility of the Scottish ministers. Although we would not necessarily express our views in the language or tone set out by the committee in its amendment and would not necessarily agree with how its views are expressed, I nevertheless think that we can accept the committee's request to make representations to the UK Government. The committee has previously asked the Minister for Justice to do that and she has written to the UK Government. I recognise that the committee is now asking for that to be done on behalf of the Parliament and we accept that we can do that. Given that there is such depth of feeling and that there is cross-party consensus on the issue, we are prepared to accept the spirit of the amendment, if not all the specific words. The minister will make representations to the UK Government based on those concerns. Therefore, we will accept the amendment. On the core issue for which we are responsible, there is much in the motion to commend it to Parliament. All members have made points about their concerns very well. I have no doubt that a record of those comments will make its way to our colleagues in the UK Government. I repeat that the Minister for Justice will make representations  to the UK Government that reflect the tone and content of the debate.

I thank members of the Justice 2 Committee for their consideration of the legislative consent motion in respect of the bill, which is one of the first legislative consent motions since the review of the Sewel convention last year, and for their report to the Parliament. The motion illustrates that the convention now has an established place in our parliamentary process. Policing is a devolved matter, and the Scottish Executive has a distinct agenda for policing in Scotland that is very different from that of the Home Office for England and Wales. Later this month, we will debate stage 3 of the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill, which has received widespread support from all the major parties in the Parliament. Today we are considering the Home Office's Police and Justice Bill, most of the provisions of which relate only to England and Wales. The legislative consent memorandum is concerned with very few provisions, in relation to which there is a clear, strong case for agreeing that the UK legislation should extend to devolved matters or alter the executive functions of Scottish ministers. I will outline briefly the four pertinent elements of the memorandum. First, the bill will merge the Police Information Technology Organisation and the Central Police Training and Development Authority into a new England and Wales organisation to be known as the national policing improvement agency. Like its predecessors, the new organisation will provide some services, such as senior staff training, specialist policing support and work on some information technology developments, on a UK basis. The LCM will allow Scottish police organisations to continue to benefit from those services. Crucially, the bill provides safeguards that will require the NPIA to consult the Scottish police on its activities in Scotland. Any changes to the functions or structures of the agency that relate to devolved matters will be made by Scottish ministers, subject to the consent of the UK Government, under the scrutiny of the Parliament. Secondly, the LCM will allow the new, merged inspectorate of justice, community safety and custody services to carry on the work of Her  Majesty's inspectorate of constabulary in the inspection of cross-border bodies such as the Civil Nuclear Constabulary and the British Transport Police. Thirdly, the bill makes improvements to the legislation on computer crime that are necessary to comply with the European Union framework decision on attacks against systems. The LCM will allow those benefits to extend to Scotland, recognising the advantages of UK-wide legislation to combat an international problem. Fourthly, the bill makes a number of technical improvements to the Extradition Act 2003. Although that is a reserved matter, under the established convention the amendments that alter the competence of the Scottish ministers require the consent of the Parliament. It is entirely appropriate that all of the measures that I have outlined should be extended to Scotland. A strong case has been made for doing so. I commend the legislative consent motion to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the UK Parliament should consider those provisions of the Police and Justice Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 25 January 2006, which will legislate in devolved areas in respect of the abolition of the Police Information Technology Organisation and the establishment of the National Policing Improvement Agency and the Justice, Community Safety and Custody Inspectorate, and computer misuse, and which will alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers on extradition matters, as laid out in LCM(S2) 4.1.

In the seven months since the legislation came into force, two cases containing charges in respect of section 1 of the act have been reported to the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. Both have resulted in solemn proceedings. One case resulted in a conviction and the other is on-going. No risk of sexual harm orders have so far been made.

I am aghast at the fact that people continue to exploit young children for sexual and sometimes financial purposes. It is already an offence for someone to secure the sexual services of a child under the age of 18 years. If a person is guilty of an offence under section 9(4) of the 2005 act, which relates to a person aged 16 or over, they are liable "on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum or both". Richard Baker raises a slightly different issue, which is how we treat those who are engaged in the provision of sexual services. Clearly, we have already taken steps in the act on inciting the provision by a child of sexual services or child pornography. My officials have a meeting planned with Barnardo's and we will reflect on some of the wider issues that Richard Baker raises. As he will be aware, it is a matter for the Crown Office to  decide whether to pursue a case against an individual.

We have agreed a series of performance contracts with drug action teams throughout Scotland. Those link funding for drug treatment to defined outcomes. An additional £210,000 was allocated to Dumfries and Galloway drug action team in July 2005 to deliver a reduction in waiting times.

We need to keep the amount of money that is seized from criminals in perspective. We expect that the amount may increase in future, but there is no way that the money that is currently available would make a significant impact on the waiting times to which Elaine Murray refers. It is worth bearing in mind the substantial increases in funding that have been made available not only to Dumfries and Galloway but to others across the country. The funding was enhanced further by the additional £4 million. We will continue to keep a close watch on what is needed, but we must ensure that the money that is allocated is used to best effect. Both the Minister for Justice and I hope to return to the issue in the near future. We want to see effective and timeous treatment and to ensure that the resources that are allocated are used to good effect.

I cannot give the specific figure for what is happening nationally or in Dumfries and Galloway, but I will seek to revert to Stewart Stevenson on that.

As announced on 20 April, we are in discussion with the senior judiciary with a view to setting up a judicially led review of the civil courts. Consideration of the specific recommendations from the Scottish Consumer Council report will be a matter for that review.

We have not yet confirmed the details of the scope and remit of the review, and they will be given careful consideration. We would want any review to help to speed up the process of law; we want to ensure that access is more easily obtained, irrespective of people's circumstances; and we want to ensure that access  is not only speedy but affordable. I have been impressed and enheartened by the breadth of support for conducting such a fundamental review.

The Executive is committed to tackling antisocial behaviour, and involving the whole community, including young people, is crucial to ensuring that our strategy is a success. We are clear that providing young people with positive activities and opportunities to engage with their local communities is key to such community involvement.

I thank the organisers of yesterday's conference for their invitation. It was impressive to hear people engaging so positively on such an important issue. The innovation of junior wardens—which started in Auchenlodment primary school in Johnstone, in my constituency, and has now been copied elsewhere in the country with some success—is definitely the way forward. It engages young people in a positive way in contributing to their communities and in the serious issues that sometimes confront them. I am aware of the press reports today to which Christine May refers. It is deeply depressing that adults can give that type of example to younger children. There is no excuse for carrying a knife or a serious weapon. It is not a protection and it is not a deterrent; in fact, it contributes to a serious problem in Scotland. A warning needs to go out to those misguided people that the law will deal with them should they continue to do that. However, I also know that, in Christine May's constituency, the community safety partnership provides free personal alarms, which should give some degree of assurance to those who might feel at risk. I hope that the efforts of that community safety partnership can be encouraged and promoted. Equally, I hope that the relevant agencies will use the full powers of the criminal law to deal with those who carry knives and will use the new powers that are available under antisocial behaviour legislation to deal with those who engage in acts that cause distress to the local community.

The decision about whether to grant bail is a matter for the courts. It would be utterly inappropriate for any member of this Parliament—and particularly for any minister—to try to influence or comment on decisions that are made by judges. Equally, the sentence to which Phil Gallie refers was an outcome of a decision that the judge made having had regard to the circumstances of the particular case. It is fair to put on record the fact that the Executive is determined to tackle knife crime and has in hand proposals to double the lengths of the sentences that are available to the courts when dealing with those who carry knives. Further, when knives are used in serious cases, stringent and severe sentences are available should the judge think them appropriate. However, the issue is not only the responsibility of the judges, which is why the Minister for Justice has given so much time to engaging with the violence reduction unit in Strathclyde and others to try to promote a debate across Scotland and to send the message that, although most of us do not carry knives, we all have a contribution to make to changing the climate in which knives are carried. We must change the way in which people in Scotland behave. We cannot just expect those who carry knives to change.

In the debate on the legislative programme on 6 September last year, I announced that we intend to strengthen the laws that deal with hate crime. That remains our intention. The Scottish Executive is committed to tackling prejudice in all its forms, as we believe it has no place in our society.

As Patrick Harvie is aware, the working group's recommendations are wide ranging and impact on a number of different areas, including the criminal justice system, the education curriculum, new legislation and media reporting, to name but a few. We have given very careful consideration to all the proposals. I assure Patrick Harvie that we will issue a formal response to the working group in the near future. It is fair to say that, in the meantime, where new legislation is not required, we have made progress on many of the recommendations.

It is not the Executive's intention—nor is it, I believe, the intention of the Parliament—to introduce legislation that is unenforceable. Since the creation of the Parliament, the Executive has consistently introduced legislation that makes a difference to people's quality of life. Some things that happen in our society are abhorrent. It is right to put that on the record. I hope that neither Phil Gallie nor his party is suggesting that those in our society who suffer physical and verbal attacks for whatever reason should be left unprotected. The police do the job, and they do it to the best of their ability. I recognise the difficult circumstances under which they operate at times. That said, the Parliament would find it totally unacceptable if the Executive abandoned those in our society who suffer as a result of their views, status, gender or any other factor.

A survey of local authorities in Scotland reveals that 51 antisocial behaviour orders were applied for and 17 orders were granted in South Lanarkshire in the period 2002-03 to 2004-05. We do not hold information centrally on the number of orders that are applied for and granted in particular courts.

Karen Gillon highlights a particularly sensitive issue. The Executive's legislative programme has been delivered in this regard: we created the 2004 act to tackle the problem of antisocial behaviour and we provided substantial resources to do so. We need to consider carefully the next step. We do not interfere in the operational independence of the police. It is up to chief constables to use resources and to decide, through their officers, the ways in  which they will enforce the act in their localities. The Executive also does not attempt to interfere in the independence of local authorities to deliver services in their areas. If there is a failure in any part of Scotland to use the powers under the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, local members, councillors and communities need to ask councils and the police why they are not using the powers that were granted to them. I have had representations from other members with constituencies in the Strathclyde area. For example, it appears from the evidence that dispersal orders, closure orders and vehicle seizures are not being applied for and used in the way that other local authorities are using them in the rest of the country. We are producing information that gives a picture of what is happening across the country and we will circulate it to all local authorities and all members. When people are armed with that knowledge, I hope that they will ask the appropriate questions at the local level.

That question is slightly different from the one that Karen Gillon raised, which asked why the police and local authorities are not using powers that have been made available to them. In terms of the policy framework, everything that has been asked for has been done: staff have been appointed, money has been allocated and plans have been produced. With those in place, we come to a different set of questions, including why dispersal orders have not been used and why ASBOs have not been applied for. Neither the Executive nor the Parliament should dictate what happens in local communities. Local representatives should question those who are responsible at the local level and hold them to account for their actions. Local communities should do the same. It is not reasonable to suggest that we should dictate from here in Edinburgh the exact way in which the powers are used in every community in Scotland.

I repeat that the powers are in place and the money has been provided. Local agencies must now use them. Margaret Mitchell needs to ask the police and councils in her area why those things are not happening. We need to have a sense of perspective. The Executive did not anticipate that large numbers of ASBOs for under-16s would be made as a result of the passage of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. Criticism was levied that the act might be used as a blunderbuss, but that was never our intention. The powers need to be used proportionately. That said, where they are not being used at all, local agencies should be asked why they are not using them.

There are a number of examples of local authorities taking positive action to encourage young people in particular to use quad bikes responsibly. In North Lanarkshire there are some good examples of facilities being made available. We encourage local authorities to do that. We will reflect on whether there are any legislative gaps, but it is for local police to ensure that appropriate procedures are in place.

I state for the record that any possible by-election in Banff and Buchan is the unintended consequence of an act of human kindness. Today's debate has been useful. It has shown that, for too long, we have concentrated on aspects of our criminal justice system at the expense of addressing some of the difficulties that have been developing in civil law. We have heard how much civil law impacts on all our lives in a myriad of ways, some of which are more obvious than others. Having spent so much time and effort driving through major reforms in the criminal justice system, it is right that we now take a step back and consider what is needed in the civil law system. Our intention behind today's debate was not to offer a prescription or a blueprint, but to ask people to stop and think about what we need to do for the future. We want genuinely to engage people in a wide-ranging debate. We have already taken steps to talk informally to stakeholders in civil law to find out from them what the difficulties are and what their ideas are. We have made informal approaches to the judiciary to inform it of what we intend to do and I hope that we will, following the debate this afternoon, be able to engage with members of the Parliament about changes that are needed outwith the formal parliamentary process. It is incumbent on us to be realistic about what will be required. There is no way that we will resolve all the issues of civil justice in the next 12 months. We are putting down an early marker, but we will have to leave it to a future Administration to develop and deliver the plans, although it is right that we touch on some of the more immediate issues. This afternoon's debate has inevitably covered some of the detail of the forthcoming Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Bill. I mention that in passing, but do not intend to go into too much detail because we will have further opportunities at stages 1 and 2 of the bill to examine the detail. It is important to remember that although we have been concentrating so much on criminal law, we have not entirely neglected civil law. Pauline McNeill and Sylvia Jackson mentioned the great deal of work that we have done in family law. We have also made significant changes to property law in Scotland and Parliament is engaged in further work on bankruptcy and diligence. I have mentioned legal complaints and there is also the strategic review of publicly funded legal advice and assistance. I will return to some of the points that have been raised about in-court advice and  mediation services, on which we have done some work. We intend that our civil justice plan will set out a framework for reform. As a number of members said, we need to increase access to justice—Kenny MacAskill and Pauline McNeill developed that theme. It is not just about access, however; it is about affordability and ensuring that everyone has access to justice. As Pauline McNeill said, it is about trying to reduce and minimise the complexities in the system. We want to encourage mediation. Mary Mulligan was right to mention some examples and I pay tribute to the work of the in-court advice and mediation project in Edinburgh. We are using a slightly different model for pilot schemes in Aberdeen and Glasgow. I have met representatives of the Edinburgh project and have spoken to people elsewhere and I have been tremendously impressed by the breadth of advice and experience that have been brought to the process, as well as by the swiftness with which resolution can be achieved outwith the formal court process. Where that can be done, it should be done. The best way to progress is to ensure that going to court is the last resort. However, if a case has to go to court, the process should be quick and cost-effective. As Kenny MacAskill and other members have said, the response should be proportionate to the case. I will return to points that were made about small claims. Margaret Mitchell spoke about arbitration. We have been considering how to deal with arbitration in the proposed arbitration bill. However, it is not just a question for the Executive because there are issues about the parliamentary time that is available before the next election. Both the justice committees are fully engaged with a number of bills and there will be no opportunity to progress an arbitration bill. However, it is right that we put down as a marker our support for use of arbitration and that we recognise the contribution that it can make. I hope that a future Parliament will return quickly to the issue to consider what needs to be done and how it should be done. Indeed, there may well be issues that can be addressed outwith legislation—we should move on that. However, where legislation is required, it must be considered. Kenny MacAskill, Mike Pringle and David Davidson spoke about issues around small claims. The Minister for Justice has indicated her support for changes. Kenny MacAskill spoke about the ludicrous nature of the limits for small claims, to which David Davidson, Bill Aitken and others also referred. However, on the point that was raised about personal injuries, it is right to record that we have made it clear for years that there is no way that we will support personal injury cases being  dealt with in the small claims court. There is a separate issue to be addressed about whether personal injuries are best addressed in the Court of Session or whether there is an opportunity to develop expertise in the sheriff courts, as Pauline McNeill and Bill Aitken suggested, because expertise in commercial law is developing. We need more discussions on that. John Swinney raised a number of issues arising from his interest in the Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Bill. We can return to the question of the levy later on. Suffice it to say that we have laid out a framework for and suggestions about the balance between the general levy on people across the profession and an individual levy on those against whom a complaint is made, but we have no particular view about what that should ultimately look like. We have given our initial suggestions and we believe that it is right that the Scottish Law Commission should consider the issue. Its engagement in discussions with the legal profession should determine what the balance should be. We have said that no additional costs should be involved for the profession as a whole and that we do not think that there is a need for further expenditure. However, I am willing to engage in discussion at this stage on how any expenditure should be levied for, though I remind people that we believe that the Scottish Law Commission has a role in taking forward that discussion at a future date. Issues have been raised about the availability of legal advice and about non-qualified legal advisers. Again, I will come back and discuss that with the Justice 1 Committee as the Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Bill proceeds. However, we are committed to ensuring that a variety of sources is available for advice work. Reference was made during the debate to the advice work that the Scottish Legal Aid Board has funded. I recognise the value of that and I want it to continue. However, on CABx, I put on record that funding is not determined by the Scottish Executive Justice Department. There is a particular issue on which Parliament must reflect; I have made this point before in debates. MSPs have told the Executive on a number of occasions that we should not interfere with decisions that are made by local authorities, which are funded to carry out work at the local level. However, we are also encouraged to take centralised decisions on funding for local agencies.

We must acknowledge that CABx do more than just give legal advice. There is a particular issue that we must address, which is people's belief that the question of Executive funding for local authorities to deal with local matters is not being properly addressed. Do we want to centralise funding or should we continue with the current model? We need a separate debate on that. Sylvia Jackson mentioned specialist courts. There will be an interesting debate to be had with the judiciary about what will develop because such courts would be largely its responsibility. Mary Mulligan and Jeremy Purvis touched on issues regarding the voluntary sector, which I think will develop apace. I believe that the debate has been a good starting point for a debate on civil justice. We have acknowledged the contribution that lawyers, many people in the voluntary sector and the CABx make. We have also said that we have an open mind on how the future system should be developed. We genuinely want to hear new ideas and to stimulate debate about how legal advice should be provided. I hope that, in the coming year, we will be able to reach out, through Parliament, to a wider section of Scottish society to ensure that what we do reflects the best interests of the people whom we represent, and that it represents best practice in respect of what we choose to proceed with.

I commend to Parliament the amendment in my name, which represents a general statement of intent rather than a specific prescription on every aspect of the issue that has been mentioned during the debate. I welcome the large degree of support that has been expressed for the work that we are doing, the recognition that we are confronted by a significant problem and the willingness to work together that members of all parties have shown. Although we may sometimes disagree on particular issues, I hope that we can work together on our general intent. There have been some excellent speeches. I commend Maureen Watt for making an excellent and highly thoughtful first speech in the Parliament. It was fascinating to hear her draw on her experience as a prison visitor. I agree that giving drug users short sentences is often not the answer, although I accept Bill Aitken's point that prison must sometimes be an option for those who commit crime persistently.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. I agree with what Maureen Watt said, which is why we have introduced drug treatment and testing orders. We want to keep people who have a persistent drug problem out of prison. I was shocked by the example that Maureen Watt gave of the release of a prisoner from Barlinnie. I would certainly like to know more about that case because it demonstrates some of the failings that still exist in the system and the inability of different parts of the system to come together. In her thoughtful speech, Susan Deacon was right to discuss education and awareness raising. She mentioned the choices for life initiative, in which the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency is involved. That programme, which is funded largely by the Executive, demonstrates our commitment to educating young people about the dangers of drugs. As a number of members said, simply telling them not to take drugs is not enough. We must make them aware of the wider context and of the consequences of taking drugs. That is the starting point for much of the material in the know the score campaign, the effectiveness of which in providing drugs education and contributing to the  drugs strategy is widely recognised in the United Kingdom and beyond. We must reduce the use of drugs among children and young people—and I have mentioned the role that education and the provision of public information can play in that—but we must also reduce the harm that is done to children and young people who live in drug-addicted families. We face a huge moral and social dilemma about what to do in such situations. We know that parents want to be with their children and vice versa, but we need to ensure that by allowing that to happen we are not exposing children to dangers that could sometimes be lethal. We must engage in debate on that. It is proper that we ensure that the number of problematic drug users who get timely and effective treatment increases, which is why we have extended the range of facilities that are available. However, we must keep a sense of perspective in the debate about residential treatment. Although such treatment, when given at the appropriate time, is right for some people, there can be other, equally effective interventions. We must leave that for the experts to determine. Today's debate on what is a complex subject has been useful. Given the comments that have been made, I want to work with members of all parties and I hope that members of the justice committees will join me in examining what is happening in Glasgow and elsewhere. The more we can educate ourselves about the challenge that is ahead of us, the more we will be able take effective action to ensure that the problem is dealt with properly.

I know that Rosemary Byrne cares deeply about these issues and that she campaigns on them actively. There is much in what she says with which I could not disagree. In fact, she makes eminent sense on some things. However, I must disagree with some of her conclusions. While I think that the proposed bill to which she refers has some noble aspirations, from what I have heard this morning, it will not actually offer a constructive way forward in terms of practicality and effectiveness. However, we can deal with that later. The gist of what Rosemary Byrne has to say is right, and none of us could disagree with it. We know that there is a major challenge in dealing with drug addiction in this country. At the same time, however, we must keep a sense of perspective. Despite the difficulties that we face, we are making progress. The number of problematic drug users is going down, as is the proportion of those users who are injecting. The use of drugs among schoolchildren is stable. More people than ever before are getting treatment for their drug addiction. The rate of acquisitive crime—robbery, burglary and the handling of stolen goods—fell by 24 per cent between 1999-  2000 and 2004-05. However, we cannot be complacent. We still face a major challenge, because of which we have steadily increased funding over the past seven years. We now have record levels of investment in tackling drug problems. We have put improved treatment and rehabilitation services at the heart of our approach. Our support of drug treatment services has nearly doubled since 2000. We are now investing £23.7 million per year, which means that there are more services and there is a better range of treatments. Since last year, an extra £4 million has been provided, which has resulted in more than 2,600 new clients in the period to March 2007. That is in addition to the 14,300 new clients who accessed a wide range of treatment and rehabilitation services in 2004-05. We are committed to providing addicts and their medical advisers with a wide range of treatment and rehabilitation options, from residential detoxification and rehabilitation to community and motivational support and substitute prescribing, to which Rosemary Byrne referred. We are conducting pilot experiments in the use of buprenorphine. We know that, despite all that work, there is no quick fix to tackling drug addiction; neither is there a single treatment option that will work for everyone, which Rosemary Byrne acknowledged.

It might be down to a combination of factors, including a decision by the medical people responsible for dealing with a particular addict about the appropriate course of treatment. As Rosemary Byrne acknowledged, not everyone would benefit immediately from residential rehabilitation or treatment. Beds might be lying empty because of finance or access issues, or because the medical people do not believe that particular individuals are ready for residential rehabilitation. I cannot substitute my opinion for the decisions of medical experts. Margo MacDonald said that she did not want to introduce a note of discord. I prefaced my remarks by saying that I thought that there was a degree of consensus in the Parliament about how we should proceed. Had it not been for the vagaries of the system, we would have supported the Scottish National Party amendment, because there is much in it that we commend to the Parliament.  We need to work together on the treatment and care of drug users, because we owe it to the users, their families and their communities to deal with the real world. We know that drug addiction is a chronic, relapsing condition, but we also know that people's needs change and that we face a challenge. We need to ensure that people get treatment when they need it.

Currently, no doctors in Scotland are licensed to prescribe heroin. Pilot projects are being undertaken in England and we will take account of what happens there. We need to be realistic and honest about such experiments, including those in other countries. They are small-scale and apply to a small number of people for whom every other course of action has failed. Prescribing heroin is not a large-scale solution to the problem that we face. We need to get it in perspective. I want to see more solutions. Rosemary Byrne referred to the model in Glasgow, which has combined health and social care services in partnership under single management in a community setting. It has a properly joined-up system of managed care, where services and clients can plan more easily for a beginning, middle and end to treatment for addiction. I want to visit that model and I invite my colleagues on the justice committees to join me, because I think that we could all learn from what is happening in Glasgow. Because of the time constraints, I will skip to my conclusion. We know that drug treatment is the most effective way of reducing drug-related crime. We know that we need to put money into diversionary activities and early treatment. As the SNP has suggested, we should be spending more on trying to recover the assets of dealers in order to use them to good effect. We will continue to build on the successful model that we have already agreed. I will leave it to others to raise the issues of the declassification, legalisation and decriminalisation of drugs, because I do not have the time to do so. We need to support drug addicts' families and the wider community. We have a clear vision for tackling drug addiction in Scotland. Drug use is not inevitable. I agree that the long-term solution must be a drug-free life, but addicts have to get the support that they need to motivate them towards that goal. We need to give priority to children and young people. Above all, we need to say to those  who are using the substantial resources that we have provided throughout Scotland that they have to be accountable for the use of that money and report back to us on how effectively it has been used. I move amendment S2M-4252.4, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "recognises that drug abuse destroys lives and tears families apart; believes that improved treatment and rehabilitation should be at the heart of our approach; further believes that there is need to help addicts to move towards a drug-free lifestyle by offering a range of interventions; welcomes the progress made but recognises that more needs to be done, particularly to make sure that treatment is linked to further support, and believes that early intervention is the most effective way of helping offenders and reducing drug-related crime."

We are concerned to ensure an adequate supply of high quality legal and other advice services across the country. That underlies our proposals in the "Advice for All" consultation and  our other initiatives on access to justice. We are now considering how best to take those matters forward.

The examples that Jim Wallace cites are good ones. What is happening in Shetland, where good use is made of e-mail, telephone communication and videoconferencing, is highly instructive. If the use of such technology can be shown to work, I think that it should be applied more widely throughout rural Scotland. Understandably, there will be circumstances in which it will not be appropriate to use such methods, but given that they have been shown to work in Shetland, I see no reason why they could not be applied elsewhere. We will consider the matter carefully; we hope to encourage the adoption of new technology whenever that is possible.

Maureen Macmillan has written to me about that issue. I will reply to her shortly. Along with SLAB, we need to reflect on a number of aspects of the matter. We must consider not only the availability of solicitors, but what other options might be provided, including publicly funded solicitors. In addition, certain parts of the rules may need to be examined and perhaps changed. There is no doubt that justice cannot be delivered if parts of Scotland are neglected, so we must demonstrate flexibility and imagination to ensure that everyone has proper access to justice.

Thurso benefited from investment in CCTV in 2002. A number of local authority areas are now utilising quality of life, community safety partnership award programme or antisocial behaviour funding for CCTV. Highland Council has said that £133,000 of quality of life funding in 2006-07 will be spent on CCTV developments. The decisions on where that funding will be allocated are for the council to take.

As I said, a number of budget headings can be used to access funding for the deployment of CCTV cameras. When we come to allocate the funds across Scotland, we do so under agreed criteria. We try to look as objectively as we can at the needs of areas across the country. Many communities in Scotland would make similar pleas to the one that Jamie Stone makes. The funding has already been substantial, and I hope that Highland Council will be able to consider whether some of the other funding headings that I mentioned would give the council the opportunity to make further funding available. We have already seen the effectiveness of such funding in many communities, but it would be wrong of me to suggest that there is additional money available for either Wick or Thurso that might somehow be made available without that happening at the expense of other communities.

The strong message from the 500 responses to our consultation was that a greater degree of independence was needed in arrangements for handling complaints about lawyers. For that reason, the bill seeks to create a Scottish legal complaints commission, which will be independent of the legal profession. We therefore believe that our bill does indeed address the issues that people raised in response to our consultation.

We listened carefully to representations from various quarters, including the legal profession. Although conduct complaints would remain with the legal professional bodies, the commission would have oversight and would be empowered to enforce its recommendations in relation to the professional bodies' casework decisions. Of course, the bill still has to be considered by Parliament, so that it will be a matter for parliamentary determination. I await with interest the exchanges that I will have with the lead committee and with others who choose to participate. I think that we have struck the right balance, but there is much still to be decided as the bill develops.

We provide funding to the Drug Action Team Association and the Scottish Association of Alcohol Action Teams to share good practice among alcohol and drug action teams through seminars, newsletters and regular meetings. We are also setting up a national forum on drug-related deaths and have published several good-practice guides to help ADATs learn from one another about successful approaches to tackling substance misuse.

There are three issues. First, any treatment needs to be clinically proven and medically approved. Secondly, we want to ensure that a range of interventions are available throughout the country. We want pilots to be developed that explore different methods of treatment, because we do not believe that offering one treatment is the best way forward. Thirdly, we must recognise that any decision must be made by the professionals, the medical authorities and the patient, who cannot be dictated to by politicians. If a treatment is safe, available and appropriate, I hope that it can be applied.

I am not familiar with the project in Blantyre, but I met representatives of the Lighthouse project at the invitation of Margaret Jamieson and I listened carefully to what they  said. I recognise the work that is being done in the area. Of course, such local organisations are not directly funded by the Scottish Executive—we make our funding available through intermediary agencies. I think that funding decisions on local projects are best made by those who are familiar with local circumstances. We have continued to increase the amount of money that is available for such projects and we recognise the value of the voluntary sector, but it would be wrong for me to dictate what local provision should look like.

A survey of local authorities in Scotland revealed that nine interim orders were granted in Glasgow in 2004-05. That is an increase from zero in 2003-04. We have no centrally held data on the number of applications for interim antisocial behaviour orders.

Several issues have been raised with me about the use of the new powers. Clearly, there are concerns that the powers are not being used as extensively or as effectively in some parts of the country as in others. That is one reason why we are circulating a regular newsletter among local agencies, politicians and other groups. It will let people see what is happening across Scotland, which will enable them to ask their local agency why it is not using those powers and engaging co-operatively and collaboratively as happens in other areas. I will visit a number of areas to discuss with people how they plan to roll out their use of those powers. Paul Martin can be assured that I will look closely at those areas of the country that appear not to be using the powers and money in the way that was intended.

The Scottish Executive is taking action to address both the symptoms and the causes of antisocial behaviour. As well as introducing new legislation and improving antisocial behaviour services, we are continuing our long-term investment to deal with the causes of antisocial behaviour.

As I said, through both legislation and investment, we are trying to address the symptoms and the causes of antisocial behaviour. What Mike Pringle describes is an operational issue. If there is a rise in antisocial behaviour in a neighbouring area, the relevant agencies should get together to ask how they can use both the investment and the powers available to them to prevent a problem from developing. Ultimately, we must reflect on the need for people throughout our society to face up to their individual responsibility and to address their own behaviour. Parents must show an example to their children and make them aware of what is right and wrong.

That is a matter for local authorities in their area. It is not for ministers to determine what voluntary organisations do in any locality. I recognise the significant contribution that voluntary organisations make to improving the quality of life throughout Scotland. I have visited a number of voluntary organisations in recent years and have been very impressed with what they do to help young offenders, people who have been released from prison and young people. Although I am impressed with that work, the determination of what happens in a local area is a matter for the local funding agencies.

Community safety partnerships have agreed community safety problem-solving plans with the Scottish Executive. Funding for subsequent years will be released subject to satisfactory performance against those plans. We have recruited a national community safety co-ordinator to lead a programme of support and training, to promote best practice and to work with partnerships to improve delivery.

The CCTV van to which Duncan McNeil refers was funded through social inclusion partnership moneys rather than through community safety, but he identifies a real problem. It would be a scandal if any money that the Executive gave to improve safety in the community, under whatever heading, was not used for its intended purposes. I will certainly speak to my colleagues who are responsible for that budget, because we would want some assurances that the money has been used properly. It is unacceptable that a CCTV van should lie in a garage in the way that Duncan McNeil describes. Questions need to be asked of those who are responsible locally and they need to be held to account for any failure on their part.

Yes. Mobile CCTV is one of a range of measures that can be used to assist in reducing crime and antisocial behaviour. I will shortly be announcing the successful bidders for flexible-response CCTV projects in the financial year 2006-07, in line with the commitment that we made in "A Partnership for a Better Scotland" to expand CCTV in shopping and other areas, thereby supporting businesses and others to reduce crime. We will then undertake an evaluation of the impact of public-space CCTV.

Yes. The mobile camera vehicles represent an innovative use of CCTV. Indeed, along with Charlie Gordon, I visited one of the vans in Castlemilk, where it was stationed at the time. I was extremely impressed with the quality of picture and size of area that the camera captured and with the way in which the data were stored and, ultimately, used. The visit helped to convince me that mobile CCTV has a wider application. I am also aware of some of the issues in King's Park. People there could benefit greatly from the siting of such a van in the area. I know that the local agencies—police and others—are favourably disposed towards that. I hope that Charlie Gordon makes the case to those agencies that such a deployment would benefit the local community.

We have commissioned an evaluation of the implementation and impact of community warden schemes, which is expected to report by early 2007. The research will include interviews with young people to explore the impact the schemes have had on their behaviour, as well as surveys to assess the perceptions of residents. We are also funding diversionary activities for young people through the £5 million local action fund. That is being evaluated through the provision of twice-yearly monitoring reports.

Elaine Murray is right to point to the success of the community warden scheme throughout Scotland. A number of people were sceptical about the deployment of community wardens. In my area, the sceptics are now clamouring for the schemes to be extended. Community wardens are well received by communities and work well in partnership with the local police. As well as helping to identify and report potential problems, wardens engage constructively with young people. We provided a finite amount of money for schemes and asked local authorities to identify priority areas, because it is not for the Executive to dictate to local authorities on the matter. We tried to restrict the use of schemes to certain areas, so that wardens would be seen to have an impact. However, a number of people, including Elaine Murray, have made representations to me that a degree of flexibility might enable councils to respond to particular problems as they arise. As long as the core purpose of the wardens is not undermined and key areas are serviced, I am prepared to consider a degree of flexibility to allow a response in particular areas. However, other agencies must be signed up, so that it is not just a case of wardens working in an area for a limited period.

Unfortunately, because of a lack of time, I will not be able to answer all the questions that members have asked, but I will be happy to respond to any member who wishes to write to me. Fiona Hyslop posed a number of valid questions. Although I would argue that, in some areas, we have delivered and moved on, she was right to say that Parliament needs to scrutinise what the Executive has done. We must think carefully about whether what we have delivered has had the appropriate effect or whether there is more to be done. I hope that in a spirit of working together, Parliament and the Executive can reflect on what we have done. Such a debate would be useful. Stewart Stevenson mentioned education and the need to raise people's awareness of the harm that drugs do to stop them becoming addicts in the first place. The Conservatives have repeatedly made  unfortunate comments about the know the score campaign. Some of our material is highly specific and extremely hard-hitting. We have produced adverts on heroin and cocaine that are blunt and to the point. If Annabel Goldie or any other member of the Parliament wants to sit down with me and my officials to examine the material and to discuss whether it is getting the message across or whether we need to change it in any way, I will arrange that. Some of our adverts, featuring programmes such as "Hollyoaks" and "EastEnders", have had national recognition—they have featured on "News at Ten"—which shows that what we are saying is the right way to get a message across. Mary Scanlon spoke about the provision of help and treatment, but we have made available extra resources. When we announced that we would provide an additional £4 million in 2004, we insisted that organisations would have to reduce waiting times if they wanted to get some of that allocation. Other comments have been made, which I do not have time to address. The Conservatives were upset by the comments that I made earlier. They do not like it when people such as me are fairly blunt about the crude message that they put across. Perhaps I should reflect on the language that we use, but perhaps they should do so, too. When I listen to what the Tories say, I sometimes get angry. On such an issue, I am genuinely disappointed that they will not work with members of other parties to reach a sensible conclusion. It is in the interests of everyone in our society for us to put aside petty views and to work together. I hope that if Annabel Goldie and the Tories will not listen to me, they might listen to David Cameron. Although I do not agree with what David Cameron says on a range of issues, including some drugs issues, I think that the Tories should listen to his views on a zero tolerance approach, for example. At the Scottish Tories' conference, Annabel Goldie described David Cameron as a joy and said that he was their political adrenaline. Perhaps Bill Aitken should listen to some of David Cameron's comments. He thinks that the debate has been held back because "Politicians attempt to appeal to the lowest common denominator by posturing with tough policies and calling for crackdown after crackdown." He also thinks that effective educational programmes are essential to reduce the demand for drugs and that it is no good just preaching to young people or telling them that drugs are all the same because they will not listen. His view is that "The simple, bold answers are superficially attractive. Whether it is the authoritarian 'introduce life sentences for all pushers and zero tolerance on street users' or the libertarian 'legalise all drugs, destroy the black market and  treat, rather than punish, those who abuse drugs', both offer seemingly easy solutions to a problem that haunts all western governments." David Cameron is at least taking a more thoughtful approach to such matters. It is just unfortunate that the Conservatives in the Scottish Parliament are not doing the same. Even at this late stage, I appeal to the Scottish Tories to wake up, look around and be a bit more mature. As David Cameron said, drug abuse affects us all. Some people would prefer a tougher approach involving stiffer penalties, a pretence that illegal drugs are all as bad as each other and a just say no campaign for kids. I do not believe that that would work, but if we tell children the facts and explain the dangers, they might just listen; perhaps the Conservatives in Scotland might just listen, too.

This is a useful debate. Such debates are generally characterised by thoughtful speeches—I except those by Conservative members—in which members genuinely try to grapple with a difficult problem. I was struck this week by a letter in The Herald from a drugs expert in California, on methadone and people who criticise its use. That expert said that the first potential problem is the impact that careless adults can have on children and that the second problem is that "drugs most commonly cause insanity in those who have never taken them." I thought that he was describing members of the Conservative party, to whose comments I refer members. We must recognise the significance and scale of the drugs problem, which is why we have invested significantly in tackling it in recent years. We have invested in extra policing and the establishment of the Scottish crime and drug enforcement agency.

What I have said about whether people should take drugs is perfectly clear. I have never taken drugs—indeed, I abhor drugs—and I hope that David Cameron will be as clear and prescriptive in such debates as I am being. We have invested in the police and in additional resources for treatment and rehabilitation because we believe that more needs to be done, particularly where children are growing up in drug-addicted households.

No, thank you. I have only a short time. Drug addicts must be helped to move towards drug-free lifestyles. A range of interventions is appropriate in that respect, which is why I have asked officials to consider what is being done about encouraging abstinence, about methadone and about alternatives. However, we must keep a sense of perspective. Methadone has made a clear and proven contribution to introducing stability to people's lives; equally, people—including those in the Conservative party and in all  the other parties that are represented in the Parliament—are right to be concerned about it. However, medical doctors—not academic doctors or politicians—should decide whether methadone or an alternative should be used, although we must be assured about its use and ask questions about people who are on it, despite its proven success.

Absolutely. That takes me to the point that I was about to make. We must identify suitable treatment and a range of alternatives, but we need protocols for use. We must know who is responsible for allocating treatment, that there is a comprehensive care plan and an exit strategy for people who are on methadone and that someone has responsibility for monitoring the use and reduction of methadone and for getting people off it. At the end of the process, other things must be done to get people into stable lifestyles. We must ensure that they are helped into training and employment, for example. That is why we want the Scottish centre for healthy working lives to focus on helping people back into employment, but there are no easy solutions in that respect. It is right to say that we need more information—that has already been mentioned. More information is needed about the number of addicts, where they are, what drugs they are on and the length of time that they have been on them. As a result, we have taken steps through the Scottish drug misuse database to improve the collection of data to help to shape and improve services. We need to give thought to the issue and we need consensus, not sterile, futile and—frankly—infantile political slogans. I move amendment S2M-4073.3, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "recognises that drug abuse destroys lives and tears families apart; recognises that more needs to be done, particularly to support and protect children in drug misusing households; believes that there should be an early intervention strategy; believes that there is a need to help addicts to move towards a drug-free lifestyle by offering a range of interventions; believes that for those on methadone there should be a care plan which includes an exit strategy from methadone use; believes that there should be an education programme which continues to reinforce the dangers of taking drugs; believes that employability issues should be addressed as part of re-establishing a drug-free stable lifestyle, and welcomes the enhancements to the Scottish Drugs Misuse Database which should lead to an improvement in the collection of data to help shape and target investment and services."

A variety of measures are available to local authorities and the police to monitor and control noise in residential areas under, for example, the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, the Environmental Protection Act 1990, the Road Vehicles (Construction and Use) Regulations 1986 and the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982.

Before I touch on the 2004 act, I want to put on record the powers that are available under the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 to the police and complainants. A complainant can take action against a pet owner under section 49(2) of the 1982 act, by making an application to the district court for an order to be made requiring the owner of the creature to take action to prevent the annoyance from continuing. Under section 43(2) of the 1982 act, the police can seize a dog if the owner refuses to comply with the court order. Our inquiries to North Lanarkshire Council reveal that the council is producing a self-help pack for the public on the ways in which they can take action under section 49(2) of 1982 act. The council plans to publish the pack during noise action week, which will be held this year between 22 and 26 May. North Lanarkshire Council has advised that it uses the new powers under the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 to investigate complaints from barking dogs—

I am sorry—complaints about barking dogs. Sometimes that may be the same thing. The council believes that it can act more quickly using powers under the 2004 act than it can using other legislative powers. If the noise exceeds the permitted level, the council will issue a warning notice. If the notice is not complied with within 10 minutes, the council can issue a fixed-penalty notice. So far, the council has not issued any fixed-penalty notices, nor has it made any seizures.

Does Alex Neil not want to stay to hear about children at risk?

The debate has been exceptionally good, and the contributions have reflected the significance of the bill. I am heartened that, with one notable exception, there is agreement across the Parliament that we need to act to protect the people we serve. Although it is true that we need to be bold and sometimes decisive, the caution that members have urged on us is right. If we take steps that have the potential to impact on individuals, we need to be sure not only that we are doing the right thing but that we have protected people—individuals and communities—in the best possible way. I will return to the question of rights, on which several members, including Kenny MacAskill, touched. It is important to remember the broader context of the bill, and I will try to pick up on as many of members' points as possible. We are fulfilling a commitment to take measures to reduce violent and drug-related crime, with which I do not think anyone could disagree. We have committed ourselves to making communities safer and to making people feel safer in those communities. We have promised steps to reform the legal system, and the bill is another part of that process. Bill Aitken complained about the amount of legislation that we have proposed, but I argue that such legislation is long overdue. If anything, our programme of legislation reflects the fact that we did not have a body such as the Parliament to consider the breadth and volume of legislation required. We are addressing weaknesses and gaps. I agree with Bill Aitken on that. However, the question is now one of enforcement. As Kenny MacAskill suggested, we need to take a step back and to reflect on how that enforcement takes place. We should not impinge on the responsibilities of the police, who have a duty to enforce independently. The Crown Office  has a duty to act, but it does so independently. Our judges have a duty to sentence and to reflect the legislation that we pass, but they do so independently. We need to put the debate on enforcement in that context. The bill is about making communities safer. It is about ensuring that the police have the powers they need to do the job they are required to do and that they are backed up by effective support services. Members have heard from not only the minister but a number of members across the political spectrum that the bill gives the police the powers they need to tackle knife crime, football violence and drug-related crime.

Patrick Harvie is perhaps a bit confused about the issues. I can respond to him on the detail of that by letter. At the moment, I want to concentrate on the broader principles. By using mobile fingerprint readers to check suspects' identity without having to spend time taking them back to the police station, and by requiring suspects to reveal their date and place of birth, the bill will help the police to identify suspects more effectively. I understand the concerns that have been raised about how long fingerprints might be retained for. We have said that they should be destroyed as soon as possible, and I acknowledge that more work needs to be done on that. The difficulty is that if we say that the fingerprint should be dispensed with immediately, does that mean immediately after it is taken? We start to get into arguments. Should it be after seven days? If we do not need to keep it for seven days, why should we do so? There are issues that we need to address and we have tried to phrase the bill in a way that recognises that a fingerprint should not be held for any greater length of time than is absolutely necessary.

We will consider that again, because we recognise that there are concerns. Whatever we do, we need to ensure that it is effective. We need to strengthen prosecutors' ability to get co-operation from criminals who can provide evidence to put other major criminals behind bars. The bill does that. Concerns have been raised about the ECHR. We think that the bill is compliant. Concerns have been raised that the bill might be used and abused by criminals. Yes, we need to be alive to that. However, Jeremy Purvis, I think, made the point about having the opportunity to return to the legislation and remove any advantage given, if we have evidence that that has happened. The bill impacts on many areas. Questions have been asked about the organisation of public processions. The bill will enable local authorities to take account of a wider range of factors when considering marches and parades. Patrick Harvie asked whether the legislation would be used against political demonstrations. All demonstrations and marches should be treated equally—no organisation should be treated any differently. However, the bill will ensure that the rights of communities—which Donald Gorrie alluded to—that have been affected over many years are considered in the same way as the rights of marches and marchers. The provisions in the bill are about ensuring that a balance is struck when decisions are made. I acknowledge that there are concerns about the time period for notifying people that a march has been banned, and we will consider that. We think that our suggestion is reasonable, but it is only proper that we should reflect on the arguments that have been advanced. We will come back to that at stage 2. Comments have been made about police complaints. Donald Gorrie talked about ombudsmania, but Jackie Baillie put it into the proper perspective. Our proposals are about having an independent police complaints commissioner. I do not think that we should be precious about what the commissioner will look like, but their independence must be guaranteed, their rights and powers must be properly enshrined and they must be effective. If the  committee wants to consider what the structure should be and come back with proposals, let us have a further debate at stage 2. Some interesting suggestions have been made that are worth further reflection. Stewart Maxwell raised the issue of mandatory reporting. I suggest that mandatory reporting is not always necessary. In Wales, reporting takes place on a voluntary basis, and the minister referred to a pilot voluntary scheme that started in Paisley yesterday, which I hope will lead to progress. However, the question of the information being used effectively by the police is a point well made. I conclude by putting the bill in the context of human rights, which was an issue raised by Kenny MacAskill. It is important that we recognise human rights as a valid issue for the Parliament to consider. As Kenny MacAskill suggested, it is right that we give due recognition to the rights of individuals. However, it is also correct to say that the human rights of the decent majority in communities throughout Scotland need to be considered. When we talk about human rights, it is incumbent on the Parliament to ensure that we refer not only to a small, specific part of our community. I hope that the bill will give the people we represent confidence that their human rights will be properly addressed.

I will leave aside the point that we intend to double the sentences for the less serious crimes, too. To help me to respond to the debate, it would be useful if Stewart Maxwell said what he is looking for. He has identified the problem, but I am not sure whether his concern is about a failure of the courts to impose sufficient sentences or about a failure, in his perception, of prosecutors to bring appropriate charges. Perhaps he wants us to move in the direction of Tommy Sheridan's proposal for mandatory sentencing.

Too much information. [ Laughter. ]

I expect very shortly to receive a report evaluating the in-court advice pilot projects that are currently operating in Edinburgh, Aberdeen, Airdrie, Dundee, Hamilton and Kilmarnock. However, those projects are not staffed by volunteers.

I pay tribute to the work that volunteers do in many areas of activity throughout Scotland. For example, they do sterling work in supporting victims. The projects that we are talking about now, which are funded by the Executive, employ full-time staff in all the schemes, except the one in Dundee, which has two part-time advisers who are practising solicitors. As a starting point, we placed the pilots in sheriffdoms where there had been no provision. Not all the projects are managed by citizens advice bureaux and CABx would not necessarily be responsible for the service in any roll-out. In Edinburgh, the scheme is managed by Edinburgh central CAB, and the pilots in Airdrie, Aberdeen and Hamilton are managed by the local CABx there. In Dundee, the pilot is a joint CAB and Shelter Scotland project, but the Kilmarnock pilot is managed by East Ayrshire Council. We need to reflect on what has worked, what works well and who would be best placed to manage and run a local service. However, I take seriously Donald Gorrie's suggestion that when it is appropriate for volunteers to be involved, they can make a significant contribution. I never fail to be impressed by their enthusiasm, their willingness to train and their professionalism and dedication, which I hope that we can draw on in many future areas of activity.

As I announced in the Family Law (Scotland) Bill stage 3 debate on 15 December, the Executive is introducing two new initiatives to help to address the problem of non-compliance with contact orders: a pilot project to appoint contact compliance officers to Scottish courts and new research to help us to understand the nature and scope of the problem better.

The matter was debated fully during stages 2 and 3 of the Family Law (Scotland) Bill. Parliament came to a considered view, to which I referred earlier. Irrespective of the conclusion that Parliament drew in relation to the bill, court orders are a matter for the courts to enforce. It is not for politicians to interfere with the judiciary or to dictate to it what should happen in the event of non-compliance with a court order. Serious measures are available to the courts should someone refuse to obey a court order, but that matter is best left to the judiciary.

Local communities across Scotland are rightly putting pressure on local agencies to make full use of the measures that we have provided to tackle antisocial behaviour. We are supporting them by keeping the public informed of the positive local results through publications such as our community newsletter, which has just been issued—copies have been given to members of the Scottish Parliament—and our first anniversary report on the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. Local agencies are preparing antisocial behaviour outcome agreements, which include clear targets, and the Executive is monitoring their performance.

Janis Hughes makes an important and serious point. In passing the act, Parliament clearly expressed not only its determination to make an improvement throughout Scotland but its determination that the act be used to protect the public whom we serve. It would be outrageous if any agency or individual decided that they would defy the will of Parliament and not apply legislation where it should be applied. However, we should acknowledge that with any new legislation there is a learning and settling-in period. As I said in the members' business debate last night, which Christine May introduced to highlight some of the excellent work that is being done in Fife, there are good examples of the law being used. We have seen clear action in Fife through the use of closure orders, seizure of vehicles and vehicle warning notices and we have seen the successful introduction of a pilot project in Tayside. One of the reasons for producing a regular newsletter to be issued throughout Scotland is to ensure that not just elected representatives and agencies but the public know how well the act is beginning to be used in certain parts of the country. That will give people the confidence to ask their local representatives for the same support.  We will engage with agencies. We will consider the antisocial behaviour outcome agreements and the plans and meet to have discussions in the areas where we perceive slight weaknesses. MSPs and councillors also have a role in considering what is happening in their area and meeting the police and councils to ensure that the legislation is being applied effectively.

I thank Christine May for the opportunity to, in her words, celebrate and focus on the responsible majority. She is absolutely right; the majority of people in communities across Scotland want to lead quiet and peaceful lives. They want to be good neighbours and citizens. In too many  places in Scotland, it is a disgrace that the tiny minority of people that members spoke about are causing such mayhem and blighting the lives of so many. That cannot be allowed. It is right that we need to work to change behaviour. We need a long-term strategy to make people behave responsibly; we need to eliminate poverty and deprivation. I will repeat something that I have said on many occasions, and which Ted Brocklebank mentioned in passing: poverty is no excuse for bad behaviour. Many members grew up in poor circumstances, but our parents would not have allowed us to behave in the way that some people are allowed to behave today. It is a slight and an insult to poor people to always associate them with bad behaviour. Some of the examples that I hear about are of bad behaviour from people who are well-to-do and who have access to means, but who do not give a damn about those around them. We need to put that in perspective. Christine May gave some excellent examples of how partnership between the Executive, local authority, police and local agencies can begin to make a difference. When we give support, either by way of legislation—which, as Trish Godman said, provides back-up to communities—or by way of funding, it makes a difference only if there is the imagination and determination at the local level to make a difference. Christine May gave some very good examples of how CCTV, community wardens, drink-driving campaigns and action to tackle drug dealers has an impact on local communities. The time2act campaign in Fife is an exceptionally good approach; we will wait with interest to see exactly what results it produces. Mention was also made of examples such as the use of a mobile CCTV unit in Buckhaven. I am extremely interested in how that initiative pans out. I have seen a mobile CCTV unit at work in Glasgow and I am extremely impressed by the flexibility and quality of evidence and information that can be obtained from such units. Flexibility is key to what mobile CCTV can bring: instead of using a fixed unit to target one or two streets, a mobile unit can be deployed to the locations where there is a problem. I assure Christine May that I will see whether the Executive can build on that work, by whatever means. Christine May asked me to visit Fife. I must apologise to her in some respects. Last year, Scott Barrie asked me to visit Fife to look at some of the issues in Dunfermline, which I know apply elsewhere, and I am remiss in not having done so as yet. I will come to Fife to see what is going on. I have visited Fife on a number of occasions to launch or participate in some of the initiatives that were mentioned in the debate. Fife has a  commendable record in applying legislation, policy and resources in an imaginative way. I want to correct some of the comments that Patrick Harvie made, one of which was that enforcement measures are not the solution because they are not being taken up. In addressing his comments, I will leave aside the issue of ASBOs. As Iain Smith said, if ASBOs are not being used, it is a sign of success. To some extent there is no need to take action in safe and effective communities where there are no problems. However, it is not a sign of success if the problems are allowed to persist because the measures are not being used. I encourage councils across Scotland to use the measures. I return to Patrick Harvie's point about the antisocial behaviour measures not being taken up. Across Scotland we have had 12 closure orders on premises, at least four of which were made in Fife, which is leading the way in Scotland. We have also had 366 warning notices on the seizure of vehicles, with 16 vehicles seized. Again, Fife, is leading the way, with 198 notices and nine seizures respectively. We have had 688 warning notices and 33 fixed-penalty notices for noise nuisance. The fixed-penalty notice pilot on antisocial behaviour in Tayside has resulted in 2,300 fixed-penalty notices being issued. We have had 28 ASBOs on conviction and 16 electronic monitorings for under-16s through the children's hearings system. We have had 26 community reparation orders. Do not tell me that the measures are not being used. My concern is that they are being used very effectively in some areas but not to the same effect elsewhere. We need to find out what lies behind that. Tonight's debate has been a good one. As Mary Mulligan rightly said, antisocial behaviour undermines confidence. Also, as I said earlier, antisocial behaviour does not only happen in the most deprived areas. In addition to highlighting problems in Port Glasgow, which is a deprived community, Trish Godman gave examples of the better-off areas in her constituency where antisocial behaviour is a problem. One of the areas that she did not mention tonight, about which she has spoken to me on a number of occasions, is Bridge of Weir. That is another apparently relatively affluent area that suffers from persistent antisocial behaviour in one or two parts of the town. I agree that there are issues to tackle. One issue that was raised is that of police numbers and how the police are used. I remind Ted Brocklebank that we do not accept that the number of police officers that we inherited from the Conservatives was sufficient. That is why we have increased police numbers to record levels. Moreover, we have a system and a principle of allowing chief constables  to decide at a local level how staff and resources are used operationally in particular areas.

No I will not, because I am just about to finish. It is a matter for chief constables to decide how they use their resources. Fife constabulary has a record of being at the forefront of using resources effectively, and I congratulate everybody in that police force on that record. Christine May has done us a service in allowing us to explore some of the general issues. I was intrigued by Ted Brocklebank's parable of poor Annabel, who was subject to antisocial behaviour. I do not diminish the seriousness of that individual's problems, but I wondered whether there was more to the parable of Annabel suffering from antisocial behaviour, being menaced and threatened by people around her who were behaving badly and not being able to find any solace until those responsible were removed. Annabel in Fife has finally found some solace; I hope that, in the Parliament, the other Annabel might eventually find similar solace. Tonight's debate has been interesting, and I thank all the members who participated. I congratulate all those in Fife who are tackling antisocial behaviour and I look forward to seeing at first hand the difference that is being made there and elsewhere.  Meeting closed at 17:52.

We are currently considering the conclusions of further work that was undertaken in response to our initial consultation exercise on the review of emergency fire control rooms in Scotland. In addition, we have asked Her Majesty's chief inspector of fire services to produce a report on the Scottish fire and rescue services' ability to cope with the communications challenge of a major emergency in light of the bomb attacks in London on 7 July. We will make an announcement to Parliament and stakeholders in due course.

Local knowledge is a key feature in the ability to respond quickly, but so too is having access to the appropriate level of technology and information. It would be remiss of us not to reflect on the consequences and aftermath of the London bombings. We need to ensure that our infrastructure is capable and that our staff are well trained—they are and they do a fantastic job—and we need to take the time to get it right and consider all relevant factors.

I find that statement shameful, shocking and utterly irresponsible. I acknowledge the anxieties that are caused people by uncertainty about their future. However, if we are a mature organisation and a Parliament worthy of that name, it is incumbent on us to take time to make the right decision. We need to reflect on serious events and ensure that money goes to the right places for the right equipment. Some of the investment decisions that we need to make will have to be substantial. It would be wrong of us to behave in the way that Bruce Crawford suggests. We need to get it right so that we protect people throughout Scotland.

I start by clarifying a point that arose when we were dealing with amendments. Stewart Stevenson asked about the tense of a word in the bill. I apologise for any confusion about the meaning of "attended" in schedule 1, paragraph 6(a)(iv). We mean the school that is being attended; the word is used in the present tense. I hope that that puts the matter to rest. I join others in thanking a number of people. I thank the Justice 1 Committee for its work, which has been a good example of the Executive and a committee being able to work together. There has been give and take on both sides and we have had to listen. I understand the pressures on the committee. The bill is complex and it took a long time to get through. I recognise that the committee was working to deadlines. Committee members, supported valiantly by their clerks and others, did a fantastic job in getting us to where we are today. I also thank the Executive's bill team: Carol Duncan, Moira Wilson, Alex Mowat, Neil Robertson, Kirsty Finlay, Anne Cairns and David McLeish. Not only have they been tremendous in  supporting Cathy Jamieson and me, but they worked with committee members and attempted to support them where further clarification was needed. They have helped us through an enormously difficult job. I agree with what Marlyn Glen said about having a great sense of achievement, although I hope that it is not too churlish to say that I also feel a great sense of relief now that we have got to this stage. There have been achievements and it is right to put the bill in context. It will not resolve every failure or every problem in our country. In a sense, we need such a bill only because problems exist. If everybody got on well together and was able to resolve their difficulties without any aggravation or dispute, there would be no need for the bill. However, human nature being what it is, with people not being able to agree, we have had to build in certain degrees of protection. That is why there is a huge sense of achievement. We have righted a number of wrongs that it has taken some time to address. As Jim Wallace said, one of the benefits of having the Parliament is that we have been able to do that. I hope that, on reflection, people will recognise the significance of what we are doing. We are legislating not for the Scotland of our personal beliefs, not for the Scotland in which we grew up and not for the Scotland of the church or group in society to which we belong, but for Scotland as we find it—a Scotland in which people make decisions in their own way. We are legislating to address not just the wrongs but the problems that existed. For many years, there were myths about the rights of unmarried fathers in relation to their children. Those rights just did not exist, but now we have introduced parental responsibilities and rights. It is right to talk not just about the rights but the responsibilities that parents have to make a difference to their children. It is a disgrace in many respects that many men in particular walk away from their children, turn their back on them and do no more for them. It is right that we give them rights but also responsibilities. It is right that we have done away with the wrong in relation to the concept of illegitimacy. It is right that we should examine how to help parents to do what is a difficult job. Alan Finlayson has done tremendous work in developing a parenting agreement that will be of enormous value and benefit over the coming years. It is right that we had the opportunity to discuss the difficulties that many grandparents faced in trying to maintain contact with their children. It is right that we were able to give recognition to the fantastic job that grandparents do across Scotland. I hope that the bill will help to create a better context in which grandparents can be seen as valuable parts of an extended family. We should have a sense of pride in being able to address a problem—[ Interruption. ]

It is right that we were able to address an anomaly that existed for certain people in the Jewish faith. I am proud that we were able to do something about that. It is right that we were able to address the myth that, in so-called common-law marriages, women had certain rights and protections. They did not and we have recognised that there is a need to protect people—usually women—who find themselves in a vulnerable position in a relationship. It might disappoint Susan Deacon and others but, by doing that, we have not extended the same rights to those people as are available to people who are married. Marriage still has a certain status in our society that we value. Nevertheless, that should not prevent us from trying to right the wrongs that many people who live together have experienced. It is right that we addressed some of the problems that fathers had in getting access to their children. I am pleased that we have introduced measures that will, we hope, help to make contact orders more effective. We have righted a number of wrongs and can take great pride in that. After this debate, I will also be left with the words of Murdo Fraser ringing in my ears. He said: "I am a lawyer and I am confused." What is new about that? The Scottish Parliament has much to be proud of in passing the bill. Being a member of the Parliament is a privilege. It is a privilege to be allowed to make a difference for the people whom we represent across Scotland. Sometimes that means making difficult decisions, falling out with people and perhaps not pleasing everyone. Sometimes, however, we simply have to do what is right; I think that, in the bill, we have done what is right.

Amendments 31, 33 and 34 seek to add three minor repeals to schedule 3. Section 19 of the Court of Session Act 1988 makes provision for the Lord Advocate to enter into any actions of declarator of nullity of marriage or for divorce. Section 38B of the Sheriff Courts (Scotland) Act 1907 makes equivalent provision for actions that are brought in the sheriff court. Section 129 of the Civil Partnership Act 2004 makes corresponding provision for actions of declarator of nullity of a civil partnership or for dissolution of a civil partnership. That was done to ensure equal treatment for civil partners. However, the power is outdated and has rarely been used in the past 20 years. Persuasive arguments have been made that there is no clear need or justification for the retention of the statutory  provision in question. I move amendment 31.  Amendment 31 agreed to.  [Amendments 32 to 34 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.]

In establishing a right for a cohabitant to apply to the court for a discretionary award when their partner dies intestate, we will introduce a degree of fairness into an unhappy situation, with provisions that are just and equitable. We have tried to ensure that any surviving spouse's or civil partner's position will remain intact and that the total award to a cohabitant will be limited to the amount to which they would have been entitled had they been a spouse or civil partner of the deceased. Beyond that, the courts will be expected to decide what is  fair and reasonable in the circumstances of each case, within the rules that are set out in section 22. The court will first of all refer to the definition of "cohabitant" in section 18. The applicant will have to satisfy the test that is set out there before the court considers the application for an award. The court will then consider the factors that are set out in section 22(3), which include "the size and nature of the deceased's net intestate estate" as well as "any benefit received, or to be received" by the surviving cohabitant from the estate and "the nature and extent of any other rights against, or claims on, the deceased's net intestate estate". Amendment 47 seeks to introduce an additional factor for the court to consider in determining the award: the length of time that the cohabitants lived together. That displays a wee bit of misunderstanding of the discretion that will be available to the court. Section 18 will determine whether the applicant is eligible to be considered for an award. Once that has been established, the discretion that will be available to the court will relate to the circumstances of the individual estate. Therefore, the court will not carry out an exercise in determining who is more worthy or deserving or whether someone who lived with their partner for 10 years is entitled to more than they would have got if their partner had died six years earlier; instead, the court will examine the size and nature of the estate and the other legitimate claims that can be made on it. A cohabitant who lived with someone for 10 years where the deceased has no surviving spouse or children might get a different outcome from a cohabitant who lived with a partner for 10 years but whose partner remained married and had children with the spouse and/or another previous partner. Amendment 48 seeks to make matters clear by putting it beyond doubt that the calculation of any children's legal rights should be postponed until the discretionary award that is to be made to the cohabitant has been satisfied. However, that would fetter the discretion of the court in such matters. The issue is more complex than amendment 48 suggests; it is not simply an either/or situation. Among other matters, a child's claim on the estate would be taken into account in the decision on the award. In certain circumstances—for example if the cohabitant was entitled to a large pension settlement from the deceased's estate—the court might wish to set aside a sum to meet the child's legal rights in their entirety before deciding on the award to the cohabitant. In other cases, the circumstances described by the amendment would be appropriate. The matter must be left to the  discretion of the court, which will take into account all the facts and circumstances.

Clearly, that would be one of a number of factors that would need be taken into account; it is not appropriate to specify one factor. I move to amendment 49, in the name of Stewart Stevenson. I am sorry that he understood only the three words "Dear Stewart". I will try to clarify the issue; I will write again to see whether we can provide more clarity. As Stewart Stevenson said, he seeks to address an unusual situation in which there has been some time between the person dying and a declarator of death being made. We are satisfied—this is the nub of the letter, although the legalese may not have been understood—that the terms of section 22 are sufficiently wide and give the court sufficient discretion to ensure that all the circumstances that he raises can be covered. I urge Parliament to reject amendments 47, 48 and 49.

Amendments 50 and 51 are technical. We are amending the definition of "child" in section 18(3) of the Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981 to follow more closely the definition that is used elsewhere in the act. As section 24 of the Family Law (Scotland) Bill is adding new provisions to the 1981 act, for the sake of consistency it makes sense that "child" has the same definition throughout. I turn now to amendment 4. Section 8 of the bill amends the Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981 by extending matrimonial interdicts to include not only a matrimonial home but any other home occupied by the applicant, the applicant's place of work and the school attended by any child in the applicant's permanent or temporary care. Section 24 of the bill makes similar provision for domestic interdicts for cohabiting couples in relation to their family home. Those changes are replicated for civil partners in schedule 1. However, the wording that is used at section 8(2)(b)(iv) to describe schools attended by children in the care of an applicant spouse has not been mirrored exactly in the drafting of the equivalent provision for applicant civil partners, which is paragraph 6(b)(iv) of schedule 1, which will become part of section 113(2)(b) of the Civil Partnership Act 2004. I understand that amendment 4 aims to bring the drafting of the relevant interdict provisions in schedule 1 into line with that for matrimonial interdicts in section 8 and domestic interdicts in section 24. I am therefore happy to support amendment 4, which is very useful. I move amendment 50.

I am sorry, but I am not able to give that specific clarification. Do we want to delay proceedings till I find it? I am actively searching for the provision among my papers—I am not sure of the tense. As well as being a mathematical expert, Stewart Stevenson is clearly a language expert.  Amendment 50 agreed to.  [Amendment 51 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.]

If you will bear with me, Presiding Officer, I am still seeking that word. I believe that "attended" means "going to", but I do not know what that then does.—[ Laughter. ] The effect of amendment 25 is to amend the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 at section 24 to include civil partners, as well as married people, in the provisions relating to the termination of a power of attorney, thus ensuring that civil partners are treated in the same way as spouses in the legislation. I move amendment 25.  Amendment 25 agreed to.

I have some sympathy with Stewart Stevenson on this, but I will not say too much about the scourge of domestic abuse. It could be argued that a more descriptive definition of conduct would be helpful, but we believe that the bill as drafted is sufficiently wide in scope to include the behaviour described in amendment 45. However, if we were to be as prescriptive as amendment 45, there would be a danger that some forms of threatening or abusive behaviour might not be considered by the courts because they were not listed in the bill. We need to avoid that situation. We think that section 17A strikes the right balance. The drafting of subsection (7B)(d) quite deliberately mirrors the definition of abuse that is contained in the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001. Without a complementary change to the provisions of the 2001 act, there would be the potential for considerable confusion. We do not want to move away from a position of clarity and consistency, so we hope that Stewart Stevenson will withdraw amendment 45.  Amendment 45, by agreement, withdrawn.

On the question about the timescale, research will take some time. We will start that as early in the new year as we can. I give the chamber a guarantee that the compliance officer will start work as soon as we are able to scope the job and to recruit. The funding will be made available before the end of this financial year and the work will probably start in the next financial year.

To answer Christine Grahame's final point, we will scope that, but it is for the court to determine what is best and to try to resolve problems. The purpose of compliance officers is contact enforcement. They will report to the court, after which it will be for the court to determine exactly what happens. We are committed to the delivery of high-quality public services, which is why we give a huge amount of support to local government through grant-aided expenditure, the changing children's services fund and other funding sources. Under the way in which we operate in Scotland, it is then a matter for local government—the democratically elected local councils—to deliver services locally. I recognise that it is for local authorities, working with partners, to determine their local service priorities based on local need. In that way, they can secure the outcomes that matter locally. Therefore, it would be wrong for us to build an infrastructure in which local services are funded directly from the centre.  However, I also acknowledge the point that Mary Mulligan made and that other members made in the committee, which is that local councils must be held to account locally, given that there are huge gaps in provision across Scotland. Stewart Stevenson also made that point. The question is whether it is for us to determine what happens in a local area or whether that is a matter for the council. The money that we put in will go towards trying to encourage the development of local services. As we have not quite finalised the arrangement, at this stage I would prefer that we put more effort into looking to help people to work through relationship problems by using counselling and conciliation services. We already spend money on mediation, which also has a contribution to make. We are not talking about a universal service that everyone should have; people need the service at certain times in their lives and in different ways. This is about local needs being responded to locally by those responsible. I said this morning that I am arranging a meeting with COSLA to discuss concerns about patchy service delivery. Mary Mulligan mentioned the excellent way in which South Lanarkshire Council uses the changing children's services fund. Why have other councils not done the same? We give the money to local government to use as they see fit in local areas. Why is it that the arrangement  can work very well in some areas but not in others? I want to explore that issue further. I know from talking to the convener of the Justice 1 Committee that the committee may well come back to the issue. A statutory obligation on local authorities to provide services in a specific way would have significant financial implications, as they would come straight back to us to ask for more money. This morning I heard SNP members shout to Conservative members about what was, in comparison, a relatively modest financial proposal. The SNP members asked, "Where will the money come from? Have you costed the proposal?" We could say exactly the same about this proposal, which would involve a huge financial burden, for which there is no blank cheque. I know exactly what Stewart Stevenson is trying to do. We sympathise with his aim and we will work to try to improve service delivery locally in an appropriate manner. We want new models of working. We want joint working and better integration of services such as counselling, mediation and conciliation throughout the country. We want more effort to be put in at the start of the process rather than at the end. That is why we announced the funding this morning. Stewart Stevenson's amendments are well intentioned, but they would have completely the wrong effect. I worry about what the consequences would be if they were agreed to. Therefore, if he does not withdraw amendment 44 or moves amendment 53, I ask Parliament to oppose them.

The warning will be effective only if there are sanctions to back it up. The sanctions to back up the warning affect the parties differently. One party faces far graver sanctions for non-compliance than the other. I have already mentioned the potential for people to feel intimidated.

However, it remains for the court to determine how issues should be raised, whether warnings should be given and what action should be taken. We are attempting to deal with issues that are best left to the rules of court. We do not think that section 17B is the best way of proceeding, which is why amendment 15 has been lodged.  We are concerned that the issues raised by both Sylvia Jackson and Pauline McNeill are substantial, and we intend to move on two fronts. First, we want to determine the extent of the problem. When Sylvia Jackson drew attention to it, we found that there was a lack of accurate information and statistics. Some of the information was not particularly pertinent to Scotland. At stage 2, I gave the commitment that we would undertake research into post-separation contact arrangements. We need to scope the extent and shape of the problem, to understand what works and does not work and to examine the durability of the arrangements. Once we have a clear understanding of the problem in Scotland, we can start to design specific solutions. If it transpires that court-based solutions are needed—we do not know for certain that that is the case—and that the issue cannot be addressed through changes to the rules of court, we will seek a suitable legislative vehicle to introduce those solutions. I hope that the civil justice review that we intend to carry out will offer us scope to do that. My second point is that, in direct response to what Sylvia Jackson, Pauline McNeill and others have said, we propose a pilot project to explore issues relating to contact enforcement. I will give members an outline of the proposals. It will be an outline only, because much remains to be developed with key partners, including the judiciary and the Scottish Court Service. We propose to establish a contact compliance officer, initially in one or two courts. The overall purpose of the post will be to contribute to local resolution of disputed contact cases, to provide data and analysis for wider research into the causes of breach of contact and to contribute to developing ideas for options for reducing the incidence of such breach and securing the parties' continued exercise of their parenting role. The proposals are very much in the early stages, but we will work up a fully developed project plan that will establish a framework for the role of contact compliance officers and their interface with the court and the parties involved. The officers' functions are likely to include: early and protracted involvement in cases in which a contact order has been breached; becoming a point of contact between the parties; supporting and giving the parties practical advice, including information about relevant services; explaining to parties the consequences of failure to obey the court order; and calling on mediators' skills, if appropriate. That goes some way to realising what Sylvia Jackson is trying to achieve with her amendment, but it also recognises the concerns that she and Pauline McNeill have. Cost is an issue when one party has access to legal aid and the other does not. I will have further discussions with the Scottish Legal Aid Board  about how the rules are applied and whether changes need to be made. It cannot be right that one party can use legal aid to thwart another party's access to justice without further consideration. We will negotiate with sheriff principals to explore the structure of the role of contact compliance officers and how they could add value to the current family court system. We will also explore the possibility either of using the existing rules of court or making new ones to make provision for the referral of appropriate cases to the contact compliance officer. Amendment 42, in the name of Pauline McNeill, seeks to speed up court procedures. She has recognised the Executive belief that the amendment is unnecessary because the existing court rules are sufficient. The rules direct the court, in appropriate cases, to set a child welfare hearing for the next suitable date, allowing 21 days between the lodging of the notice of intention to defend and the hearing. Amendment 42 also cuts across the existing provision for making rules of court either by acts of sederunt or by rules of the court of session. The judiciary, rather than ministers, should determine court procedures. That maintains the independence of the judiciary. I hope that with those assurances, Pauline McNeill will withdraw her amendment.

The problem is that the same force would not come down on the father who did not turn up because he was watching the football, as would come down on the resident parent. We would be warning people about consequences that are completely and utterly uneven. That is the problem.

Amendment 15 removes section 17B, which was inserted into the bill by an amendment from Sylvia Jackson at stage 2. Section 17B seeks to compel the courts, when making or varying a contact order, to attach to it a notice warning of the consequences of failing to comply with the contact order. I understand what drove Sylvia Jackson to lodge her stage 2 amendment and what was behind some of the other issues that she raised at that stage. Indeed, both Sylvia Jackson and Pauline McNeill have been diligent in pressing an issue of  genuine injustice at times when one parent is denied access to their children. As a parent myself, I could not begin to imagine what it would be like not to have access to my child, despite having a court order to support me. Pauline McNeill was absolutely right to outline some of the implications, of both cost and the significant time that it takes to resolve such issues. I sympathise with what Sylvia Jackson attempted to achieve to improve the quality of contact between children and their separated parents. However, section 17B as constructed could be unhelpful. It could be unduly intimidating to warn parents, before either of them had done anything wrong, of the consequence of non-compliance. At worst, it could encourage one parent to seek opportunities to threaten the other with consequences, for even the slightest breach. Our main motivation for lodging amendment 15 was the unintended consequences of section 17B. If it achieved simply what Sylvia Jackson was seeking to achieve, we might have been able to live with it. Unfortunately, it affects each party differently. The resident parent could face harsher consequences than the non-resident parent. Having listened and spoken to Sylvia Jackson, I do not think that she intended that.

I point out to Phil Gallie—this is also relevant to what Donald Gorrie said—that Rosemary Byrne's amendment does not mention a grandparents charter. The amendment deals with the charter for grandchildren and looks at the matter from the child's perspective. Some members have concentrated on grandparents, but the amendment focuses on grandchildren.

Rosemary Byrne's amendment 41 seeks to ensure that the court has "regard to the charter for grandchildren". It is important to keep emphasising that we are taking the child's perspective. We have emphasised that throughout the bill. Kenny MacAskill was right to say that we need to consider the child's best interests. Christine Grahame explained in detail how the courts examine the broader range of issues and consider the contribution that members of the wider family can make in a child's interests. Margaret Mitchell  is right: the amendment would not achieve the desired outcome. We started by developing a grandparents charter but, as discussions progressed, it became clear that we had to shift the focus back to grandchildren. It would have been wrong to consider an adult's interests ahead of those of a child. The charter is one of several packages of non-legislative projects that we are undertaking, including the parenting agreement and a public information campaign. A range of organisations supported the drafting of the charter. We involved people from organisations such as the Association of Directors of Social Work, the Family Law Association, Parenting Across Scotland, Family Mediation Scotland, the Grandparents Apart self-help group, Stepfamily Scotland, Children in Scotland, Scottish Women's Aid and Families Need Fathers. To avoid doubt, given that we are talking about grandchildren and not grandparents, it is useful to put on record our recognition of the tremendous role that many grandparents play. Christine Grahame is right: some grandparents play an inordinately invaluable role, although others may be quite obstructive. In general, we know that grandparents do a huge amount throughout the country. When we debated financial support this morning, Cathy Jamieson said that we are considering a range of measures. We know that many grandparents step into the breach when parents have failed for whatever reason—whether it is medical, social or personal problems. Grandparents may be left with the burden at a time when they should, in a sense, be winding down. We need to examine how to support them far better and we are doing that.

The charter is not mentioned elsewhere. Kenny MacAskill and other members spelled out why neither the charter nor the parenting agreement is mentioned in the bill. Those documents are non-legislative and are designed to help people; they will not be legal documents. The court will take into account many factors, such as anything that a parenting agreement says. It will listen to children and consider the contributions from other family members. However, the charter was never designed to be a legal document. As Margaret Mitchell said, Rosemary Byrne's proposal would not achieve the desired outcome. I have tremendous sympathy with what Rosemary  Byrne seeks and I have put on record our appreciation of the work that grandparents do throughout Scotland. The charter was drawn up to recognise the value that grandparents can add to their grandchildren's lives but, in practical terms, it does not serve any real purpose. In considering orders that relate to children, the courts will take into account current arrangements for a child, parents' views and, as Christine Grahame said, the views of other family members such as grandparents, if appropriate. The charter says nothing about the relationship between children and their grandparents, so to compel sheriffs to have regard to the charter when they consider the granting of a contact order would at best be inappropriate. If the amendment were agreed to, it could also reduce the flexibility for revision in future. The intention is honourable and right and we sympathise with it. However, the practical effect would not be achieved. I ask Rosemary Byrne to withdraw her amendment.

Amendments 12, 13, 14 and 32 deal with the representations that we received in the wake of amendments to the bill at stage 2 that were designed to abolish the concept of illegitimacy. Many commentators have expressed their desire to see the concept of illegitimacy removed from Scottish law. However, as illegitimacy impacts on two reserved areas—succession to hereditary titles and the granting of arms—it is not within the competence of the Scottish Parliament to abolish the concept in its entirety. I will leave it to members' imagination as to who might still be classified as illegitimate. The provisions that were introduced at stage 2 attempted to achieve the retrospective abolition of illegitimacy from Scots law with a saving provision that the abolition does not affect those reserved matters. However, since the amendments were made, a couple of points have been brought to our attention that require further consideration. The first concerns new section 1(4) of the Law Reform (Parent and Child) (Scotland) Act 1986, as introduced by section 15B of the bill. It has been argued that the provisions in subsection (4), which explains how references to enactments and deeds that were passed prior to the commencement of section 15B are to be read, are too narrow and run the risk of missing out people who are currently regarded as legitimate. Although the risk is small, it is unacceptable. Amendment 12 provides that the changes made by the bill will not affect enactments or deeds that were passed or made before the commencement of section 15B. Although that represents a shift in policy from a retrospective to a prospective abolition, it provides much-needed clarity and ensures that the position is both straightforward and unambiguous. Amendment 32 is an additional repeal that is made necessary by that change. Secondly, questions were raised about the relationship between the removal from the law of declarators of legitimacy, illegitimacy and  legitimation and the reserved matters of succession to or devolution of hereditary titles. It was drawn to our attention that, although the existing saving provisions in the 1986 act refer to the titles and the way in which they may transmit on death, they do not extend to the means by which a person may establish whether there is any entitlement to such transmission. Amendments 13 and 14 allow for the retention of such actions in the limited circumstances that there is a connection with the succession to or devolution of a title, coat of arms, honour or dignity that is transferable on the death of the holder. I move amendment 12.  Amendment 12 agreed to.  [Amendments 13 and 14 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.]

The available recorded crime statistics do not include a breakdown by class of drug. However, figures show that 4,307 seizures were made of class A drugs in 2003, which is the most recent year for which data are available.

We have expanded the operations of the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency significantly and given it new powers. Its work is significant. I am impressed not just by its work within Scotland, but by its increasing number of international links. The SDEA has identified a challenge that faces society as a whole and it in particular. It must have access to expertise that matches the expertise of the major criminal gangs. We are funding and supporting the development of expertise in financial operation matters and in information technology. I am not complacent, because I realise that, because of the profits involved, every time that we make progress, the criminals seek other opportunities. Nevertheless, I am heartened by the excellent work that the SDEA is carrying out.

Local antisocial behaviour strategies and outcome agreements include clear targets against which the Executive monitors performance. Ministers regularly meet local delivery agencies and communities—for example, the First Minister was in Aberdeen earlier this week. We also produce publications, such as "Standing up to Antisocial Behaviour: First Anniversary Report" and our regular community newsletter. Those give examples of positive action being taken in communities throughout Scotland in the fight against antisocial behaviour.

I cannot speak for the handful of Scottish councils that have used either no or only one or two antisocial behaviour orders in the past two years. Councils must make decisions about the circumstances that pertain in their local areas. I would be disappointed if any local authority set its face against using the significant powers for political reasons. We have given the powers to local delivery agencies because people throughout Scotland were yearning for action to be taken to tackle insidious antisocial behaviour. I am encouraged that we are—slowly but surely—seeing the effective application of those powers. However, I acknowledge that some areas are more active in using the powers than others. One of the reasons why we produce a regular newsletter is to let people—not only local authorities but local agencies and communities—throughout Scotland know what is happening. If nothing is happening in their area, they can point to good examples elsewhere and ask why such action is not happening in their locality.

It is not for politicians to determine the use of ASBOs on conviction, but we are ensuring that people across Scotland are aware of the powers that are available. We want people to be aware of the application of ASBOs on conviction and we want to promote and encourage examples of good practice so that others can take confidence. On a number of occasions, we have discussed in the chamber some of the excellent initiatives that have given respite to communities across Scotland. I am heartened that people are now beginning to see the benefits of the legislation that we have passed.

As part of a package of measures that includes prevention, diversion and early intervention, antisocial behaviour orders are a very useful tool in bringing respite to hard-pressed communities and in dealing with people who persistently refuse to change their behaviour. More ASBOs are being applied for and granted; there was a significant increase between 2003-04 and 2004-05. That shows that agencies are finding them an appropriate and valuable form of intervention.

We need to be careful when discussing breaches because in some cases there are multiple breaches and we do not know how many people are directly involved. We are looking into that. We are at an early stage, but I am heartened that the majority of ASBOs are being complied with and that a pattern is emerging of breaches being dealt with quickly. Once the message gets out that breaches of ASBOs will be dealt with quickly—Margaret Smith is right to emphasise the  importance of that—I am sure that people will think twice about breaching them. The word is now getting out that ASBOs are not just useful but effective.

Murdo Fraser spoke about the primacy of committee decisions on this matter. Could that be a member of the same Conservative group that regularly votes against committee decisions when they come back to the chamber? He suggested that we should take the decision that was made at stage 2 as being the line that should be held and said that it would not do anything for the reputation of the Parliament if we ignored that. If we followed that argument to its logical conclusion, we would not bother with any votes at stage 3 at all. This is about Parliament coming to an informed decision and, on the basis of the discussion that we have had today, I believe that the decision that we will take will be an informed one. We have had a very good, measured debate from all sides. I recognise the difficulties that many members face when contemplating the issue. John Swinburne made a valid point about how we can hear the views of children on this subject. That might be one of the matters that Scotland's commissioner for children and young people should consider when establishing what children think on a range of issues. Divorce, in common with all aspects of family law, is a sensitive issue. I recognise the range of views that exist. I emphasise yet again that our reform of family law is not intended to devalue the importance of marriage; it intends to reflect the changing shape of our society and to protect the interests of children. I come from a tradition in which divorce is not recognised. When I grew up, I did not know anyone who had divorced and there was no one to whom I was related who was divorced. It was just  not something that featured in our lives. Today, it is entirely different. The question for us, as legislators, is this: do we legislate for what we believe in, personally, individually or religiously, or do we legislate for Scotland as we find it? Do we legislate in the best interests of people, irrespective of what we individually think about the decisions that they choose to make in whatever way, shape or form? That is what we as legislators need the courage to do to reflect the best interests of Scotland and the rights of people, wherever they are in Scotland and whatever they believe. I believe that it is also right to put children at the centre of our reform. We are confident that our approach strikes the right balance. We want relationships to work and we recognise the special place that marriage holds for so many people in our society. That is why we will increase our support to those who help to resolve problems in relationships. I say this to those who believe so strongly in the value of marriage: if someone has decided that there is no longer any point in making a relationship work, if that person then meets someone else and wants to move on to a new relationship, and if that person believes fundamentally in the value of marriage, are we seriously saying that we will prevent them from marrying again and that we will force them to continue living with the same person? That would seem to fly in the face of everything that people argue if they believe in marriage. We should let people move on and live their lives to the fullest. Let us put some of the problems of the past behind us. If two people are intent on divorcing, we believe that it is necessary for that to happen with the minimum possible bitterness and acrimony. Far be it from me to agree with Fergus Ewing on anything, but if I gave the impression that we believed that our proposals would remove acrimony, I apologise—they will not. They are about trying to reduce it and minimise it. We want that parting of the ways to take into account the best interests of the children, not the personal anger and animosity of the adults. Our proposals are based on long-held values that reflect the central role of children in family life. The amendments are based on the principle that is central to everything that we stand for as a country and as a society: the best interests of children.

Exactly—we want there to be local capacity building. We acknowledge the contribution of mediation, but mediation comes at the end of the process, when people are negotiating how to part. We want to focus more attention and funding on counselling and conciliation, to help people to work through their difficulties. We will discuss with national bodies and local service providers exactly how that can be done. Divorce is a process not an event. It does not happen overnight; it happens after relationships begin to break down and after people begin to argue, to move apart and to lose contact with each other. Brian Adam said that things could not be "done and dusted" within a year. That is right, and our proposals do not suggest that they could. We are talking about a minimum of one year's separation before divorce can be contemplated, so there is no way that everything could be "done and dusted" within a year. Mr Adam also spoke about evidence, but he suggested that the evidence that Jim Wallace presented was not valid because the circumstances were different. I am not quite sure what Mr Adam's evidence is. We know that many couples will have been unhappy and will have been working to resolve their relationship for a considerable time before they make the difficult and heartbreaking decision that their marriage is over and they want to separate. That decision made, the sole ground for divorce is the irretrievable breakdown of the marriage, as established by one of five facts. At present, one of the facts is separation. When there is consent, the period of separation that courts require to establish irretrievable breakdown is two years; when there is no consent, it is five years. It is important to understand that the separation periods represent the minimum time after the couple separate and before a divorce can be applied for. Even then, divorce is not granted automatically. Regardless of the length of the separation, the court must still be convinced that the marriage has irretrievably broken down. If the court considers that there is a reasonable prospect of reconciliation between the parties, it will not grant the divorce. Contrary to what may be said, divorce is never easy. In reforming divorce laws, we have made it clear that we do not wish to change the nature of the divorce process. We want the law to continue to  underline the importance of marriage. That is why couples will still have to prove to the court that their marriage has irretrievably broken down, and it is why a court will still not grant a divorce if it considers that there is a reasonable prospect of reconciliation. Following the recommendations of the Scottish Law Commission, we looked closely at the statutory non-cohabitation period. We accepted the commission's proposals that the time periods should be reduced to one year when both parties consent and to two years when they do not. I accept that an element of judgment came into that. However, that is what politicians are elected to do—to judge what we think is best. We have based our decisions on the advice of the Scottish Law Commission and on the subsequent support of legal practitioners and academics in successive consultation exercises. We have not plucked the figures from thin air; we have consulted on divorce three times in the past five years. Parliament has also consulted. The Executive's amendments 8 and 9 seek to return section 10 to its original form. We propose time periods that, first, were recommended by the Scottish Law Commission; secondly, have been in the public domain for more than a decade; thirdly, have been fully consulted on; and fourthly, have broad support among legal practitioners. The time periods that the Justice 1 Committee agreed at stage 2 were subject to no consultation whatever. The Parliament places great emphasis on consultation as a critical part of the legislative process. I would argue that to pick arbitrary time periods for such an important and significant issue without consultation and careful deliberation would be to do a disservice to our legislative process. I am not convinced that the alternative separation periods that were agreed at stage 2—or those that are proposed today by Brian Adam—have any foundation to support them like the foundation that supports our proposals. Finally, I want to clarify an issue that many members may have found confusing. Our amendments 27, 28 and 54 seek to ensure that whatever decision Parliament makes on the separation periods for divorce, the same periods will apply to the dissolution of civil partnerships. We are concerned that if the arrangements for divorce do not mirror those for the dissolution of civil partnerships, the bill as a whole might not be compliant with the European convention on human rights and so might be defective. I am sure that members understand the principle that is at stake. We might not need to move amendments 27, 28 and 54, but we must have a fallback that will ensure that whatever decision Parliament makes, the bill is consistent.

Section 10 has, understandably, attracted more attention and debate than any other part of the Family Law (Scotland) Bill. We recognise that divorce is always a sensitive issue and that for many people it touches on their core beliefs about the sanctity of marriage and its importance as one of the principal building blocks of society. There are others who disagree, but people have strong views on the matter. Ministers have stated many times—I am happy to do so again—that the Executive values and supports marriage. We recognise its special status and the value that it contributes to so many families in Scotland. The Executive has not, does not and will not undermine marriage, and we certainly do not do so with the proposals that we are considering today. However, it is equally right to say that the state cannot force people to remain married. A proportion of marriages will end in divorce for whatever reasons; in those circumstances it is important, as Richard Lochhead said, to support families so that the transition is as painless as possible, particularly where children are involved. Where the conflict is protracted and bitter, children will suffer. I want to emphasise that relationship services are an important part of the Executive's overall effort to support stable families and to give children the best possible start in life. I believe that the best way is early intervention, through counselling to help couples to save their marriages or other committed relationships, where those marriages or relationships can be saved. I accept, however, that where separation is inevitable, mediation can help to ensure that parents work together sensibly to look after the best interests of their children. Parents should not use their children as pawns in their personal war. I acknowledge that current services can be made to work more effectively for users. Our view is that counselling and mediation services are complementary and should be linked at national and local levels. We need integrated and cohesive services.

If people want the opportunity to stay together and to work things through in their own interests and those of their children, we want that to happen. Children suffer not so much from the process of divorce as from a wide range of factors including bitterness, fighting, arguments and distress. Many children go through a protracted period of suffering because of the agonies that have been inflicted on them by their parents. The Executive wants to try to remove that suffering. We hope that adults will behave like adults and behave responsibly, instead of seeing such situations as a surrogate war in which the children can be used to inflict harm and pain on the other individual. That is disgraceful and it happens in far too many cases.

I will move on. The member can come in later if he wishes. We believe that people should have a range of relationship services to which to turn. The strategy on the ground for those services should be aligned with local authorities' overall goals for children and families. There should be easy access points and there should be flexibility to respond to families' changing needs. However, we need action in order to get the overall framework right, which is why we are encouraging and funding the national bodies to integrate their efforts and to build the capacity of local services to deliver more effectively. We have already made available some £500,000 this year and last year to the national family bodies, in addition to the existing grant funding of some £633,000 a year. There is a particular challenge to develop the capacity of local family support services and to provide incentives for more joined-up working. Local services are at the sharp end—they deal with the people, with the fallout and with the breakdowns. I am pleased to announce that the Executive will provide an additional £300,000 for capacity building in local family support services in 2006-07. We will consider the details of how that investment will be made, but the key message is that more money will be available next year to fund proposals by local counselling and mediation services, acting together for capacity building, infrastructure development and joint working. I hope that that will put local services in a stronger position to contribute effectively to the wider  agenda on integrated services for children and families that local authorities, with their partners, should be developing at local level.

I will make one point and then let Christine Grahame in. I acknowledge the concern that has been expressed by the Justice 1 Committee in a number of our discussions and by the national bodies and many of the local bodies, about gaps throughout Scotland. They are worried about the failure in some areas to provide adequate services.

I will finish this point and, if the Presiding Officer allows it, I will take both interventions. I have asked the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities for a meeting to discuss that concern. The Justice 1 Committee is equally concerned—Pauline McNeill may develop that point. I am sure that it is something that the committee may consider. We need to consider the funding that the Executive has already provided under a number of headings, and we need to ask why that is not being used to deliver adequate local services. I hope that those discussions will lead to something productive.

Christine Grahame's point is about local service delivery and local service provision. We are funding the national bodies but we recognise that there is a problem with local service delivery. There is concern about that—the Justice 1 Committee raised that issue on a number of occasions.

Section 2 is concerned with putting on record certain elements of the common law in Scotland. It will place on a statutory footing the existing grounds at common law under which a marriage would be void. One of the key policy objectives in putting the rules for void marriage into statute was to dispense with tacit mental reservation as a ground for nullity, because it is considered to encourage sham marriages. Persuasive arguments have been received from the Scottish Law Commission that, due to a recent court case—which was reported after stage 2 consideration of section 2—the existing section is potentially flawed under certain circumstances, so amendments 1 and 2 have been lodged to ensure that the policy aims of the section will be met. Amendment 5 replicates the change in relation to civil partnership. I move amendment 1.

We do not believe that there will be any unforeseen consequences of manuscript amendment 55's not being selected. In effect, that amendment referred to something that was no longer there. At some point in the future, we will use a suitable legislative vehicle to effect the appropriate change. I apologise to you, Presiding Officer, and to Parliament, for the lodging of that manuscript amendment. It was done without our knowledge, albeit with the best intentions, at a very late stage. Both Cathy Jamieson and I felt that it would be inappropriate for it to be debated and considered today. We felt that, given that there would essentially be no consequences of its not being agreed to, it would be better to deal with the matter at another time, rather than have it cause anxiety and confusion or create the impression of our trying to bounce Parliament into a decision.  Amendment 1 agreed to.  [Amendment 2 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.]

In response to the request from the committee in its stage 1 report, the Executive reconsidered its decision to retain marriage by cohabitation with habit and repute and lodged an amendment at stage 2 for its abolition. I appreciate that a number of committee members have expressed concern about difficulties that might face some Scottish couples who choose to marry abroad—members have heard about that in detail from Pauline McNeill. Stewart Stevenson was right to say that changes in that regard will affect few, if any, people. However, the point has been made well by Pauline McNeill. We are happy to support amendment 6, which is designed to address the particular circumstances that caused concern for the Justice 1 Committee.

Amendment 7 will make a minor technical change to the wording of section 5 of the bill, which concerns the conveyancing of a matrimonial home and protection of the occupancy rights of a non-entitled spouse. Section 5(3)(a) of the bill will operate on section 6(3)(e) of the Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981. It will do so by reference to the word "sale" but, in fact, there are two instances of that word in paragraph (e). By specifying that we are amending the word where it first occurs, we are removing any potential doubt as to precisely which part of the 1981 act will be being amended. The same problem arises in relation to the mirroring provision for civil partnerships, so an equivalent change to schedule 1 will be made by amendment 26. I move amendment 7.  Amendment 7 agreed to.

The debate has been interesting, if strange in some ways. There have been some excellent speeches and some that had very little relevance to the subject that we are discussing this morning. However, most people would agree that it is right to try to set out some kind of strategic framework for how we intend to proceed, to reflect from time to time on what we have done and to look forward to what more needs to be done. It is also right to put into context what we are trying to achieve. We know that there are social problems in Scotland—they have been discussed in many debates. We know about some of those problems and we acknowledge that low-level antisocial behaviour is a real problem in many communities. We also acknowledge that serious crime is a problem in far too many areas. It is right that we should take a comprehensive approach to that. It is right that we should look at what our court system is doing and at what we do in our prisons. It is right that we should ask who should be going to prison and what happens when people come out of prison. It is also right to consider the broad issues that are associated with drug taking and misuse. We should not just be tackling criminality but dealing with the human problems. It is therefore right that we should take the widest possible look at structures, systems, resources and then policies. That is what we are trying to do in reflecting on the past and looking forward. We are very clear that we want to support the decent people in Scotland who are working hard to protect their families and to bring up their  children as decent people in a decent community. We want young people to be able to avoid being drawn into criminality. We therefore have to make sure that the social structures are available to support people and that the mechanisms exist that can deal with people as and when the need arises. In a sense, we would argue that it is not a choice between dealing with crime or dealing with the underlying causes of crime; it is a question of doing both. We know that, tragically, notwithstanding some of the statistics and the examples that we have heard this morning, although crime can happen in the most affluent communities in Scotland, the vast proportion of crime and antisocial behaviour weighs heavily on our most disadvantaged communities. It is right that being tough on crime should also mean looking at what we do to improve not just the quality of life of people who live in those communities but the life chances of those who do not have an opportunity to realise their full potential. The Executive acknowledges that it has a leadership role and that, notwithstanding the fact that there will be some specific areas of disagreement, there is broad support for us. I will touch on some of the speeches that members gave this morning. There was probably very little with which I could disagree in about three quarters of Kenny MacAskill's speech, which was well constructed. However, I must address two issues that he raised at the end of it. I will not go into a huge amount of detail on the issue of air weapons, although I note that he said that the SNP's view is quite clear. Does it want a ban? Well, I do not think so. Does it want registration? Well, maybe. Does it want licensing? Well, possibly. Yes, it certainly looks as if the SNP's view on the issue is absolutely clear.

No, because I have to address other issues that the member will no doubt want to comment on. Kenny MacAskill then touched on rendition flights. For most of his speech, he concentrated on the criminal justice plan; however, at the very end, he felt that he had to be politically opportunistic and get in a soundbite for the press release or the headlines on a matter that has nothing to do with what we are discussing today. He made a number of very serious allegations, some of which Pauline McNeill has addressed. It is right that we put on record a number of points. First, the Minister for Justice, the First Minister and the Executive have explicitly stated that we find torture abhorrent and do not support it in any shape or form. If there is evidence that torture has taken place, it should be—and must  be—dealt with as soon as possible in the most vigorous manner. Secondly, the Lord Advocate has explicitly stated that there is no role for Scottish ministers in dealing with these matters. However, any evidence of criminality should be reported to the police. It is up to them and, in the final analysis, the Lord Advocate to determine whether a serious crime has been committed. Kenny MacAskill said that he wanted action. However, as I listened to him, it became clear that he did not want action from us, because much of what he talked about related to reserved matters and has nothing to do with the Executive. He was asking purely for words. I suggest that there is a huge amount of posturing in that.

I will make my position and the position of the Executive very clear. Chief constables who act independently will have our full support in continuing to do so. We will not attempt to interfere politically with their operational decision making. If they believe that a crime has been committed, they will have our full support in investigating that crime. It will then be a matter for the prosecuting authorities to take things forward. As Cathy Jamieson has said more than once, if Kenny MacAskill or anyone else has evidence that a crime has been committed, they should bring that evidence forward at the earliest opportunity and the appropriate authorities will deal with it. We are quite clear that, whatever happens, torture has no place in a modern country. The UK Government and others have raised—and I am sure will continue to raise—many of these issues with the US Government. On the antisocial behaviour issues that Kenny MacAskill and others raised, the Executive's record is well documented. As Mary Mulligan has said, we were right to act on the matter. I do not have the time to go into any detail on the comments made by Annabel Goldie and the  Tories but, frankly, they sounded like a worn old record and had nothing new to contribute to the debate. Cathy Jamieson has made it very clear that the numbers of police on patrol are not what the Tories have claimed. I should also point out that they seemed to want us to direct chief constables on how they should use the record numbers of police. However, chief constables must exercise their operational independence on the matter. Moreover, the Tories' proposal to have directly elected conveners of police boards is bizarre; in fact, it is nonsense and will never work. It is probably one of most peculiar of the many peculiar ideas that they have come up with. I am sorry that I have no time to address some of the other issues that members have raised. We are on track with what we are doing. We have established a proper framework in that respect; however, as Cathy Jamieson has said, although we acknowledge some of our successes, we must admit that there is still much more to do.

Kenny MacAskill has suggested that the Executive needs to take action. Will he spell out what action it should take?

On 10 November, I announced that we are making £1 million available for flexible response CCTV projects in the financial year 2006-07, in line with the commitment in "A Partnership for a Better Scotland" to expand CCTV in shopping and other areas, to support businesses and others in reducing crime.

We need all partners at a local level to play their part in taking full advantage of the investment that we make; those who are intent on making good use of such facilities will do that. We have decided to consider mobile facilities in this spending round because we are aware that, while they have proved enormously beneficial, fixed cameras can often be limited and cannot respond flexibly to problems that may occur in different areas and which may need to be attended to. I have looked at some of the mobile units and have been very impressed with the equipment and its ability to identify and record. I want not only to ensure that mobile units are properly integrated with fixed systems but that they are used with the full back-up and support of the police, wardens and other agencies that can make a difference to community safety in an area.

There has been an interesting exchange of views this afternoon. I thank members for that and I also thank everyone who has contributed to taking the bill through Parliament. I thank members of the Justice 2 Committee and the convener for their detailed work during the committee stages and also thank the clerks for their sterling work in support of those processes. I acknowledge that the process has not always been easy and I recognise some of the pressures that they faced. I also put on record my thanks to the many organisations that gave up their time to provide evidence to the committee and I thank them for their many contributions throughout the process. Those contributions have been valuable in helping to shape what has been a fast-changing process as we have moved forward. As the Minister for Justice and many members have said during the course of the debate, the bill is about reducing reoffending and making our communities safer. Some specific questions were asked during the debate. I welcome Kenny MacAskill's support for the bill. He rightly said that the legislation alone will not solve the problem of Scotland's reoffending rates. It is important to re-emphasise that it will be the hard work of individuals within the new framework that will bring about the change that we all seek. I have high hopes for what we can achieve, given the positive comments that have been made. Jeremy Purvis talked about the length of time it takes for cases to get to trial. We acknowledged in our criminal justice plan that was published last December, the importance of faster court processes. That is why we are pursuing landmark reforms to the summary justice system. I hope that that will stimulate some more significant debate. It was interesting that in the course of the debate Colin Fox and Annabel Goldie came together in a Tory-SSP coalition—a coalition of innate conservatism—to say that there should be and will be no change. Annabel Goldie said that the case has not been made so we should leave the system  alone. Colin Fox not only, in an innately conservative manner, supported the status quo, but he has not stayed up to date with the changes that have taken place within COSLA and the ADSW. I refer Colin Fox to the ADSW, which welcomes the opportunity to work with the SPS, and I also refer him to the statement from COSLA, which states: "We are grateful that Ministers have responded positively to the" case made by local government. The statement continues: "COSLA, along with colleagues from across local government, will now direct its energies and commitment to ensuring that the new arrangements are successful." COSLA has left the innate conservatives behind and has moved forward. It is worth our while to remind not only Annabel Goldie and the SSP what they have done this afternoon, but to remind Parliament and the wider public exactly what the Scottish Socialists are opposing. They are opposing tougher measures against sex offenders, recovery of criminal injury payments from offenders, improved drug testing in prisons and improved ability for ministers to intervene in some of the tragic cases where failure takes place. That is shameful. If I leave the innate conservatives aside, there is genuine good will for the bill in Parliament and among the many organisations throughout Scotland that want to work together to reduce reoffending. I believe that the bill will be a very useful way forward and I thank everyone for their work. I believe that Parliament will do the right thing and leave some of the dinosaurs behind.

The purpose of amendment 21 is to allow the Scottish Prison Service to obtain and test saliva samples from prisoners for the purpose of detecting drugs in their system. [ Interruption. ]

Presiding Officer, perhaps you could come to my house some time and exercise the same degree of control over my children. The power for the Scottish Prison Service is in addition to the existing power to obtain and test samples of urine for the same purpose. Amendment 21 will allow the Scottish Prison Service to develop simplified and more cost-effective processes that take advantage of scientific advances in drug testing. There are a number of advantages in using the method described: for example, the ease and speed of sample collection, and the fact that sample adulteration is less likely as collection can be  directly observed. Furthermore, the method eliminates the need for same-gender sample collections; tests can be conducted almost anywhere; and results are available on the spot in minutes. Amendment 21 will add flexibility to the SPS's drug-testing regime and will aid the SPS to align its testing practices with those of its partners in the criminal justice system—for example, the police and those who conduct tests for drug abuse to inform drug treatment and testing orders. Amendment 24 is a consequential amendment to the long title of the bill. I move amendment 21.  Amendment 21 agreed to.

Parliament will recall that part 1 of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003 introduced new procedures for dealing with high-risk sex offenders and violent offenders. The procedures include the establishment of the Risk Management Authority and a new sentence to be available to the High Court—the order for lifelong restriction. We have been working with the Risk Management Authority to set up the arrangements for accrediting risk assessors and the arrangements for the risk assessment methods needed before the new orders for lifelong restriction can be brought into force. Those arrangements will be provided for in a scheme under section 11 of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003. As part of the arrangements, we want to ensure that there is a clear separation between decisions on whether to award or remove accreditation and decisions on appeals.  At stage 2, the Justice 2 Committee agreed to add section 10A of the bill, which will ensure that the Risk Management Authority is able to delegate  its functions appropriately rather than the board having to take every decision. Section 10A also allows the accreditation scheme under section 11 to authorise accreditation decisions and allows appeal decisions to be taken by committees of the Risk Management Authority. As the bill stands, there is doubt about whether that is permitted. Amendment 23 will bring section 10A into force on royal assent. That will allow the accreditation scheme to be made without delay. In turn, that will allow the order for lifelong restriction provisions in the 2003 act to be brought into force early in the new year. I move amendment 23.  Amendment 23 agreed to.

Will the member give way?

I congratulate Annabel Goldie on taking on the awesome burden of leading Rag, Tag and Bobtail in the Scottish Parliament. When she was interviewed yesterday, she referred to her vintage. Unfortunately, in relation to the issue that we are discussing, she has a worn 78 that she might want to consider bringing into the 21 st century. She is in a groove in which she is saying nothing new. In the committee and today, she was clearly uncomfortable at having to say things that have no great relevance, effect or contribution to make. She has rightly identified an important issue, however, and she is right to say that, between stages 2 and 3, she has addressed one of the questions that was asked of her, which was to do with when the terms of her amendment would come into force. Today we got an answer, of sorts, to that question. She was quite specific: the provisions will come into force sometime and will apply to offenders after that time. So, as we are obviously clear about that issue, we can move on in the debate. I am not sure which part of our often-voiced commitments to change the current early-release arrangement is unclear. We have said that retaining the status quo is not an option and that we will introduce reforming legislation next year.  We have also said that any change will be considered within the broader context of our on-going top-to-bottom reform of the criminal justice system. That reform is striving to achieve the overarching objectives of enhancing public safety and reducing reoffending. We have said that the law that was introduced by the Tories needs to be changed. We also accept that change could have significant resource and financial implications, which is why we need to make the change properly. It is utterly wrong to approach this matter in the way in which the Tories are doing. Annabel Goldie has not answered any of the questions that she was asked at the committee, although, when she sums up, she might answer some of the questions that were just posed by Bill Butler. Deputy Presiding Officer, on the question of whether extra prisons will be required, I know that you have asked me about a specific concern that you have about your area. Annabel Goldie needs to answer the question of how many extra prisons will be required—perhaps she could use some of the information that was helpfully provided by Stewart Stevenson when she does so. Where will those prisons be? Deputy Presiding Officer, I cannot give you an assurance in relation to the specific question that you asked me, which was to do with whether there will be a prison on the ex-Royal Ordnance factory site in Bishopton. I do not know; perhaps Annabel Goldie can answer that question for you. This is a complex area of law and we need to get it right. We have a body of experts considering the issue of early release. We will build on the findings of the Sentencing Commission and bring forward a comprehensive set of proposals for Parliament to consider. That is the right way to go about this, rather than endlessly debating sterile political slogans. I hope that, under Annabel Goldie's leadership, the Conservatives will move on.  Amendment 2 is a rather strange afterthought. Annabel Goldie suggested that it is a way of addressing a problem. However, it would introduce a novel parliamentary procedure, requiring the commencement order bringing the new early-release regime into force to be debated and approved by the Parliament. I do not know whether Annabel Goldie has spoken to the Subordinate Legislation Committee about her suggestion. When looking at the Family Law (Scotland) Bill recently, it agreed that it would not be appropriate to subject a commencement order to parliamentary procedure when Parliament had  already agreed that it was content with the proposal in the bill. Perhaps amendment 2 is a sign that Annabel Goldie is not sure that her proposals are a good idea. Maybe she wants Parliament to have one last chance to stop them coming into force. If we are not sure that the proposals are a good idea, we should not legislate for them now. Far better to follow our approach of having a comprehensive set of proposals for Parliament to consider, based on the Sentencing Commission's work. I hope that Parliament will reject Annabel Goldie's suggestions.

The purpose of amendment 18 is to provide courts with the necessary statutory powers to conduct progress review hearings of offenders who are subject to a probation order. The enabling power will allow courts to hold review hearings in instances in which they are felt likely to be of positive benefit to the offender's progress on the order. The need for a firm legal basis to the probation review hearings that courts have used for many years follows a recent court of appeal ruling that such hearings were legally incompetent under existing legislation. Nevertheless, the court of  appeal acknowledged that there could be sound reasons for holding review hearings in appropriate cases. Amendment 18 imposes a requirement on the offender to attend a review hearing set by the court as part of the probation order. It also provides the court with the power to issue an arrest warrant for the offender's arrest if he or she fails to appear for the hearing. Moreover, the amendment assists the court in conducting the review hearing by requiring the offender's supervising officer to submit a written report in advance of the hearing. Personal attendance at the hearing by the supervising officer or procurator fiscal is on a discretionary basis. Amendment 18 provides the court with the power to amend the conditions of the probation order in light of the supervising officer's report. However, it may do so only after the effects of the proposed amendment to the order have been explained "in ordinary language" and the offender's consent has been obtained. The amendment also provides the court with the power to hold further review hearings if appropriate. Finally, the amendment applies to the review hearing scenario the existing powers available to courts in dealing with an offender who has failed to meet the terms of his probation order. I move amendment 18.

I should point out that, although the term was probably used as shorthand, we do not have a probation service as such in Scotland. However, I understand what Stewart Maxwell was getting at. Instead of consulting the courts and probation officers on the issue, we are simply allowing them to do what they are already doing, although we are putting that on a statutory footing. Our concern is that they would continue to work without that statutory underpinning. The issue raised by Kenny MacAskill would be a matter for the courts and social workers to address and make progress on, if required.  Amendment 18 agreed to.

At stage 2, we delivered on our promise to take action to end the unconditional release of short-term sex offenders. Those offenders will no longer simply be released from prison in a way that allows them, in effect, to drop out of local authorities' control. They will now be supervised and be subject until the end of their sentences to licence conditions that reflect the nature of the risk that they pose and their offending. Naturally, we want the important new measures to have maximum impact when they come into force. At stage 2, Bill Butler asked whether we could extend the classes of offender to whom the new measures would apply to include not only those who were convicted on or after the new provisions come into force but those who were already serving their sentence at the time. Following some consideration, Scottish ministers have decided that the new measures should be extended to those in custody at the time of commencement. That is the purpose of amendments 19 and 20. Of course, we cannot say at the moment exactly how many additional offenders will be involved, because we cannot predict how many may be in custody when the new measures come into effect. Whatever the number, the important point, which relates to what Bill Butler said at stage 2, is that more sex offenders will be subject to the new arrangements. I hope that members will agree that that is an encouraging prospect. However, the provision is not about numbers; it is about enhancing public safety. By lodging the  amendments, we are ensuring that the valuable new measures have maximum effect from the time of their inception. In so doing, we are contributing once again to our commitment to support stronger, safer communities. I move amendment 19.

We need to put the matter in context. We are not talking about huge numbers, so I am not sure that there will be a huge resource implication. However, we also need to remember that we fund criminal justice activities 100 per cent and we will clearly continue to fund the demand that exists and the requirement that we identify in each area. The new community justice authorities must also examine what is happening in their areas and identify whether dealing with the specific group of offenders as proposed will have significant resource implications. That information will be fed back in the normal way and we will look at it. Clearly, we are not going to pass the bill and then find that it cannot be implemented simply because there is a resource issue. I hope that we can retain some perspective, put the amendments into the right context and note that we already fund criminal justice activities 100 per cent.  Amendment 19 agreed to.   Amendment 20 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.

I give Kenny MacAskill the assurance that he seeks. We do not believe in a one-size-fits-all approach. We will scrutinise the plans closely, and we hope and expect that they will reflect the points that the member has made.

The amendments in this group are minor or technical in nature. Amendment 4 makes it clear that in section 4 the term "partner bodies" has the same meaning as in section 2(16). Amendment 5 alters the reference in the bill to "the Chief Inspector of Prisons" to "Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Prisons". That is the standardised wording for such references. Amendment 7 corrects an error in section 5(4)(b) of the bill, which refers to an "enforcement notice". The correct term is "enforcement direction", which is used elsewhere in the bill. Amendment 22 is a technical amendment to ensure that the bill contains the correct references to provisions in the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968. I move amendment 4.  Amendment 4 agreed to.

Jackie Baillie proposes to amend section 5, but her amendment also has a read-across to section 6. Section 5 addresses specifically the situation where a failure on the part of a community justice authority to exercise its functions under the bill is independently identified. The powers provide a structured mechanism by which ministers can require specific action to be taken by the CJA. Section 6 deals with a failure by a local authority to exercise its statutory criminal justice and social work functions and provides ministers with the power to require action by the community justice authority to remedy the situation. It follows the same staged approach as described in section 5. Ministers would initially draw the reported failures of a CJA or local authority to the attention of the relevant CJA by issuing a preliminary notice. The notice would inform the CJA of the failure and  require it to submit an appropriate written response. If ministers were dissatisfied with the response, they would have the option to issue an enforcement direction requiring the CJA to take action to address the failure. As the bill is drafted, ministers may specify the time within which the CJA must respond to a preliminary notice. The provision follows the same approach to the intervention as that taken in the School Education (Ministerial Powers and Independent Schools) (Scotland) Act 2004. The approach provides flexibility to enable ministers to intervene as speedily as demanded by the type of failure that has occurred. It is important to have that flexibility. As Jackie Baillie said, amendment 6 would impose a minimum period of 14 days for a community justice authority to respond to the preliminary notice. I worry that that would limit the flexibility for ministers to decide on a case-by-case basis when a response needed to be provided. There might be circumstances in which immediate intervention is required—to safeguard public safety, for example—in which case a 14-day delay could have serious consequences. We are not prescribing that an immediate response would always be required, but we believe that it is important to have that flexibility. I hope that, with those assurances, Jackie Baillie will seek to withdraw amendment 6.

The committee agreed to an amendment that I lodged at stage 2 enabling certain functions of the Scottish Prison Service relating to the rehabilitation of prisoners to be transferred by order to community justice authorities. I believe that that is an essential  additional provision, giving flexibility and encouraging joint working between the organisations. At the time, I also undertook to consider whether it might be possible for a CJA to act as an agent of the SPS—that is, to undertake certain functions relating to prisoner rehabilitation on behalf of the SPS, without requiring a statutory function. That is what amendment 10 will achieve. Thus, the transfer provisions relating to the SPS will mirror those for local authorities. Amendment 9 is supplemental to amendment 10; it clarifies that the CJA need not consult local authorities and partner bodies prior to agreeing to undertake a function on behalf of the SPS. Such an arrangement would, rightly, be the concern of the CJA and the SPS alone. I move amendment 9.  Amendment 9 agreed to.  [Amendments 10 to 14 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.]

I am pleased to bring forward amendments 15, 16 and 17 to refine further the definitions of mentally disordered offenders in section 9(10) and to correct an omission in section 9(11). The definitions of mentally disordered offenders in section 9(10), which were agreed at stage 2, cover people who are subject to a restriction and compulsion order or hospital direction under the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 and a transfer for treatment direction under the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. Amendments 15 and 16 will not change the policy intention and, therefore, who is covered; they will provide a simpler approach. The categories in paragraphs (a) and (b) of section 9(10) will be defined as those subject to different types of order made under section 57(2) and section 59 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995. The categories in paragraphs (c) and (d) of section 9(10) are unchanged. The health service will have a statutory function to establish joint arrangements with the other three responsible authorities—the Scottish Prison Service, local authorities and the police—to assess and manage risk, including sharing relevant information, for that group of mentally disordered offenders. Significantly, that will allow the health service to formalise the care  programme approach that is already in place across Scotland. Under that process, a range of agencies works with the health service to support the safe pre-discharge and post-discharge arrangements for mentally disordered offenders. Section 9(3) of the bill already gives ministers the power to make an order requiring other agencies to co-operate with the responsible authorities in establishing and implementing the arrangements for offenders in the community or offenders being released from prison. The responsible authorities also have a duty to co-operate with those agencies and with one another. We think that it is important that the health service should be under an express duty to co-operate with the other three responsible authorities as regards offenders who are not mentally disordered. Section 9(11) achieves that and amendment 17 will fully achieve it by ensuring that reference is made to all the categories referred to in subsection (10). The provisions in relation to mentally disordered offenders are complex, but we are now confident that they will create a stronger framework within which the justice and health agencies will work together to assess and manage risks to the public. The amendments represent a major step forward in the drive to provide our communities with additional safety. By including health boards in provisions relating to mentally disordered offenders, we will plug a gap in the current situation with regard to a group that can also undoubtedly pose a risk to the public. I move amendment 15.  Amendment 15 agreed to.  [Amendments 16 and 17 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.]

We are certainly aware of some of the specific issues identified and questions raised by Jim Wallace, and we are also aware of the concerns expressed by the islands authorities. Performance is not just about speed; it is about access to the latest developments in professional practice and access to networks. Of course, good practice is a two-way process. What we are proposing is not just about Orkney learning from others but, potentially, about taking some of the progress identified by Jim Wallace and making sure that others are able to share that information. Jim Wallace asked specifically about rotating meetings, but that is not a matter for us. I am sure that the members of the CJA would be more than delighted to visit Orkney occasionally, but far be it from me to order them to do so. We acknowledge the particular circumstances prevalent in the islands, which have to be taken into account in developing policy in the area. That is why we lodged amendment 14. I will return to our amendment shortly, but first I will comment on Jim Wallace's amendments. As Jim Wallace indicated, we believe that amendment 25 is unnecessary. There is nothing in the bill to prevent a community justice authority from covering the area of a single local authority. Amendment 26 would place a duty on the proposed northern community justice authority to provide separate area plans for island authorities. Such a provision does not sit easily with the objective of area plans, which is to improve consistency in delivery, sharing of expertise and the transitions between prison and the community. The amendment would also place additional burdens on all partner bodies, as they would need to deal with up to four area plans within the proposed northern community justice authority area. Amendment 26 would also give island authorities a unique power over the relevant community justice authority by making it impossible for the CJA to submit its area plans without the agreement of the island authorities. No other council in Scotland would have such a right of veto. Amendment 27 seeks to allow any local authority that is the sole member of a CJA to appoint one of its own officers as CJA chief officer. However, given the chief officer's important role in monitoring and reporting performance both to the community justice authority and to ministers, the amendment would place chief officers in the impossible position of having a clear conflict of interest between their reporting duties and their employer's interests. The creation of new chief officer posts that are independent of individual councils is a critical element in improving accountability.  I can give Jim Wallace some assurance, in that his discussions with the Minister for Justice have persuaded her of some of his arguments. Hence, some of the Executive amendments that we have lodged. I can also assure him that, when ministers receive community justice authorities' plans for scrutiny and approval, we will expect to see evidence in the proposed northern CJA's plan that the authority has consulted each of the island authorities, considered their particular circumstances and attempted to reach agreement with them. The Executive's amendments respond positively to the concerns that have been expressed by island authorities. I hope that the amendments demonstrate that we are not set on a one-size-fits-all solution, as some might suggest. We understand the unique issues that, as Jim Wallace has outlined, island councils face in delivering criminal justice services. In particular, we appreciate that the size and nature of island authorities mean that the sustainability of services requires particular consideration. Consequently, as Jim Wallace mentioned, any transfer of staff resources to a community justice authority will be unusually sensitive. The bill as drafted allows the transfer of functions and staff resources to community justice authorities from all local authorities within the area of a community justice authority. We recognise that the island authorities are particularly concerned about the implications of such transfers. Therefore, amendment 14 will introduce into section 7 a new subsection that will enable the island authorities to retain functions that other local authorities within the area of a community justice authority have agreed to transfer. Clearly, if an island authority has chosen to opt out of a function, it would be inappropriate to lay an order to require the authority's consent. Taken together, amendments 14 and 13 will enable ministers to lay a transfer order that excludes the transfer of functions from any or all island authorities, should such authorities so choose, without requiring the consent of any relevant island authority that is not taking part in the transfer. Such a split in responsibilities between the local authority and community justice authority is feasible in an island context. However, we believe that it would be inappropriate to extend such transfer opt-outs to mainland local authorities, as that would create a complex mosaic of service responsibilities within a criminal justice authority, which would be to the detriment of clarity and accountability. Amendments 8, 11 and 12 are consequential to amendment 13.  I hope that we have given sufficient assurance for Jim Wallace to consider withdrawing amendment 25. I urge members—

We already provide 100 per cent ring-fenced funding for criminal justice purposes, so there is a certain logic to ensuring that funding flows in relation to the protection of staff. Clearly, that point will have to be considered. We have already given assurances about the plans and the staff opt-out. As Jim Wallace suggests, it would be ludicrous if we allowed staff to remain without allowing the funding for them flow through.

The bill contains a number of provisions that are designed to achieve closer working among those charged with the delivery of offender management services. Indeed, that is the thinking behind the creation of community justice authorities. It will be important to be able to gauge the success of those provisions in improving the co-ordinated delivery of services. Assessing the performance of the prison and police services, social work services and the community justice authorities in delivering joined-up services will in itself require joined-up working. Amendment 3 establishes a power for social work inspectors, Her Majesty's chief inspector of constabulary for Scotland and Her Majesty's chief inspector of prisons for Scotland to co-operate in their assessment of the delivery of services to offenders. Because co-operation is defined in the bill as including information sharing, the provision will put beyond doubt that those bodies may share information about the services that are being delivered for offenders. That will be crucial if we are truly to create an offender-centred management regime. The power will enhance the inspection of offender management services.  I acknowledge that, in future, it may be appropriate to include other inspectorates, such as those that deal with health services. I am, however, conscious of sensitivities surrounding the sharing of information about individuals. Consequently, I feel that it is only right that any alteration to the list of designated inspectorates can be made by an order under the Parliament's affirmative procedure only. I move amendment 3.

rose—

I acknowledge that it is always best to give as much notification as possible and to bring things to committee early. In the development of all pieces of legislation—and this one is no different—we look to find where we can improve things. We look for any oversights and we look to find ways of accommodating comments made by committees and others. I apologise for the delay but we felt that amendment 3 was important. We understand that it would have been desirable to deal with the matter earlier but it was brought to our attention late in the process. As soon as the matter came to our attention, we addressed it.  Amendment 3 agreed to.

There are three main strands to our monitoring regime. Statistics on the use of antisocial behaviour measures under the act are collected on a six-monthly basis. Community planning partnerships report annually on the implementation of their antisocial behaviour outcome agreements and strategies. In addition, all 32 local authority antisocial behaviour teams have been visited as part of a Scottish Executive audit process.

The City of Edinburgh Council has been imaginative and diligent in the application of the legislation. What the council is doing is right—it is listening to communities and ensuring that local agencies work together and are increasingly aware, as are others, of the significance of the legislation. It is good to see the act being used in Edinburgh to help communities to improve the quality of their lives. I hope that others consider what Edinburgh is doing. I am heartened by the fact that the community is becoming increasingly aware of the potential uses of the legislation. I look forward to further successes in Edinburgh.

The working group reported back to my officials in June 2005 and we are considering the recommendations in the light of our wider programme of reform in this area.

I am aware that there is some concern about our ability to identify how many people are within that category. Clearly, we need to address that. We need to ensure that any legislation that we enact or action that we take helps the people whom we intend to help. We will continue to consider the problem closely. I am sure that my colleague Allan Wilson, who will take the bill through Parliament, will consider whether anything needs to be done. Outwith the scope of legislation, I think that there are other important factors that need to be carefully considered.

The final evaluation report on the two drugs court pilots was received earlier this year. I am considering the contents of the report and I will announce shortly our plans for the future of the drugs courts.

We need to consider several factors carefully. Generally, we need to consider the value of rolling out drugs courts throughout Scotland. If we decide to do that, we need to consider whether to concentrate on the main urban centres. However, we must consider the issue in the context of the widespread use in Scotland of drug treatment and testing orders, which offer a type of drugs-court lite in many courts. We must also consider whether to progress along the path of creating specialist courts in Scotland on a range of issues. Whatever decision we make, we want to ensure that the positive lessons from the drugs courts and other pilots that we have introduced are learned and applied in courts throughout Scotland. The investment and effort that have been put into those initiatives will be pointless if the lessons are not applied widely.

Figures for ASBOs granted in Scotland are collated for financial years, so figures for the past six months are not available. The most recent figures show that 210 ASBOs were granted in Scotland during the financial year 2004-05. Those figures will be presented in a full report to be published later this year, which will explore the use of ASBOs in Scotland. Figures for the past six months will be available as part of the 2005-06 figures, which are due to be published in late 2006.

The situation that Cathy Peattie describes is outrageous and unacceptable. No one should have to tolerate such behaviour. Two issues arise. Some of what Cathy describes is outright criminality and should be addressed as such. Powers are available and laws are in place to deal with that. As for the surrounding issue of antisocial behaviour, we have significant new powers, and significant resources are available to police and councils. Some ideas come immediately to mind but it is not for me to dictate what should happen operationally. However, to give an example from my own area of Renfrewshire, an antisocial behaviour order has just been taken out against someone under the age of 16. That is the first time that that has happened. In some parts of Scotland the powers of dispersal have been used to remove people who have been grouping together to cause antisocial behaviour. In Fife and in Glasgow, the powers of closure of premises have been used to remove people from houses where they have been associated with antisocial behaviour. By a combination of the law on crime and the law on antisocial behaviour, powers should be available to police and local authorities to give the  protection that Cathy Peattie's constituents and people across Scotland deserve.

I would certainly encourage partners in various parts of Scotland to work together. When we introduced the legislation, we were clear that there should be local partnerships and that decisions should be made locally. However, we were also clear—despite what many people told us—that the powers should be proportionate and appropriate. I am encouraged that positive results are being reported from throughout Scotland of local agencies using the powers to the benefit of local communities. One thing that I intend to do—and I have asked my officials to work on it—is to produce a regular antisocial behaviour newsletter to be issued to councils, councillors, police, local agencies, MSPs, MPs and others to detail the ways in which antisocial behaviour powers are now being used to best effect across Scotland. The more we disseminate such information, and the more information we can provide to the effect that the powers are working, the more we will encourage the appropriate use of the powers throughout Scotland.

Replying to a members' business debate so early in the afternoon is a slightly unusual experience, the circumstances of the by-election having affected the parliamentary timetable. This has been a useful debate and I thank David Davidson for giving everyone who has stayed behind in the chamber the opportunity to put on record their appreciation of the work done by retained, volunteer and auxiliary firefighters. I add the thanks of the Scottish Executive, because we recognise the significant role that they play in protecting our communities. A number of disparate points have been made on the back of a fairly specific motion. Not all of them have been entirely relevant to the central thrust of the argument David Davidson advanced, but I will attempt to address some of them. Fergus Ewing and Shiona Baird asked about self-extinguishing cigarettes. I am advised that product design standards are a reserved matter for Westminster, so it is for our colleagues there to determine that issue. If that is not the case, I am sure that information will be given when the motion to which Shiona Baird referred comes to be considered. The contribution made by retained, volunteer and auxiliary firefighters has been recognised over the past couple of years. Their specific contribution was recognised in the June 2003 pay agreement, which provides for the pay of staff on the retained duty system to be equalised with that of whole-time staff. That was a significant move that at a stroke changed not just the rewards for those staff but the recognition of those staff. The pay agreement also allows for whole-time staff to act as retained firefighters in addition to their whole-time duties. I hope that those two measures in the agreement will attract recruits to the retained-duty system.

I am not sure of the detail, but a national agreement was reached and any payments and issues about status came about as a result of a very attractive agreement to support firefighters throughout the United Kingdom. David Davidson mentioned the 30 per cent shortfall quoted in the chief inspector's report. I do not want to split hairs, but I should point out that that shortfall is largely due to the Highland and Islands fire board's programme to upgrade many of its volunteer firefighters to retained status. It is a sort of welcome problem: had it not been for that, the statistics would not look as bad as they do. I am not denying that in many parts of the country—the Borders have been mentioned—more effort should be made to recruit, but that programme has resulted in what would appear to be a temporary shortfall in retained staff for Highland and Islands and Scotland as a whole.

The decision in Melrose is about fire cover. That is a matter for locally elected politicians to determine. The future of Melrose fire station is primarily a matter for Lothian and Borders fire board, which is currently consulting communities throughout the Lothians and the Borders. What is happening at Melrose is a matter for local management and local elected representatives.

I will come to that in a second, but first I will return to the issue that I was developing. I hope that David Davidson will take some comfort from the reported remarks of the chief fire officer of Grampian fire and rescue service. I understand that he has said that the shortfalls in his area are not serious. I say to Mike Rumbles that we acknowledged in our 2002 document "The Scottish Fire Service of The Future" that the issue of fire cover in sparsely populated areas had not been fully addressed. More recently, in our "Fire and Rescue Framework for Scotland", we noted that Scotland has a higher proportion of part-time firefighters than other parts  of the United Kingdom. The issues arising from that fact are being addressed in a number of ways. I mentioned the June 2003 pay agreement. In recent years Her Majesty's chief inspector of fire services for Scotland commissioned a programme of research to investigate ways in which part-time firefighters could become more integrated within the Scottish fire and rescue service. The second of two reports was published in 2003 and it made a number of detailed recommendations. Among the recommendations were some that were aimed at the recruitment of part-time firefighters. That issue is picked up in the "Fire and Rescue Framework for Scotland", where we gave an assurance that we would work with fire and rescue authorities to implement the report's recommendations. In a minute, I will mention what could be done. However, in the framework we state that we expect part-time staff to be given the same opportunities as their whole-time counterparts to participate in the integrated personal development system and to undertake development programmes commensurate with the requirements of individual fire and rescue authorities. We will work with fire and rescue authorities, but a key issue will be to prepare information, advice and literature that is relevant to the local area. We should not construct a centralised recruitment campaign; the campaign should be different in the Borders, in the Highlands and Islands, and in the north-east.

I will develop one point and then bring David Davidson in. Shiona Baird said that prevention is the key and that more resources are required for that. Our whole focus in developing fire services has been to consider prevention and safety rather than just considering how to react to disasters and tragedies as they occur—although we will undoubtedly always have to do that. The introduction of integrated risk management plans means that fire and rescue authorities will have to match available resources to the risks identified in those plans. But I say to Shiona Baird that politicians in this Parliament cannot have it both ways. If we attempted to dictate to local fire authorities—or to local authorities or to other local services—what they should do, Shiona Baird and others would be the first to criticise us for undue interference. So she cannot come to us and say that we should be doing more in the development of local responses. We have put more money into the fire services than ever before, but how those resources are used is for local management and local boards.

I note David Davidson's encouragement of our developing further spending plans to encourage businesses to release staff. We will certainly consider that, but it is not our immediate intention to develop the type of proposal he suggests. We examine our budgets very carefully. The money that has gone out to fire and other services is at record levels. We need to consider how we engage with local businesses. Even if chambers of commerce and other organisations can be engaged to give encouragement, that does not address local circumstances or, irrespective of what Scottish Chambers of Commerce says, what local businesses would have to do to implement proposals in a way that was commensurate with their needs. There are tensions and issues there that have to be addressed sensitively.  There is a perception that the general public has a low awareness of what is involved in being a part-time firefighter. We recognise the need to provide information to the general public in order to raise awareness and to promote the benefits of part-time firefighting. As a number of members have demonstrated in their speeches this afternoon, the security and safety of many communities in Scotland rely on part-time firefighters' dedication and expertise. I have mentioned the role that will be played by the integrated risk management plans in that. I hope that the different roles that are now available in the fire and rescue service will prove more attractive than the previous ones. I am hugely encouraged by the advances that have been made by our fire and rescue services in recent years and I look forward to those advances continuing in the future.  Meeting closed at 14:01.

The fire and rescue services have introduced multi-tier entry and accelerated promotion to attract a more diverse range of applicants. Although there is a long way to go, the number of female firefighters has tripled in the past 10 years. In the police service, the percentage of women increased from 11 per cent in 1995 to more than 21 per cent in 2005 and the percentage of officers from ethnic minorities increased from 0.3 per cent in 1996 to 1.2 per cent in 2004. We are providing direct financial assistance to SEMPERscotland, an ethnic minority support organisation that is working to improve recruitment, retention and community perceptions.

Any evidence that helps to advance the argument will be carefully examined. Marlyn Glen is right to mention retention: it is no success simply to recruit people in and then to lose them quickly. We want to ensure that when people join the uniformed services they are made welcome and that proper career development is provided and discussed. I want to see far more women and people from ethnic minority backgrounds advancing through the ranks of the police service and the fire service.

I am not aware of any conclusion from those studies, but I know that the police service takes its responsibilities very seriously. I would encourage—as the Minister for Justice has encouraged—greater integration of women and people from ethnic minority backgrounds. Any evidence from the studies will be closely examined. However, I want to emphasise that operational issues are for the police and for chief constables.

A range of measures are being undertaken to improve public safety in Scotland's towns. The Executive has provided £1 million over three years for the establishment of safe city centre initiatives. That approach has recently been extended to cover a further nine towns, including Kirkcaldy. Scotland's towns have also benefited from substantial investment in public space closed-circuit television systems, which are also funded by the Executive. A further £1 million is  committed to expanding CCTV in shopping and other areas and to supporting businesses and others to reduce crime.

We have not specifically committed extra funding. We are in regular discussion with the Scottish Retail Consortium. We have held a number of discussions with business representatives about how to tackle retail crime and we will continue to do so. Although money is important, and although, as I have demonstrated to Christine May, we have made a significant investment, I hope that we can also continue to improve our operational practices and use the money effectively, looking at lessons that have been learned elsewhere and applying them. I accept the need for investment where it is appropriate; I also want good practice to be rolled out across Scotland.

Under the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, the police have been given additional powers to seize, retain and dispose of on and off-road vehicles that are being used in an antisocial manner. We have consulted the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and other interested parties on guidance for those new powers and that guidance will be issued shortly.

The registration of vehicles of whatever kind is probably a matter that is reserved to Westminster, but the wanton vandalism and destruction to public spaces that Jean Turner has described should and can be dealt with under powers that existed even before the passing of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. She and local representatives need to discuss the matter with the council and the local police. As I explained, new powers are available under the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. We have said in the Parliament that those powers are already being used to good effect in parts of Scotland and I hope that other forces will use them to good effect where doing so is appropriate.

I am sure that Donald Gorrie recognises the significant investment that has been made in youth justice services. I know that he is raising a broader issue, but he talks about the investment that is needed and what must be done to translate that into practice at local level. I would be interested to hear whether he thinks that that should be decided by the Executive from the centre or whether he thinks that there should still be local decision making that is able to respond to local needs. If it is the latter, there will always be variations across Scotland that we cannot resolve from the centre.

Hear, hear.

I agree with what Kenny MacAskill has said about the difficulties of short-term funding. Sometimes, given the pace and scale at which we have invested, we have had to try out new things, and it would be wrong for us to give guarantees of indefinite funding for such initiatives. That said, we should try to introduce some stability where something has been proven to work. The context of which Kenny MacAskill speaks—the huge scale of deprivation and the links to antisocial behaviour and criminality—poses a challenge for us all in the Parliament. One of the things that we might all have to face up to is that we need to start to invest at a greater level in such areas than we invest in others across a range of services—health, education, social work and housing—to make a proportionate difference. Such a funding approach might have consequences for other parts of Scotland. Does the member agree that we need to face up to that situation?

I commend Bill Butler. It is a brave man who would attempt to substitute for Annabel Goldie, but he did so exceptionally well. He has not only offered Parliament a comprehensive overview of the committee's report but has touched on a number of significant subjects. This is a welcome opportunity to debate the Justice 2 Committee's report and to focus on youth justice issues. I pay tribute to the committee for the work that it has done. It took a significant amount of evidence from a wide range of groups, and the report is both comprehensive and balanced. We welcome the report's  acknowledgement of our national strategic approach and our support for national and local agencies, and we acknowledge the committee's concerns and recommendations for action in specific areas. It has made many pertinent points well. We agree with the committee—it would be foolish to disagree—that more can be done. We have made huge strides in the last few years, but there is more that we need to do. We have attempted to concentrate on increases in funding, and we have put in place the necessary infrastructure. Having done that, we must now turn our focus to delivery. When we talk about youth justice, it is important that we remember that the vast majority of young people in Scotland do not offend. Of those who do, most will respond positively to the guiding hand of a concerned parent, the support of a teacher, the involvement of a youth worker or a warning from the police. Our starting point in tackling youth offending must be to place the young person at the centre of what we do. We need to put their needs and their deeds at the centre. That is not about excusing their behaviour or their actions, but about providing support where and when it is needed, as well as challenging their offending behaviour. We must do that because we care passionately about young people, because we do not want to lose anyone to a life of crime and because we want to help them to turn round their lives and make the most of the opportunities that are out there for them. We want to enable every young person in Scotland to become a successful learner, a confident individual, an effective contributor to society and a responsible citizen. So, what are we doing to tackle the youth offending of the minority? Wherever possible, we are looking to prevent and divert young people from offending through positive interventions. We are investing heavily in community safety partnerships, in community quality of life and in closing the opportunity gap—all of which seek to engage young people in their communities and to divert them from crime. Bill Butler touched on an important point, to which I may return if I have the time. It is exceptionally important that we give young people the opportunity to do something positive in their communities. During the summer, I visited a project called the pulse in West Dunbartonshire. It is an imaginative scheme that has, as Bill Butler suggested should be done, brought together a range of services—education, youth services, the police, social workers and others—to offer young people a variety of opportunities to engage in activities that they enjoy but have probably never had the chance to experience, such as music and  drama, outdoor activities and various leisure activities. What I saw there was positive and enthusiastic engagement with young people. I hope to learn more over the coming months about how successful that project has been. We are committed to developing services for children, but we are also committed to reforming services, including the children's hearings system, to ensure that our children and young people get the help and support that they need when they need them. We want to challenge their behaviour and meet their needs, and we want to intervene in an appropriate, proportionate and timely manner to improve their life chances. Consultation on those proposals closes tomorrow. We need a wide range of interventions such as counselling, work with families, and supporting education, which all rightly have a place, so that we can ensure effective action in all cases. Intensive community-based programmes, including electronic monitoring, and residential and secure care also have their place, however. For some offenders, an antisocial behaviour order might be appropriate. Many members will know that last week an antisocial behaviour order was deemed appropriate for a young person in my area of Renfrewshire. However, it is important that we view in context the use of antisocial behaviour orders for young people under the age of 16. Such orders should be used ordinarily only when other measures have been tried but have failed; for example, when it looks likely that secure accommodation will be required. They should be used only as one element in a range of measures that are designed to change a young person's behaviour. We also need to ensure that we have effective links between the youth and adult justice systems and that we make the necessary links in order to share good practice and reduce reoffending. An example of that is the Management of Offenders etc (Scotland) Bill. We cannot be, and we are not, complacent. The important themes of the committee's report—improving multi-agency working and addressing gaps in services—are crucial if we are to have the youth justice system that we want. The report has helpfully flagged up a range of important issues; in some, work with local partners is already on-going, in others, more action is undoubtedly required. Our response to the committee made it clear that we are committed to working with partners to take action. We want to ensure effective multi-agency working. We will place new statutory duties on all responsible agencies to work together to ensure that young people get the support that they need, we will ensure that there is appropriate  representation in all youth justice strategy groups and we will ensure that we identify and share examples of effective multi-agency delivery and information-sharing.

Susan Deacon makes a valid point. She is right: multi-agency working does not apply just to youth justice. The time is right for examination of how services are delivered locally and across Scotland; indeed, the concept of community planning is an attempt to ensure that agencies come together at local level. However, much more needs to be done. We need to reflect on the experience of the past five or six years in considering the best way forward. We do not want to create bureaucratic responses and we want at the same time to ensure that we break down barriers. There is no excuse for people to retreat into their own areas of responsibility and to blame others when things go wrong. We also need to address gaps in services. Since 2000-01, funding for youth justice has increased remarkably from £3.5 million to £63 million this year. That is a huge increase in anyone's language. Most of that money has been used to build capacity to allow local authorities, police, and the voluntary sector to bring new services on stream. That means services that are designed to meet local needs and priorities and address local gaps. Bill Whyte from the criminal justice social work development centre for Scotland told the Committee: "more has probably been done in the past three years than had been done in the previous 20 years."—[ Justice 2 Committee, Official Report , 11 January 2005; c 1257.] Bill Butler made a valid point about different funding streams and the need to ensure continuity. We need to examine that, but we are encouraging three-year funding streams under the Scottish compact. At the same time, however, we also need to try out some pilot projects.  Without skipping over other points that the committee raised, let me simply say that we will certainly work to ensure that there is better and more co-ordination. Having had the opportunity over the summer to visit a number of projects such as Includem, I have been heartened to see the work that is being done to make a positive impact on the lives of children and young people from sometimes very difficult backgrounds. I was very much encouraged by the commitment not just of the staff in those projects but also, it is fair to say, of the young people who were being engaged with. That commitment can make the difference. Changes will not happen overnight, but we are in this for the long haul. We are committed to providing the support—including funding—that local partners need. The committee's report highlights a number of key issues and areas and I hope that we can, by focusing on those, build on existing activity and continue to look forward. I am confident that we can make our vision for children and young people a reality. I commend the committee for its work.

No. This is a matter entirely for the Faculty of Advocates, but we are not aware of any such problems.

Mike Pringle's question raises a broader issue. There have been significant improvements since the introduction of the Bonomy reforms, but I know that those reforms have caused concern to some members of the Faculty of Advocates. Our main responsibility is to make the courts system more efficient and to try to ensure that public money is properly and effectively used. With the Bonomy reforms, we are seeing that happen. However, there was an increase of £3.7 million in total payments to advocates or counsel and to solicitor-advocates from the legal aid fund in 2003-04. If Mike Pringle wishes, I could go on and give him more details about the significant increases that there have been to advocates and solicitor-advocates. Those increases have been 33 per cent compared with increases to solicitors of 4 per cent, in terms of the money going to support cases. I would regret any consequences such as the ones that Mike Pringle suggests, but the improvements as a result of the Bonomy reforms are to be commended.

I recognise what Bill Aitken is saying about grandparents' contributions; others have mentioned it. As a grandparent myself, I know how much I value my contact with my grandchildren. We started out by considering a grandparents' charter, but we came to realise that we should be considering the needs and rights of the grandchildren, so we have renamed it the grandchildren's charter. It will reflect the contribution of grandparents, but we have to consider the children first and others second.

First, I thank all those who were involved in preparing the stage 1 report on the Family Law (Scotland) Bill, in particular Pauline McNeill and the members of the Justice 1 Committee, and also members of the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee. I also want to express my thanks and appreciation to the many individuals and organisations that provided oral and written evidence. The Justice 1 Committee's report is considered and balanced. I am grateful to committee members for their hard work and detailed consideration of the issues, for the constructive tone of the report and for their endorsement of the principles of the bill. Before I go into the detail of our response to the report, I will set out the context of the bill. Family law is the one aspect of our legal system that touches everyone's lives. Not one of us here today is exempt from it. Many occasions are happy and joyous—the birth of a child and the marriage of a close friend or relative—but family law bites hardest when things go wrong, for example when a couple separates or one party falls ill or dies. We have consulted extensively on our proposed reforms, but it is important to hear people's views on these important matters and to reflect on them. An individual's opinion is often grounded in their own experiences, which are sometimes bitter, and there are many other people who argue from polarised positions. As we have discovered, the subject is not characterised by consensus, but I believe that the bill reflects the issues and interests of the majority and that our proposals have won general support from a broad band of responsible opinion. I am in no doubt that family law needs to be reformed. We need a legal framework that supports families in today's Scotland. In the  1950s, around 90,000 children a year were born to married parents, compared with just over 4,000 a year to unmarried parents. Last year, by contrast, nearly 29,000 were born to married parents and more than 25,000 were born to unmarried parents. Of the 29,000 children born to married parents, many will subsequently be reared in lone-parent families or in families where adults other than their natural parents play a part. Therefore, we need to ensure that family law protects all those children, reflects their interests and recognises that they all deserve our full and equal consideration. We cannot and will not ignore their rights and needs. Family law in Scotland needs to reflect the reality of family composition, not try to determine it. I stress that we value families whatever shape they take. We want to see stability in families. We want all our children to get the best start in life and we know that that can best be achieved in a stable, loving family environment. However, sadly, that is not always possible. Where a family faces difficulties, we want it to be supported and, wherever possible, its difficulties to be resolved at an early stage. Where family breakdown is unavoidable, we want the future to be resolved with the minimum disruption, conflict and acrimony and with improved outcomes for everyone, but especially for the children who are caught up in the dispute. That is why Scottish ministers have not been afraid to broach the difficult issues—to reform our divorce laws, to extend parental responsibilities and rights to include unmarried fathers, to introduce safeguards for cohabiting couples and to extend protection for the vulnerable. Three core principles have guided our work: first and foremost, safeguarding the best interests of children; secondly, promoting and supporting stable families; and thirdly, updating the law to reflect the reality of family life in Scotland today. However, legislative reform on it own is not enough, which is why we are also working on a package of non-legislative measures. They include the development of parental agreements, which will be a tool to help parents who are separating to focus on their children and to consider their future needs; a charter for grandchildren, which recognises the importance of supporting children to continue to develop relationships with the people in their lives whom they care about; and an information campaign, because we know that reforming the law will not make any difference if people do not know about it. We all know that there are many myths and misunderstandings about the law that need to be addressed, and we will tackle that. The stage 1 report is detailed in its consideration of the issues. I have responded formally to the specific issues raised and was able to respond to  a number of them positively. For example, the Justice 1 Committee expressed concern that the law on interdicts is becoming increasingly complex and that our proposals would add to that complexity. Domestic abuse or violence is an insidious problem, and we accept that readily accessible remedies are needed. We are happy to take on board the committee's request that we simplify the rules for attaching powers of arrest to interdicts. I will lodge amendments on that matter at stage 2. On a related matter, we are aware that Scottish Women's Aid is deeply concerned about safe contact for children and their mothers, and we share that concern. Domestic abuse is a scourge on our society. When women and children escape an abusive situation, their continued safety and well-being must be ensured. However, we also share the committee's concerns about the dangers that are inherent in introducing presumptions into this aspect of family law. The welfare of the child is the paramount consideration. Judges consider the facts and circumstances of each individual case before concluding what is in the child's best interests. We are considering the issues that were raised directly with ministers and with the committee during its evidence taking. Today's debate is not about the details, but about the general principles of the bill, which, in the main, have received broad support. However, I will pick out a few of the key issues that were raised by the committee. We have proposed reforms to the rules on divorce. I recognise that it is a difficult and thorny issue, that there are many conflicting views, and that no reform will please everyone. The driving force behind our proposals is the belief that, where it is safe, children are entitled to the loving involvement of two parents in their lives, irrespective of how the parents feel about each other. We do not propose to encourage or advocate divorce. As I have said, the best outcome would be for couples to confront and overcome their relationship difficulties, but the state cannot force people to remain married. A certain and increasing proportion of marriages will end in divorce. We want to reduce acrimony in divorce, especially where children are concerned, and enable couples who are determined to end their marriage to do so without unnecessary conflict and recrimination. Forcing people to stay married when a relationship has clearly broken down adds nothing. I understand that people who accept the principles of divorce will have differences of view about the appropriate periods and that others will argue about the periods but will be opposed to divorce altogether. However, although I accept that we should do nothing that encourages the break-up of a relationship that might otherwise survive, we  need to reflect on the increasing break-up of marriages. Our proposals accept the reality of life in Scotland today. I note that the committee has not yet reached a consensus view, and I look forward to further debate on this important issue at stage 2. I accept that providing effective support for families is a key component, and I welcome the committee's recognition that the Executive has introduced measures to build capacity in the services that support family relationships. Centrally, we support the national organisations, and we have set them a challenging task—to raise their game, to provide services in a more integrated and coherent way, to maximise their efficiency and to strengthen the local network of services. However, there is only so much that central Government can do. We all know that the services that work best are those that are developed in response to local needs. Local authorities have no less a role to play in developing and supporting services for families that face relationship difficulties than they do in any of the other services for families and children who are at risk. After all, such services are indirectly a service for children. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has argued consistently against ring fencing, because it believes that local authorities are best placed to make local decisions about the use of funding, but I know from many letters that I have received that there are concerns that in many areas insufficient support is provided for those services. I will discuss that with COSLA, but the Scottish Executive cannot be a substitute for local decision makers making local funding decisions on services for which they are currently responsible. I am particularly glad to note that the committee welcomes the extension of parental responsibilities and rights to unmarried fathers and that it shares our view that legislation should encourage and promote fathers' participation in their families. Before I finish, I want to say a few words about our proposals to introduce a package of legal safeguards for cohabiting couples. That is perhaps the most complex and controversial aspect of the bill and it is important that I set out what we are trying to achieve. I want to remind members of why we need the legislation. We need to introduce greater certainty, fairness and clarity to the law, and to protect the legally vulnerable when a relationship ends. What we have seen in the course of preparing for the bill, and what has come out during the committee's evidence taking, is that there are myths in Scotland about the rights that people have when they cohabit and myths about common-law marriages. Some people mistakenly believe that they have rights where no rights exist.  That leaves them vulnerable and we need to address that. Our proposals are not about undermining marriage or about creating marriage-equivalent rights for couples who have chosen not to marry. It is just as important to protect the right of adults to live unfettered by financial and other legal obligations towards partners and to balance that with the need to protect the vulnerable. Our focus has been on those cohabiting relationships that offer some evidence of the partners' commitment to a joint life. We have set out to create what I would argue is a fair regime to safeguard the interests of those in cohabiting relationships who may be vulnerable by virtue of their exposure to risk or harm, and to provide a fair and just basis for sorting out disputes between cohabitants when things go wrong. The bill will bring Scottish family law into the 21 st century. It will increase protection for the vulnerable and, most important, it will improve outcomes for our children. Our children should be able to live in family units free of acrimony and bitterness, whatever shape those family units might form or however they might be re-formed. Their needs should be at the forefront of all of our minds, particularly at the most difficult stages of family life. They should be innocent to the problems faced by the adults in their lives and free to enjoy their childhood without being used as pawns in adult disputes. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Family Law (Scotland) Bill.

We intend to bring forward any legislation arising from the extreme pornography consultation in this Parliament. As was announced yesterday, there will be an opportunity to do that next summer in the sentencing bill.

I do not accept Donald Gorrie's analysis. Any time that we have used a Sewel motion, we have done so because that has been the most appropriate and effective way of dealing with legislation. Controversial issues have been dealt with in this Parliament and we will continue to try to bring through this Parliament whatever legislation is appropriate. However, we also recognise the value that is afforded to us by the Sewel mechanism, which will be used judiciously, appropriately and, I believe, sparingly, given the overall amount of legislation with which we deal.

High Court reform is working. The early, informal signs are very promising with, it seems, 1,000 fewer victims and witnesses having to come to court unnecessarily in the first six weeks. A full evaluation has been put in place and results will be available next September. It will look at reductions in the number of cases adjourned or needing extra time and at improvements in the experience of victims and witnesses.

Karen Whitefield makes a valuable point about the role and place of victims and witnesses in the judicial system. We have given significant emphasis in the Executive and Parliament to what many perceived as a gap in the support that is given to victims and witnesses. We have put in place a number of measures to give greater support to them and to recognise their role and the stresses and strains of being a victim or a witness in the courts. Anything that can be done to improve their experience, support them and enable them to give their full evidence so that justice can be served must be considered. It is in the interests not only of the judicial system, but of victims and witnesses that cases are dealt with quickly and effectively and that they reach a speedy conclusion. I commend everyone who has been involved in seeing through the improvements. There is still more to come, but the early signs are very encouraging and bode well for the future.

We support and encourage the use of alternative methods of dispute resolution where that is appropriate. We have published guidance for the public on how to resolve disputes without going to court and we are providing support and funding for a range of mediation and advice services. That includes funding that was recently announced for two new in-court mediation pilot schemes and for the Scottish Mediation Network.

Bill Butler is right to refer to the success of the Edinburgh project. When I visited it recently to open the new mediation rooms, I was impressed not only with the dedication of the volunteers who were there, but with the effectiveness of the scheme. It is in everyone's interest for people to achieve an early and amicable resolution to a dispute without having to  go through the full rigours—with the associated time demands and cost—of a court hearing. Although the Edinburgh project deals mainly with small claims, Bill Butler's suggestion is useful and I would like the projects in Aberdeen and Glasgow to deal with summary cause and ordinary cause. If we can help to establish that such a mediation service works for more complicated claims, we can give everyone confidence in seeking resolution without having to resort to a full court hearing.

The funding of local projects should be a matter for responsible local agencies. There is an historical anomaly in the fact that the Executive funds 10 or 11 local mediation services throughout Scotland. We are seeking to rectify the situation by transferring the funding to a more appropriate local agency. I do not think that it would be right for the Executive to determine all decisions about funding for local projects. Taking that approach to its logical conclusion, we would not stop at funding family mediation; we would fund every local voluntary project through the Executive, which clearly would not work. On the other hand, it is right that the Executive should look to support the national bodies that help to develop, promote and establish the wide variety of services that exist across the country. We are doing that. We have invested substantially in that and we are working with those national bodies, which are going through a change programme to make them more effective. Additional funding has been allocated and we remain committed to that.

We have been in discussions with local government to establish an effective mechanism for the disbursement of funds for local bodies. I hope to reach a resolution in the near future. However, that does not take away from the pertinent point raised by Jeremy Purvis. There is a need for local government across Scotland—this reflects Christine Grahame's concerns—to  recognise the value of such services. It is not for the Executive to dictate to local government what it should do with its funds. However, I encourage those in local government to look carefully at what is being delivered and achieved in their areas. I commend to them the value that is delivered by family mediation services and I exhort them not to underestimate the harm that would be caused if those services were not supported.

We have yet to see any evidence to demonstrate that such courses have a positive and long-term impact on reoffending rates. Most offenders are likely to present with complex social problems and they can encounter difficulties in reintegrating into their local communities. It is for those reasons that we are investing in programmes such as constructs—rigorous community-based programmes for young male offenders that independent evaluation has shown to be effective.

I exhort Fergus Ewing to get in touch with the reality of dealing with youth offending, rather than in touch with reality TV. I suspect that his viewing habits are as socially useful as Alex Salmond's 2 am viewing of teletext. As far as the other issue is concerned, I have  answered Fergus Ewing's question before. The matter is for individual forces to consider. A number of local initiatives throughout the country can make a contribution. We will examine with interest anything that is proven to do so. However, it would be wrong for us to dictate to local forces exactly what they should do in their areas.

The Minister for Justice and the Minister for Communities met Scottish Women's Aid in December when its concerns about aspects of the Family Law (Scotland) Bill were discussed. Since then, my officials have been in regular contact with Scottish Women's Aid.

I am aware of the concerns that have been expressed not only by Scottish Women's Aid, but by a number of other organisations. Clearly, we do not wish any child to be put into damaging circumstances. The whole of the Family Law (Scotland) Bill is predicated on the best interests of the child and that approach will continue to influence any decisions that we take. We will discuss with Scottish Women's Aid and others what can best be done to ensure that that happens. The one thing that I am clear about is that we will not proceed with any course of action that looks for any reason at the interests of any adult rather than at the interests of the child.

To date, six intensive support and monitoring service disposals have been made by the children's hearings system. One restriction of  liberty order has been imposed by the courts on a young person under 16.

I am not sure that I understand the logic of the question. I will clarify for Mike Rumbles. One restriction of liberty order was issued by the court. Six tagging—or intensive support and monitoring service—decisions were made by the children's hearings system. It is true that there was to some degree a slow start because some areas were slow to put staff in place. However, a responsible attitude is being adopted and people are committed to making the scheme work. We said at the time that there was no carte blanche; tagging is a particular disposal to avoid putting someone into a secure unit. That is the way in which the scheme operates and the numbers reflect the fact that people are carefully considering all other options before any decision is made. At the same time, tagging is an effective disposal and I certainly hope that those responsible in the local areas where the scheme operates look carefully at its use and that we see effective improvement in the behaviour of the individuals to whom it is applied.

A number of local authorities and police forces are blazing the trail in using the provisions of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, which has brought relief and respite to their  communities. Monitoring systems for the use of the act are being put in place to ensure that the provisions are used effectively throughout the country.

The agencies in Fife are to be congratulated on their efforts. It is clear that they have brought relief to some hard-pressed communities. The public response shows just how much they appreciate what has been done. I invite anyone who wants to know how the act can be used effectively to look at Fife and other areas in Scotland that have successfully used the new powers. We intend to produce a regular newsletter showing exactly where the act is having an effect and to disseminate it throughout Scotland. We want to encourage best practice. We want to ensure that everyone is aware of what can be achieved. We will look at ways to ensure that that best practice note is not just confined to police, local authorities and other agencies. We want community councils, tenants organisations and the wider public to see what is happening throughout Scotland. I will take steps to ensure that MSPs get copies of that good practice note so that they can distribute it to their constituents.

We have had a fascinating debate in which members of all parties have made good points. I think that it was Bill Aitken who asked why we were having a debate before the consultation had finished; he said that he hoped that we did not have a closed mind. What we have heard confirms why we had the debate—it represented an opportunity to open up the discussion. Far from having a closed mind, we want to solicit a wide range of views, regardless of how challenging they might be to what we or others think. I thank members of all parties for sending out a number of extremely good, fascinating, well-constructed and positive messages. I want to pick up on another point that Bill Aitken raised, which Stewart Stevenson echoed when he talked about the consultation document and how the consultation is proceeding. If Stewart Stevenson thinks that the consultation document is bad, he ought to have seen the original. His point is valid. I put on record that, even though the consultation document has been issued, the Minister for Justice and I are still striving to ensure that the consultation goes beyond the usual suspects; we have again instructed officials to that effect this week. We do not want it to be confined to lawyers—we want to hear what ordinary  members of the public have to say and we do not believe that the solution is simply to stick an advert in a newspaper somewhere and hope that people will respond. We have told our officials that we want them to explore other ways of ensuring that the widest possible audience is engaged in the process. We have a genuine desire to hear from people. We are not bereft of ideas—we have put suggestions to our officials—but if anyone has anything to say about how the consultation can be widened, we will be more than delighted to hear from them.

Indeed—the same principles apply. I would welcome any suggestions on how that consultation could be widened. I will return to that point. I turn to the line of Kenny MacAskill and the SNP on a commission, which was adequately dealt with by Annabel Goldie. What we are proposing represents an opportunity to act rather an opportunity to delay. The consultation will give everyone—individual MSPs, political parties, lawyers, voluntary organisations and individuals—the opportunity to make suggestions that go further than might have been thought. [ Interruption. ] There is an opportunity to think radically, but it would not be right to delay that process by setting up a commission.

The point is well made and I hope that it will be reflected in the consultation. I do not expect the process to end with the consultation—it should be evolutionary. That takes me to another issue raised by John Swinney, who asked what we are doing to join up all the different points and whether we are seeing the issues in a more integrated way. I suggest to him that we are. In a short period, we are looking to bring about a fundamental transformation of our legal system. This debate fits into that transformation. We have had High Court reforms, reforms of summary justice, the Management of Offenders etc (Scotland) Bill and we are consulting on the regulation of the legal profession, to which I will return. We also intend to consider the reform of civil law. Legal aid is vital in underpinning access to justice.  John Swinney mentioned the regulation of the legal profession. We want to ensure that the profession is properly regulated and that people are able to make complaints. If there are suggestions to be made, people should let us hear them. A number of members, including John Swinney, Patrick Harvie and Jeremy Purvis, mentioned mediation and alternatives. Several members spoke about non-qualified people—perhaps not barefoot lawyers, as Stewart Stevenson termed them—becoming involved. We are keen to build on the good work that has already been done. We are not proposing to transfer responsibility from local authorities to the Executive, but good work, funded locally, is being done by Citizens Advice Scotland and by Money Advice Scotland, which is attempting to provide a regulated quality-assurance structure. Good work is also being done by welfare rights officers. The point has been made that we need to ensure that people access the appropriate advice, at the appropriate time, from the appropriate individual, without necessarily having recourse to lawyers. We are keen to promote and support mediation where that is the best option. We have considered some of the work that is being done by Chief Judge Bell and others in Baltimore. Recently, a lawyer wrote to ask me to write to a housing department about what was happening in a case. Presumably, that lawyer charged the individual who was seeking legal advice and assistance. I do not want that situation to continue. As Patrick Harvie and others said, we provide such assistance at public expense and no one should be charged twice for it. Jackie Baillie and a number of others asked about the use of part V powers. Good work is being done in that area. A number of projects, including in Inverness and the Highlands, have already been approved for extension and have proven to be valuable. We are keen to extend that work and are considering a range of diverse projects. If more can be done using part V powers, it should be done. I am keen to work with the Scottish Legal Aid Board to ensure that that work continues. Similarly, the public defenders work is proving its worth and adding significant value. John Home Robertson raised legitimate concerns about the time that we are taking to review small claims work and jurisdiction limits. I apologise for that. We are struggling with a particularly thorny problem. I need to consider whether there is another way of extracting small claims from the system or whether we should opt for a more fundamental review that examines in detail the arguments of those involved. There is no excuse for the delay, and I am sorry for it. As the member said, we need to find a way forward.  All in all, this has been an exceptionally good debate that has contributed a great deal to identifying the issues that we need to consider. We will go through in fine detail all the points that have been made. We will meet officials to ensure that none of the suggestions that have been made today is overlooked. If, in the fullness of time, any member wants to submit more ideas to us, we will be more than happy to consider them. I thank the members who have contributed to the debate and hope that, at the end of the process, we will make proposals that meet the interests of justice—as many members have said—and add to the quality of the support and service that are available in Scotland today.

I accept Christine Grahame's point about the Justice 1 Committee's report. The Executive considered the report; indeed, it helped to inform what we did. Does she agree, however, that notwithstanding whether we accept any or all of the report, it is appropriate for the Executive to take soundings and to consult before it implements anything? Indeed, we would have been criticised had we not done so.

Heaven forfend.

The Parliament has been right to focus in recent years on the problems that exist in many communities throughout Scotland. What some people have to suffer is, frankly, intolerable, and it would be remiss of us not to address their concerns. We were right to consider what legislation was required to ensure safer and more secure communities and to invest in bringing peace and security to people throughout Scotland. However, sometimes there has been a loss of perspective in the debate. Certain sections have concentrated on the negatives, instead of considering the wider policies that we are pursuing. The Executive has been at pains to stress at every turn that the vast majority of young people in Scotland are decent; that they are a credit to their families, to themselves and to the wider community; that they have much to contribute; and that they have a great deal of potential. We have also recognised that sometimes, through no fault of their own, young people suffer in a way that leads them into unacceptable behaviour. We know that we must work with those young people to help them through difficult times. We have tried to strike a balance in the way in which we approach such matters, because we know that if we invest in young people we are investing in the future. We know that if we help to develop confident young people, they will help to develop confident communities. That is why, as well as taking legislative measures and introducing neighbourhood wardens, we have invested in a number of schemes that promote the positive side of things and develop the potential and capacity of young people throughout Scotland. The project that is at the centre of tonight's debate is an example of how the Scottish Executive is providing positive support and encouragement to young people. The specific focus of the project is on building bridges between generations.

I was about to describe how the project came about. It is not the way forward for the Executive to take responsibility for funding projects throughout Scotland. It would be wrong for Government to be involved in that and we do not have the capacity to do it. However, in the years 2004 to 2006 we have provided around £10 million for diversionary projects for young people, through the local action fund. North Lanarkshire Council received £700,000 over two years from the local action fund. That brings me to the crux of tonight's debate: how do young people and communities become beneficiaries? A number of factors come into play. Cathie Craigie mentioned the congratulations that are due to Karen Whitefield, because we had a local member who was alive to the possibilities, was aware of a problem, sought a solution and tried to bring both sides together. In an imaginative way she approached both sides, but also approached the local council, to which I pay credit. Yes, we funded North Lanarkshire Council with £700,000 over two years from the local action fund, but it was the council that decided to use that money in an imaginative way to support 49 local projects, including mobile climbing walls, video equipment, youth services for people with autism, skateboard parks and a number of other things. A local decision was taken based on local needs and working imaginatively. The DVD was produced with limited funding—for something like £7,000—and is to everyone's credit. One of the remarkable things about it is not just that it has helped to bring together two groups in a community who were ignorant of each others' views, feelings, needs, anger and frustrations, but that it has produced an asset that I hope will be used throughout North Lanarkshire. Cathie Craigie might want to persuade North Lanarkshire Council to consider what can be done in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth. The DVD might have been produced in Airdrie, but it has applicability in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth, Paisley, Peebles and anywhere else in Scotland. Its quality is remarkable, as is its humanity and the humour with which it gets its message across. I do not mean this to be a backhanded compliment, but the DVD is probably better than some of the things that we see on television. If TV producers and schedulers want to look at something that resonates with people, helps them understand issues and stimulates debate, they could do no better than watch the DVD that was produced by the just youth project in Airdrie. It is a credit to everyone concerned. It is quality and it is effective.  Karen Whitefield said that the DVD was touching. I, too, found it touching. It was interesting to see older people's ignorance of what young people feel, and young people's ignorance of what older people feel. However, the way in which they went about changing that was commendable. It was touching to listen to the personal comments that were made. It was moving and emotional to see how the barriers were overcome, suspicion was broken down and people engaged with each other. At the end of it, some older people who had been critical of young people said, "Aye, they need this and they need that, and we need to understand the next thing about them." Fiona Hyslop asked whether older people ever hung about street corners. Older people condemn young people for truancy, vandalism, graffiti, stealing, crime and all the rest of it, but one of the older women said in a jokey aside that when she was young she used to go into shops and steal from them. Of course, if older people saw a young person doing that now they would be outraged. It was interesting to see that context. The DVD is a remarkable production. It is well produced, quality and thoughtful. I recommend that those who have not seen it take time to consider how they can use it in their communities. I will examine how we can use it beyond Airdrie and North Lanarkshire. The project is an excellent example of how funding from the centre can stimulate action in the locality—action that has resonance not only for the immediate problem, but for the wider community.  I thank Karen Whitefield and North Lanarkshire Council. A debt of gratitude is also owed to the older people who, despite their suspicions, took the risk of becoming involved and who, like Cathie Craigie and others, were a bit unfamiliar with the technology. Their humour, warmth and compassion came across strongly. I also give my thanks and gratitude to the young people who have invested their time in the project; despite perhaps being a bit worried about how the project might affect their credibility, they engaged in it with enthusiasm. They have made a positive contribution, which I hope will be watched much more widely. I thank the production team, who helped them in the process. They have produced something that stands comparison with the work of so-called professionals.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

I am not sure whether to answer Mike Pringle or Bruce Crawford. The Scottish Executive is taking action to address both the symptoms and the causes of antisocial behaviour. As well as introducing new legislation and improving antisocial behaviour services, we are continuing our long-term investment to deal with the causes of antisocial behaviour through our programmes to tackle poverty and promote social inclusion.

I have not read the report from which Bruce Crawford quoted, but I am sure that our officials will have done so. Over many years, successive Governments, as well as many local authorities, have tried to do exactly what that report suggests. In many communities in different parts of Scotland, initiative after initiative has tried to empower communities. I know that attempts to do so have certainly been made in some communities in Renfrewshire, where I live.  As well as attempting to tackle the immediate problems of antisocial behaviour and its impact, we recognise that, if such attempts are to be successful, we must also address the long-term issues by tackling problems of poverty—as this Administration, across its different departments, is attempting to do—and by looking at the fundamental health problems that beset many communities. Of course, we also need to examine the educational opportunities that are available to young people. That is why we have made the largest-ever investment in school building in this country, why we are investing so significantly in early years and why we have provided more teachers. By doing that, we hope that we will improve young people's education and, slowly but surely, their confidence. Empowering and enabling people are the means through which we can give them the confidence to stand up and challenge and to take decisions for their own communities. The problem is very deep—it cannot be answered quickly in a response to a parliamentary question—but empowerment is important. The fundamental long-term strategy of the Administration is very much in accord with what Bruce Crawford has suggested.

That is a valid point. From some of the recent discussion about what has been happening on Beach Boulevard in Aberdeen, I know that the police are taking effective action and that that action is supported by the local community. I also know that some politicians—including councillors and members of the Scottish Parliament—have criticised the action that the police have taken in that respect. The police are doing their job, using the new powers that were given to them by the Scottish Parliament. We should support the police where they take steps to tackle antisocial behaviour. We should also hope that councillors will take their duties and responsibilities seriously and that they will ensure that officials in council departments play their part in ensuring that co-ordinated and integrated action has an effect on local communities.

This has been a useful debate. It is interesting to note that, in the course of the Justice 2 Committee's deliberations, a consensus has developed that we cannot afford to tolerate the status quo, despite the things that the Conservatives have said. Member after member—many of them committee members—has outlined the desperate problems that Scotland has with reoffending. The rate of reoffending is unacceptable and I think that it would be a dereliction of our duty if we failed to take action. The committee has done a thorough job in attempting to advance a considered opinion on the wide range of issues that are associated with the bill. I thank all the individuals who participated in the process, including all those associated with the committee, for their work. This morning, we have heard some eloquent, considered, passionate and thoughtful speeches, which enhance the Parliament's ability to do its job. That is why I say, with all sincerity, that I am profoundly disappointed that the Conservatives continue not to be influenced by the quality of the speeches from around the chamber on a range of  justice-related matters. I know that there are some thoughtful, intelligent and compassionate people in the Conservative party—

Individually, when one talks to them, they reflect intelligent thoughts, but when they come to the chamber collectively, they somehow fail to rise to the occasion. They consistently diminish themselves as individuals, and they diminish their party and, I would argue, the Parliament by not rising to the challenge in the way that other members do. The type of speech that they make contributes little to the process of having a constructive debate.

Would that that were what is happening, but it is not. If only the Tories were able to advance some intelligent arguments against what we are proposing and to marshal some evidence and statistics that would prove their case. In many justice debates, I have heard speeches in which members have opposed what Cathy Jamieson and I have been saying but have done so in a measured and thoughtful way. Being opposed to our proposals does not mean that members have to come in and parrot two slogans in a thoughtless manner.

No, thank you. The Tories are unable to back up and justify their arguments. They diminish themselves and they diminish the Parliament.

I do not want to go into the point in respect of the individual, but the point that Tricia Marwick touched on is critical. Margaret Mitchell asked why we should not simply allow the co-operation and flexibility that exist at present to continue. Tricia Marwick—in a measured, concise and moving contribution—explained clearly why the status quo is not an option. Even if no other argument was put forward for why our proposals are right, her comments about the need for us to ensure action would suffice. We cannot allow the argument of those who say, "Give us more time and more money," or, "There need to be co-operation and flexibility."

No, thank you. We would be failing the public if we did not take steps to ensure that action is taken. The tragic case in Fife and the cases that have taken place in recent years in Edinburgh, Lanarkshire and Glasgow are evidence of the need for us to take action.

Yes, certainly.

A number of practical steps have been put in place. In September, there will be an update of the 1999 practice note on housing sex offenders. We are progressing joint training on enhanced risk assessment of sex offenders; we are providing accredited programmes both in prison and in the community; and we are preparing guidance to embed protocols for sharing information in local practice. I hope that Paul Martin will find some reassurance in the fact that those things are being done.  We believe that the argument for action has been made. Therefore, I must agree to disagree with many friends and colleagues with whom I have worked over the years, and Cathy Jamieson is in the same position. We are not prepared to say, "Leave us alone and things will turn out all right in the end." The evidence is not there to justify that. We will come back on a number of specific points at stage 2. Bill Butler asked for clarity on the interface between the SPS and the proposed community justice authorities. There is on-going work on that and we will provide guidance, but we will return to the matter. Jackie Baillie asked for clarification of section 2(10). This is not the time to give specific commitments, but I say to Jackie Baillie that although we will have further discussions with COSLA on the powers of direction, we will do nothing that will constrain our ability to act effectively if that is required. Some of the points about social work funding were misplaced. More money is going in than ever before. I do not have enough time to go into the other detailed arguments that were made. In conclusion, the case for action and change has been made. If we take the opportunity that is afforded us, we can make changes and improvements for a difficult section of the population; Stewart Stevenson outlined some of the difficulties very well. The Executive is committed to taking action and I hope that the Parliament will support us in that process.

The member talks about a period of good co-operation—which is working well—and about further co-operation and consolidation. We have heard the arguments that say, "Give us a bit more time" and "Give us a bit more money". Despite the time and money, we hear month after month and year after year about cases in different parts of the country where the system, not individuals, is letting the community down. What does Annabel Goldie propose to do about the systemic and systematic failures that threaten communities?

The Executive remains fully committed to criminalising the offence or nuisance that is caused by kerb crawling. We are currently considering the report of the expert group on street prostitution in the light of consultation responses, and we hope to indicate the way forward shortly.

We are fully aware of the problems that are caused in many communities by such activity, which is why we gave the commitment to tackle kerb crawling. We find the recommendations of the working group useful in that, for the first time, there is discussion of criminalising the activities of men and not concentrating solely on punishing women in relation to prostitution. We know that, in certain areas, many of these men are causing problems certainly to the women who are working as prostitutes but also to local residents. They inflict fear and alarm on women who walk in those areas minding their own business, and it is right that we should start to focus on their responsibility. The working group has recommended that men who are kerb crawling should be criminalised. We are reflecting on the best way forward. We give a commitment to Bill Butler and to Parliament that we will fully implement our proposals to tackle kerb crawling this parliamentary session. I hope that, in the near future, I will be able to introduce proposals that will build on the work of the expert group and will ensure that kerb crawling is tackled, that there is legislative action and that men are faced with the consequences of their actions.

It is still open to the police to charge someone with breach of the peace if the conditions of that offence are met. I am sure that the police will act appropriately in any such circumstances. However, it is right to consider whether there are wider aspects of the problem that do not meet the specific criteria for breach of the peace. We would want to consider whether nuisance, fear and alarm or offence were caused and whether, by widening the criteria, we could effectively put a stop to such activity.

In response to Stewart Stevenson's question about YouthLink Scotland, I assure him that my ministerial colleagues with responsibility for education and young people will pursue the matter with that organisation. The bill has been a difficult experience for everyone concerned, but I thank the Justice 1 Committee in particular. I appreciate the difficulties that the committee faced, but I believe that we now have a better bill as a result of its endeavours. I also want to put on record my thanks to the Scottish Executive officials who worked hard to get the bill to this stage. Our officials were often up against tight deadlines, but  they sought valiantly to support ministers and the committee—as, I think, the committee appreciated—through what was a difficult process. In the course of deliberations, we all learned as we went along, but one shocking thing that emerged in the evidence that the committee took is—as Stewart Stevenson mentioned—the speed with which technology is changing. The evidence that the committee heard from the police and from academics also revealed the cunning that is demonstrated by some of the people who use technology and other techniques to trap and abuse young children. It is astonishing just how manipulative those people can be. We heard all sorts of distressing examples of the lengths to which such people will go in trying to manipulate young people into positions in which they can be abused. It is right that we have reflected some of those concerns in the bill by seeking to move with the times and by trying to be as flexible as possible while retaining some certainty in law. Another important outcome of the committee's discussions and deliberations is that we have now extended some of the definitions in the bill. For example, it is right that we have moved beyond simple definitions of abuse in relation to prostitution by ensuring that the offences that are introduced will apply to people who cynically, and purely for profit, try to manipulate and exploit young people not just in prostitution but through telephone sex lines or in some of the sleazy establishments to which people will go for a certain element of gratification. It is proper that those definitions have been widened. I genuinely believe that Parliament has worked well with Government in trying to introduce legislation that will give added protection. It is encouraging that Parliament is able to send a unified message to people throughout Scotland that we will do everything in our power to protect young children and that we will not accept sexual exploitation and abuse of young children. I hope that the bill will play a significant role in the future in providing the protection that society rightly wants for children.

I understand the argument but I believe that amendment 66 is unnecessary. It is essential that those who consent as a result of misunderstanding, pressure or threats are not taken to have consented as a matter of law. It is also true that the bill as currently drafted does not contain a definition of consent. However, because a specific definition is not provided, the reference to consent in the current provisions relies on the existing meaning of consent under Scots law. The Scottish courts have made it clear that consent must be freely given by a person who is capable of understanding the implications of doing so. Case law has established that it should not be the direct result of violence or of the accused having taken advantage of an age difference between himself and the victim or of his position of responsibility for that victim. I am therefore confident that the standard Scots law meaning of consent will be sufficient to ensure that young people are protected, and I do not believe amendment 66 is necessary.

The amendments seek to make changes to the way in which sexual services, indecent images and grooming offences are listed in schedule 3 of the 2003 act. Listing in that schedule means that part 2 of the 2003 act applies to the offence. That has several implications, including the imposition of the notification requirements of the sex offenders register. A number of offences are already listed in schedule 3 without qualification, which means that conviction for those offences will result in the automatic imposition of the notification requirements. We added new offences to schedule 3 at stage 2, although we did so with some qualifications. We specified that the notification requirements would be imposed automatically only in cases where the victim was under 16 and the offender was either 18 or over or had been sentenced to a minimum of 12 months' imprisonment. In order to ensure that no one who should be on the sex offenders register escapes it, we also added a catch-all provision to each offence, so that the court could impose the notification requirements in other cases if it considered it appropriate to do so. Our catch-all provisions did not, however, allow the court to have discretion in all cases. Because of the way in which those provisions were drafted, the court could have discretion only in cases where the victim was under 16. In effect, if the victim was 16 or over, the court would have no powers to impose a notification requirement on the offender under any circumstances. That was not how we had intended those catch-all provisions to work. The amendments in the group change the way in which the offences are listed in schedule 3, so that the catch-all provisions will apply in all cases regardless of the age of the victim. There is another technical difficulty with the amendments that were agreed to at stage 2. As they are currently drafted, the catch-all provisions refer specifically to the notification requirements of the 2003 act. That might cast doubt on whether all the other provisions in part 2 of that act would apply, despite the fact that they would apply to the other offences that are listed in schedule 3 to the bill. We want to be clear, for example, that the court can impose a sexual offences prevention order on an offender who had been convicted of taking indecent photographs of a child, but who was only 17.  I move amendment 23.  Amendment 23 agreed to.  Amendments 24 to 35 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.

I begin by dealing with the issue of process that Pauline McNeill raised on behalf of the Justice 1 Committee. I have apologised to Pauline McNeill for the difficult situation in which we placed the committee in trying to scrutinise and come to a conclusion on the issue. I am happy to put that apology on record again. I accept that, because of our delay in producing amendments, the committee was unable to give them adequate scrutiny or to carry out full and proper consultation, which has caused complications and difficulties. We would not want to act like that as a matter of course; indeed, for a range of bills we have striven to ensure that that has not happened. However, as Stewart Stevenson said, some of the complexities and difficulties in trying to work out what was best caused us to pause or delay, and that had a knock-on effect on the committee. I regret that that caused some problems. At stage 2, we introduced amendments that extended the current offences in relation to indecent images of children. As a result of those amendments, offences concerning taking, possessing and distributing indecent images would apply to images of young people aged under 18 rather than just to images of people aged under 16. As Stewart Stevenson said, we considered a range of options, which we attempted to discuss. I am not sure that, in attempting to be helpful to committee members, we did not further complicate the problem and introduce further uncertainties. As Stewart Stevenson recognised, it is difficult to know exactly what is right in this matter and to strike a balance; nevertheless, we have to make a decision. Despite some of the earlier uncertainty, we are certain that the balance that we are striking is the correct one. I will return to that. I want to clarify a point that Stewart Stevenson raised. He said that, if Marlyn Glen was minded to press her amendments and if we were minded to accept them, he would be content to support them. We believe that Marlyn Glen's amendments are at the other end of the spectrum from Kenny MacAskill's amendments; therefore, it would be illogical to see the two sets of amendments as doing the same thing. Indeed, Marlyn Glen said that she could not support Kenny MacAskill's amendments for that reason. Therefore, there is a certain illogicality in Stewart Stevenson's position. We recognise that 16 and 17-year-olds are above the age of sexual consent and that they can quite lawfully engage in sexual activity and have certain rights in relation to what they can do in their private lives. Nevertheless, as members have said, it is right to remember that those young people are still at an age at which they are vulnerable and deserve our protection. As Stewart Stevenson said, we have recognised that vulnerability in other aspects of the bill; therefore,  there is no inconsistency in that respect. The question for Parliament is how we can balance the rights of 16 and 17-year-olds with the protection that they need and deserve.

No. I think that those amendments introduce a degree of restriction that we have attempted to avoid. We have sought to reflect the fact that marriage is a recognised relationship and so is worthy of exemption. I will talk later about civil partnerships, and we will recognise Pauline McNeill's amendments, which help to clarify the status of such partnerships. However, it is for the courts to examine all the circumstances and to decide not just what constitutes a relationship but what constitutes—in the wording that the Executive amendment uses—an established relationship. It is possible to be in a relationship that is only a day or two days old. That would be a relationship, but that might not be sufficient to justify the kind of exemption that we are talking about. That is why we want to talk about established relationships that have a degree of permanence. Kenny MacAskill's amendments go a step further and say that the exemption from the offence will apply only if the couple are husband and wife, civil partners or "living with each other in a relationship which has the characteristics of the relationship between husband and wife except that the persons are of the same sex". As Marlyn Glen said, the phrase "living with each other" does not reflect the reality of the lives of many 16 and 17-year-olds who are in relationships but neither married nor living together. They might have a relationship of a year or two's standing but still live with their parents, or they might live in separate towns. Kenny MacAskill's amendments 56, 59, 62 and 65 would introduce a degree of restriction on the exempted relationships that does not adequately reflect reality for 16 and 17-year-olds. We must strike a balance, as Stewart Stevenson said, and the Executive has struck a balance that is appropriate in the circumstances. The exceptions are cases in which the young person is 16 or over and has consented to be in the picture, the picture is for the private use of the accused and is not being shown to anyone else and the accused and the young person in the picture are married or are partners in a relationship. In those circumstances, the accused will be exempt from criminal liability. The  introduction of the exceptions resulted in discussion, and the committee was rightly concerned about the difficulty of defining relationships and the need to tighten up what is meant by being "partners in a relationship". That is why we have lodged amendments that seek to give a degree of clarity by referring to an established relationship. We considered whether we had achieved the correct balance between rights and protection and considered a range of possibilities similar to those that we are examining today. It is our duty to give 16 and 17-year-olds as much protection as we can without overly impinging on their rights to a private life.

I will pursue the matter quickly. Unlike Marlyn Glen, I do not accept that it is enough simply for the young person to consent to the taking or possession of the indecent photograph and, as I have said, Kenny MacAskill's amendments 56, 59, 62 and 65 are much more restrictive. Having given the matter further thought, we have come to the view that a requirement for an established relationship will give us the correct balance, and I believe that the exceptions are realistic. Amendments 17 to 20, in the name of Cathy Jamieson, make that proposal. The reference to partners in an established relationship will, of course, include same-sex relationships, regardless of whether they have been formalised into a civil partnership. However, it is important that we recognise such relationships formally, so I am happy to support Pauline McNeill's amendments 55, 58, 61 and 64.

That is the next point that I was going to make. It is my intention to review the use of the offences over the next couple of years to ensure that we have got the exceptions right. That would apply to any bill that the Parliament passes—we always want to ensure that legislation is right and works appropriately; however, in this case, I put on record my assurance that we will report to the Parliament our findings if there are any unanticipated complications. I hope that that reassures members. The Executive's intention, like that of other members of the Parliament, is to get the bill right. I hope that Marlyn Glen and Kenny MacAskill will be content not to press their amendments.

I am not sure about that—

The purpose of amendment 11 is to make it clear that RSHOs made in England, Wales or Northern Ireland under the Sexual Offences Act 2003 will apply in Scotland and that a breach of those orders in Scotland will be a criminal offence. The 2003 act allows RSHOs to be made in England, Wales or Northern Ireland. The intention behind the 2003 act is that, unless the orders are expressly limited to a particular geographical area, they will apply in each of the other jurisdictions and that a breach of an order in one of the other jurisdictions will be an offence there. However, it is not clear that the orders would apply in Scotland, as the provisions in the 2003 act do not extend to Scotland. The amendment puts that beyond doubt. Of course, orders that apply to a particular area or premises—for example, a particular school or sports centre—will not be breachable in Scotland. If the conditions in the order apply only to a particular area or premises, they will be breached only if the person does what he or she is restricted from doing in that particular place. However, orders that apply generally will apply in Scotland. For example, if a condition is not to go within a certain distance of any school, a criminal offence will be committed if that condition is breached in Scotland, even if the order was made in England. I want to be absolutely certain that, if people who come to Scotland from other parts of the United Kingdom put our children at risk, we will have the powers to deal with them. It is also important that those who are the subject of an RSHO in Scotland cannot break the conditions of the order in other parts of the UK.  For those reasons, we are working with the Scotland Office and the Home Office on an order under section 104 of the Scotland Act 1998 to put it beyond doubt that RSHOs that are made in Scotland will apply in other parts of the UK and that breaching such orders will be an offence in the jurisdiction in which the breach takes place. I am pleased to be able to confirm that I have agreement in principle from the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Scotland that such a section 104 order will be laid. I hope that the Parliament will agree that amendment 11 is necessary. I move amendment 11.  Amendment 11 agreed to.

I am sympathetic to the intention behind amendment 47, as it is important that criminal proceedings are not prejudiced by information about the accused that is not relevant to the case. However, the relevancy of the information is the key issue. If a person is prosecuted for breaching an RSHO, it will of course be necessary for the existence of the RSHO to be disclosed to the court. Without such information, the trial would be meaningless. In general, however, the Crown Office advises that the normal rules of evidence will apply to the disclosure of the existence of an RSHO. In other words, the court will not allow the existence of an RSHO to be disclosed unless it is satisfied that that is relevant to the case. Even if the accused is being prosecuted for a sexual offence, the Crown Office advises that the fact that an RSHO had been imposed previously would be unlikely to be relevant to proving that the behaviour in question had taken place. Indeed, even if the accused is  being prosecuted as a result of one of the incidents that led to the imposition of the RSHO, the fact that the RSHO had been imposed is still unlikely to have any relevance to the trial. In a criminal trial, the court would be required to consider whether there is sufficient evidence to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the incident had taken place and that the accused was responsible. The fact that, in civil proceedings, the court had considered that there was sufficient evidence to prove on the balance of probabilities that the incident had taken place would be completely and utterly irrelevant. If the Crown attempts to lead irrelevant evidence in a criminal trial, it will be prevented from doing so by the judge. Therefore, I am confident that the normal court procedure and rules of evidence will ensure that irrelevant information about the existence of an RSHO will not be disclosed to the court during a criminal trial. I am confident that amendment 47 is not necessary and I hope that Pauline McNeill will accept that reassurance.

First, I will address the amendment in Kenny MacAskill's name, to which Stewart Stevenson spoke. I do not believe that the amendment is necessary. I argue that the behaviour that Kenny MacAskill is trying to catch in the amendment is already likely to be an offence. If a person is deliberately assisting another to purchase the sexual services of a child, that person could be charged with aiding and abetting or conspiracy to purchase the sexual services of a child. Alternatively, if the person is deliberately arranging for the child to become involved in the provision of sexual services, so as to provide those services to another, that person could be caught by the offence at section 8D of the bill, which concerns arranging or facilitating. Secondly, I turn to the amendments in Margaret Mitchell's name. I am not convinced that it is sensible to add another level of penalties in the bill for offences relating to those aged under 13. I am aware that the equivalent Westminster legislation includes a life penalty in cases where the offence was committed against a child under 13, but there are important differences between the Westminster legislation and ours. Whereas Margaret Mitchell's amendment takes in all the offences relating to under-13s, the Westminster legislation takes a two-tier approach, so that a life penalty is available only in cases where the sexual services constitute certain aggravated behaviour relating to the penetration of the body of the child. We have widened the reach of the bill so that a range of sexual services is covered. Although we agree that paying for sexual intercourse with an under-13 may justify a life sentence, I am not convinced that everything that is found to fall within the definition of sexual services would justify a life penalty. In any event, it is important to reassure members that, in cases where someone has sexual intercourse with a child under 13, whether or not payment has been made, it will often be more appropriate to take proceedings under another offence. Section 5 of the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995, for example, makes provision for the offence of unlawful sexual intercourse with a girl under the age of 13 and provides a maximum penalty of life imprisonment. It will, of course, be for the Crown to decide in each case which offence the accused  should be prosecuted under. I hope that Margaret Mitchell will be reassured by my comments and will not move her amendments.

I have listened to Stewart Stevenson, who spoke to Kenny MacAskill's amendments, and to Margaret Mitchell, but I am unconvinced that their amendments are necessary. Despite Stewart Stevenson's comments on amendment 42, I cannot for the life of me see the difference between saying it is "just" to do something and saying that it is "in the interests of justice" to do something. However, not being a lawyer, I thought that I should have the matter checked out. After all, Kenny MacAskill, who comes from that noble profession, might well have some insight into it that I did not have. When I asked our lawyers to double and triple-check that I was not missing anything, they said that they could not see any significant difference between the two terms. Indeed, they believe that our formulation is more appropriate. The effect of both formulations is the same. The sheriff cannot make an interim RSHO unless he is satisfied that it is just to do so. As a result, he would have to be satisfied that it is "in the interests of justice" to make the order. I hope that that is clear; indeed, I think that users of the legislation will certainly consider the matter to be clear. Perhaps members of the Law Society of Scotland will argue over the matter on cold, dark, wet nights when they have nothing better to do, but I do not think that amendment 42 is necessary. I am also not convinced that amendment 46 is necessary. When the committee and I discussed the matter at stage 2, the committee agreed that an amendment was unnecessary. I believe that, even in cases in which an RSHO is not granted, the type of behaviour that leads to the application is sufficiently serious for the information to be kept. The police hold what might be regarded as soft information about people for a variety of reasons.  Indeed, it is vital that they do so; after all, if they have suspicions about someone, we rely on them to retain intelligence about that person to assist them in preventing potential crimes. Moreover, there are various reasons why an RSHO might not be made. For example, it might not be possible to prove that the alleged behaviour took place. The sheriff might not be convinced by the evidence before the court that the person is a risk to children. I am sure that we would agree that, if a sheriff is not convinced of such things, he should not make an RSHO. However, that does not mean that the police should not be able to retain information about the person's behaviour if they still suspect that the person might be a risk. If they retain information on such behaviour, it is surely ludicrous not to retain the fact that an interim RSHO had once been made. What happens if the person in question engages again in sexually inappropriate behaviour with the child? If information about previous behaviour is not retained, it will appear as though that is the first incident of such behaviour.

I accept Stewart Stevenson's comments about the intention behind amendment 46. However, we are worried that it could have the undesired effect that I have set out. I will come later to his point about malicious and vexatious allegations. Because it would not be possible to make another application for an RSHO until the person behaved in such a way again, a child could be put at more risk. Even worse, if a person were to move to another police force area and behave in such a way, the police in that area would be entirely unaware that that person had already come to the police's attention for those reasons. Indeed, we have had some cases in which people have moved between police force areas but information has not been properly transferred and the people have gone on to commit serious offences.  The Justice 1 Committee expressed concerns at stage 2 about cases in which full orders are not made because it had become apparent that an allegation had been malicious or vexatious. I explained in a letter to the committee that information about the complainant and the interim order would not be retained in such cases. A robust reviewing and weeding policy underpins the retention of police intelligence, and information found to be based on malicious or vexatious allegations would be deleted. The only circumstances in which information might be kept would be if it allowed the police to put together a case against the person making vexatious allegations. Stewart Stevenson has correctly drawn attention to the fact that we might need to be able to act on behalf of the person who is the victim of such vexatious or malicious allegations. However, I assure members that, in such cases, the information would be retained purely on the basis that the subject of the allegation was a witness to the case. Moving on to amendments 43 and 44, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, I make it quite clear that an interim RSHO cannot be sought unless it is accompanied by the main application or unless the main application has already been made. An interim RSHO has effect only for the fixed period specified in the order and will cease to have effect, if it has not already done so, on the determination of the main application. The normal sheriff court summary time limits will apply to the determination of the main application, so it would not be possible for interim RSHOs to apply for long periods without the sheriff court considering whether a full application should be made. I hope, therefore, that Margaret Mitchell will agree that her amendments are unnecessary, that she is reassured by what I have said and that she will not move amendments 43 and 44.

I agree with Stewart Stevenson that we should do nothing that puts children at risk. I wholeheartedly agree that if RSHOs are sought against people who work in child care positions, their employers should be told about it. We are working on the implementation of the Bichard recommendations, and when they are fully implemented, employers will be notified as a matter of course where appropriate. However, that new system is still a couple of years down the line. I acknowledge that in the meantime we need an interim system that will work effectively to ensure that in appropriate circumstances employers are told if an RSHO is sought against one of their employees. That would allow the employer to consider whether they need to take action. There is therefore no real difference between small and large organisations or what currently pertains to legislation. I will be quite clear about this: I do not believe  that an automatic referral to the list of people who are disqualified from working with children is an option. Amendment 38 is defective in a number of ways. It does not link in with the legislative scheme for including people on the list of those disqualified from working with children that was established under the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003. That means that the procedure for putting someone on the list, such as giving the person an opportunity to make representation, giving notice of inclusion, rights of appeal and so on would not apply. The Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003 sets out the criteria that the courts must take into account before referring a person for automatic inclusion on the list, but amendment 38 sets out no such criteria.

To repeat two points, I said that we need an interim system that will work effectively and that will allow employers to consider whether they need to take action, and I believe that there is a fundamental defect in the amendment. Not only are we taking steps to put in interim measures, but it would be wrong to introduce a measure that we believe to be defective. It is true that the current legislation allows for referral from the courts as a result of criminal conviction and anyone referred in that way is automatically placed on the list. However, to give the sheriff the power to refer for automatic inclusion on the list, with all the consequences for an individual's livelihood, on the basis of a civil order that can be time bound and quite specific, would raise important issues under the European convention on human rights. An administrative procedure that works within the current Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003 is the most effective way to achieve the outcome that we seek, which is getting the information to the employer and putting the person on the list in cases where that is appropriate. We will develop guidance, along with the police, to ensure systematic consideration of the need to disclose information in respect of an individual being considered for or issued with an RSHO. In building the case to apply for an RSHO, the police will be expected to ascertain the individual's access to and dealings with children, including employment or other voluntary activities. Where an RSHO is made, the police will consider whether it would be appropriate for the existence of the RSHO to be disclosed to the employer or to a  voluntary organisation. If the subject of the RSHO is employed in a child care position or works with children in a voluntary capacity, that would certainly be grounds for the information to be disclosed. To ensure that organisations are not left wondering what to do when they are told about an RSHO, we will issue guidance explaining RSHOs and encouraging organisations to assess whether it would be appropriate to move the person from working with children or to dismiss them as a result of the information. The guidance will remind organisations of their duty, if they take action, to refer the person to Scottish ministers for consideration for inclusion on the list. Even if the person is not placed on the list, if a subsequent disclosure check is made, the fact that an RSHO demonstrates concern about a risk to a child or children would be grounds for information about its existence to be released. So whether a person is currently working with children in a paid or unpaid capacity, or applies to work with children, I am confident that information about the existence of the RSHO will be and can be released to their employer, prospective employer or voluntary organisation.

I think that that would be a logical conclusion. There might be circumstances that do not come to mind at the moment where that might not happen. That would be the logical conclusion, however. I am confident that the employer or voluntary organisation will have sufficient guidance to know how to deal with the information. Some might view the requirements as an additional burden on organisations. In reality, however, employers and voluntary groups must assess the risk to children from their workers when they recruit or when any concern comes to light. I hope that child care organisations will be reassured, and that Stewart Stevenson, given those assurances, will accept that his amendment should be withdrawn.

The bill was amended at stage 2 so that it now specifies that an application for an RSHO "shall be made by summary application." As such, the normal sheriff court summary rules will apply. Those rules already contain provisions on the service of court orders. We expect specific summary application rules to be made in due course to provide further detail about how persons will be notified of the existence of RSHOs. Such court rules have recently been made in connection with antisocial behaviour orders. The rules require that an ASBO must either be given to a person who is in court when the order is made or be sent to the person by recorded delivery or registered post. I am of the view that a similar provision would be suitable for RSHOs. Requiring a sheriff officer to serve the order on the person in  all circumstances is both costly and unnecessary. In any event, the appropriate place for rules about the service of court orders is the summary application rules. Margaret Mitchell's amendment 39 is therefore unnecessary.

I understand what Pauline McNeill and Margaret Mitchell are attempting to achieve with the amendments in their names, but I cannot support those amendments. I turn first to amendment 36, in the name of Pauline McNeill. It would be wrong to be prescriptive about whom a chief constable should consult in considering an application for an RSHO. Every case will be different, and it will be necessary to consult different parties in each individual case. If the bill required some parties to be consulted but not others, it could be assumed that it is not necessary  to consult the others, even though it most certainly could be necessary in some cases. I would prefer that we issue guidance on the act setting out for chief constables the criteria that they should take into account in considering an RSHO. The guidance will also list those whom they should consider consulting before making an application. That is a more appropriate way of dealing with that than setting it out in the bill. What is made explicit in the bill, however, is that applications should be made only in cases where the chief constable considers that inappropriate behaviour has occurred on at least two occasions and that the person in question poses a risk of sexual harm to a child or to children generally. Pauline McNeill is right to point out the seriousness of the measure, to indicate that it could be far reaching, but she recognises that it is right for us to take action to protect children from serious harm. Stewart Stevenson raises a point that was touched on earlier by Margaret Mitchell, to do with concerns expressed in relation to sex education, sexual health advice or indeed what may be included in some teenage magazines, and the fear that teachers, doctors and journalists or editors might be caught by the provisions in the bill. I want to put it on record and to give the assurance that groups or individuals communicating with a child about sexual matters for the purposes of sex education or health education will not result in an application for a risk of sexual harm order. However, I would not want that to be taken as carte blanche for irresponsible and inappropriate activity, either by any individual in those professions or by any groups. Responsible people behaving in a responsible manner and acting appropriately for the purposes of their profession would not be exposed to the risk of an application for a risk of sexual harm order. However, with that would go the warning that anyone who behaved inappropriately would leave themselves open to the risk of action, should that be appropriate. Before applying for an order, the chief constable would have to believe that the person in question posed a risk of sexual harm. Before making an order, the sheriff would also have to be convinced that the person presented a risk of sexual harm to a child or to children. Those who are properly providing advice to young people should therefore continue to do so. They will not be caught by the provisions. I state in the clearest terms that it is not our intention to interfere with such advice or prevent it from being given. It is also worth noting that similar provisions were introduced for England, Wales and Northern Ireland in the Sexual Offences Act 2003 without any specific exceptions for those providing advice.  I understand the intention behind amendment 37, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, but it would not be wise to accept the amendment. Let us consider for example a person who is accused of committing a sexual offence against a child and is found not guilty of that offence. As members will be aware, such a verdict does not prove that the offence did not take place. It means rather that the case was not proved beyond reasonable doubt. However, it might still be possible to conclude on the balance of probability that the incident took place and we believe that if it was combined with a further such incident, it should be admissible for the purposes of making an RSHO, not ruled out by virtue of the previous criminal trial.

I have tried to explain that point, but I will go back over it. Phil Gallie is right in that if someone is found not guilty, it means that the case was not proved beyond reasonable doubt. The point that I am trying to make is that it might be possible to conclude on the balance of probability that an incident took place. We are talking about two different tests—a criminal test and a civil test—and saying that it is right that we should be able to take into account something that, on the balance of probability, we believe to have happened. To repeat the point, it is only right that the police and the courts should be able to take into account all sexually inappropriate behaviour against children to protect a child from further risk and there might be circumstances in which an incident that resulted in a not guilty finding should be used as part of an application for an RSHO.

There could be a range of reasons why someone was found not guilty or action was not proceeded with. I emphasise that we would not be taking criminal proceedings against such a person for the incident, as we would not be saying that they had committed a criminal offence—that brings us back to Phil Gallie's question—but saying that there was reason to believe that they posed a risk of sexual harm to children. In those circumstances, it is our duty to protect the children  who are involved, which is why we are proceeding as we are.

I have nothing much to add, except to say to Margaret Mitchell that the point that she raised will be addressed later in the discussion.  Amendment 1 agreed to.  Amendments 2 to 5 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.

These amendments do a number of things, but the effect of all the Executive amendments in this group is to provide clear and consistent definitions of "sexual activity" and "sexual services" for the bill. We propose to change the way in which the grooming offence is constructed. As the provisions were drafted originally, the grooming offence would be complete if, following prior communication or meetings, the accused met or arranged to meet a child with the intention of committing a relevant offence. A list of sexual offences was included as relevant offences in schedule 1. However, the Crown expressed concerns about that approach. Its concern was that the court might require it to prove precisely which of the relevant offences the accused intended to commit. We recognise that that might create a loophole that would allow an accused to escape conviction if the Crown were not able to specify the exact offence that the accused had in mind—for example, whether it was to be rape or some other sexual assault.  Amendment 1 and consequential amendments propose a new approach, whereby the offence will be complete if, following prior communication or meetings, the accused meets or arranges to meet a child with the intention of engaging in unlawful sexual activity with the child. The approach is different from the one that is taken in England and Wales, but we think that it will work well in Scotland. The Crown will be required to prove that the accused intended to engage in unlawful sexual activity involving, or in the presence of, the child. However, the Crown will not be required to prove the specific activity in which the accused intended to engage. In order to make that change, we must provide a definition of "sexual activity" that will apply to the grooming offence. The bill contains such a definition for risk of sexual harm orders, but amendment 21 will provide a new definition. The focus of the definition remains on whether a reasonable person who took into account all the circumstances of the case would consider the activity to be sexual. However, the approach also allows the purpose of the accused's activity to be taken into account alongside other circumstances, such as the nature of the activity. Kenny MacAskill and Margaret Mitchell lodged amendments that attempt to take the approach that I described, but the Executive's proposed definition will go further, by including a range of associated activities, such as an attempt or conspiracy to engage in sexual activity and aiding and abetting another person in relation to engaging in sexual activity. The proposed new definition will be applicable consistently to all references to "sexual activity" in the bill. Amendments 49 and 53, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, would simply lift the definition of "sexual" that applies in England and Wales, whereas the Executive amendments fit with the unique, Scottish approach that we have taken in the bill. During this morning's debate, Stewart Stevenson suggested that Kenny MacAskill had adopted a new Labour approach; this afternoon, Kenny MacAskill is trying to promote for Scotland an approach that was designed for England and Wales. The Executive's approach is more appropriate to a Scottish bill. Executive amendments will amend provisions that refer to "prostitute" and "prostitution" so that they refer instead to "the provision of sexual services". As I said at stage 2, the approach means that we will be able to catch not only those who knowingly pay for sexual services from young people or arrange for young people to work in prostitution but those who exploit young people—particularly,  but not exclusively, young women—in so-called work such as lap dancing, pole dancing, stripping and operating telephone sex lines. Any kind of sexual service will be covered by the bill. To do that, we must ensure that we are happy with the bill's definition of "sexual services". Therefore, other Executive amendments in the group will provide a consistent definition of "sexual services" throughout the bill, which can easily be based on the new definition of "sexual activity" that will apply throughout the bill. Amendment 16 sets out exactly what is meant by "sexual services". I am sympathetic to the aims of Kenny MacAskill and Margaret Mitchell in lodging their amendments, but I strongly argue that the Executive amendments will go further. I hope that Kenny MacAskill and Margaret Mitchell will agree that the Executive amendments will address the matters about which they were concerned and ensure that there is a single, clear, consistent definition in the bill. I hope that on that basis they will not move their amendments. I move amendment 1.

The debate has been interesting. It is also an opportune debate to have at this time. It has been brought to Parliament not because, as Colin Fox suggested, we believe that the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 "has not lived up to its billing", but because we believe that it is right to acknowledge that new legislation exists, to acknowledge and welcome the progress that has been made to date in its use, and to acknowledge that the level of frustration and expectation in many communities is such that we hope that more will be done with this important tool that the Scottish Parliament has provided.  It is right that we focus some attention on the people who are responsible locally. In a sense, we have done our bit—we have passed the legislation and provided the money—and we want to encourage the people who are responsible at local level to implement the legislation and to use it appropriately.

I was encouraged by the response of local newspaper editors throughout the country when Parliament debated the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill and I have been encouraged since then. Local papers have a huge influence in their communities and their response to the campaign to tackle drug dealing at local level has been positive and constructive. It is right that we reflect on what has been done and, more important, on what is still to be done. We have come a long way since we introduced the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. It is interesting that the debate about the act has heightened awareness of the broader issue of antisocial behaviour orders. I remind Parliament that the orders were not a product of the act; they existed beforehand. However, many people and communities throughout Scotland now see ASBOs in a new light because they are, to some extent, reinforced by other measures that we can take. Colin Fox said that the act "has not lived up to its billing" and the Conservatives criticised us for lack of police numbers and lack of action, so it is right that I put those comments into context. It is only seven months since the power of dispersal came into being. We always acknowledged that it is a power of last resort and that other action must be taken before it is considered, but in the past seven months we have seen it being used appropriately in the Aberdeen area. Richard Baker mentioned some of the specific problems in Aberdeen. I visited the area with him, and in response to Stewart Stevenson's question I point out that people who live in the vicinity are overwhelmingly in support of what has been done. Many of them said that this is the first time for a long time that they are able to have a decent night's sleep. Stewart Stevenson asked where the people who were causing trouble have gone. To use the words of a song that is, I am sure, familiar to him, the police have sent them " ... homewards Tae think again."  They have gone back to the communities from where they came into Aberdeen to plague, annoy and frighten local residents. That is a good example of local agencies using the new powers. Mike Pringle said that he was disappointed by comments about antisocial behaviour that were made by an Edinburgh councillor, and that the police should be congratulated on using the act and that councillors and elected representatives should not make criticisms on operational matters. I agree to some extent and I hope that Mike Pringle will join me in congratulating the police in Aberdeen, and in asking elected representatives who have criticised the police to reflect on their comments. However, I profoundly disagree with Mike Pringle's comment that the act is different from what he called the "draconian" bill that was introduced. Perhaps I can have a conversation with him afterwards, because I was deeply involved all the way through the bill's process and to my recollection we did not depart from anything in the bill as introduced. We refined and improved it, but there were no significant changes. It is a myth to suggest that there was a major change. There were some constructive contributions to the debate. I agree with Stewart Stevenson that Kenny MacAskill surprised everyone with his new Labour credentials, although he let them slip when he returned to his old mantra—which has been missing for a while from his justice responsibilities—and asked yet again for more resources. He said that agencies should be properly resourced. I have to say that during the life of the Scottish Parliament local authorities and other agencies have been resourced to an unprecedented level, whether for education, social work or a range of other services. On top of that, as the Minister for Justice said, we have invested more. We have provided £113 million to deal not only with antisocial behaviour orders but with wardens, mediation services and other positive ways of trying to resolve antisocial behaviour. We have put £10 million into community safety and £63 million into youth justice on top of all the other measures that are being taken. I return to my point about having a degree of perspective about how long the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 has been in force. Not only is it only seven months since the power of dispersal came in, it is also only seven months since the power to close premises came in. There have already been, in Fife, two closure orders, one of which was against a private householder. It is only four months since the noise nuisance measures came in, but there have already been 76 warnings for noise nuisance in Edinburgh. It is only three months since the power to seize vehicles came in, but there have already  been, in Fife, three vehicles seized: one car and two motorcycles. I have been notified that other warnings have been issued in that respect in Grampian. It is only two months since the fixed-penalty notice pilot in Tayside started, but 400 notices have already been issued. In a short space of time, we have seen some agencies positively embracing this important act. The message that we want to send out from today's debate is that some agencies have looked constructively at what the act can bring to communities and we want others to learn lessons from them and to copy their behaviour. I turn to some specific points. Margaret Jamieson asked a question about housing associations.

Housing associations asked for and were given the power to introduce antisocial behaviour orders, and questions must be asked of them. Why are they failing their areas by ruling out antisocial behaviour orders without proper consideration? That is an important message for the housing association that Margaret Jamieson mentioned, but it is also important for many others. Paul Martin asked about policing. There is an important issue to be addressed, but although he talks about deployment of the police we need to ask the local authority in the area whether it raised the matter with the chief constable.

I beg your pardon. I was given wrong information. We need to ask the police at local level what powers they have used and what they have done. Important steps have been taken and the act is making a welcome contribution. I commend those who have taken action and I encourage those who have still to take action to examine what has been done in other areas of Scotland. The act is beginning to have an effect and I look forward to action being extended elsewhere.

Stewart Stevenson is making up for lost time.

Will Margaret Mitchell take an intervention?

What Annabel Goldie has just said and the reference in her amendment to zero-tolerance policing indicate that she does not believe that it is right for chief constables to have operational responsibility. If the Conservative party ever gained power—I am talking about in a fantasy land—would she tell chief constables exactly how they should operate?

That is outrageous.

This has been a good debate. It has also been a difficult and emotive one. Many speakers this afternoon and during the passage of the bill quoted the powerful words of women who have personal experience of horrific female genital mutilation. Those profound and emotive words can hardly begin to describe the pain, agony and suffering that those women have experienced. Anything that can be done to help even one woman is something that is to be commended to this Parliament. I hope that what we have delivered today will help to make a contribution to providing greater safety for women and girls in Scotland. I also hope that the significant steps that we have taken will be examined by people beyond our borders and applied by them to their legislation. I hope that we have given encouragement to others to go as far as we have gone. It is right to put on record our thanks to a number of people. The Equal Opportunities Committee did a thorough and exacting piece of work on behalf of the Parliament and, through its efforts, significantly improved and added to the bill. I therefore want to thank the committee and all its members. I thank those who made kind remarks about my role in the process. However, in truth, those words should be directed at the officials who supported me in a difficult process. They made it much easier for me to exercise my responsibility to move things forward and I thank them for making this piece of legislation possible. Sandra White asked about the timescale for the production of guidance. We listened to what the  committee had to say in that regard. Our officials are contacting community groups and organisations that work with them for advice about what would be most effective. We will learn from some of the good practice that is being developed in England and will use it. Professional bodies are already issuing guidance to their members and female genital mutilation is already included in guidance on the domestic abuse and sexual health strategy.

No, I could not. As Rosie Kane knows, the matter that she is referring to relates to a reserved power. Today, I am concentrating on the positive contribution that this Parliament is making and will make to giving protection to females in Scotland, regardless of where they come from. I do not want this debate to stray into an argument about reserved matters that will lead to political point scoring. A good mood has built up as we have heard the arguments today and I will not stray into a discussion of immigration law and deportation because that is not within my area of responsibility. The point that I was going on to make was about guidance to health professionals. We will issue such guidance by circular letter by the autumn and development work with communities will be an on-going process. Nora Radcliffe mentioned a number of points of concern that were raised by members of the committee. I addressed many of those points in my evidence to the committee and I have explained the communications and the consultation. As I said, we can always do more to reach out to people to give them information, and we will learn from this experience about how we can do more to reach out to the communities that are affected by FGM. I put on record again my comments about the consultation process. I believe that it was justified to shorten the consultation process in order to ensure that we achieved the parliamentary time slot for the bill. It would not have been right to require a long, extended consultation period and then to have missed the opportunity to introduce legislation. Under the circumstances, it was appropriate to take the action that we took. Thanks are due to the people whom I mentioned for making the bill possible and for making the process so smooth. I join other speakers in thanking yet again those members of the affected communities who gave evidence and advice and  whose personal experience shocked us into producing what I hope will be more effective legislation. I genuinely hope that we never have to prosecute anyone using the legislation because I shudder to think that any young girl or woman in Scotland might suffer to make a prosecution possible. However, I hope that the passing of the legislation will give a warning and a message to those who think that female genital mutilation is appropriate: it will not be tolerated in Scotland.

The bill will provide better legal protection against female genital mutilation. Such mutilation has been a specific offence for the past 20 years, under the Prohibition of Female Circumcision Act 1985, but we were concerned that people could evade the law by taking a girl overseas to mutilate her. We introduced the bill to stop anyone so evading the law. We do not want any girl in Scotland to be mutilated in such ways. The bill will help to make Scotland a safer place. It will also extend protection so that it is unlawful for any person here in Scotland, or any United Kingdom national, or any permanent United Kingdom resident who is overseas, to aid and abet the mutilation of any girl in whatever country she is, regardless of her nationality or status. The extraterritorial powers in the bill that we introduced were very wide-ranging. However, the Equal Opportunities Committee and others called on us to extend that protection further and we listened to those calls. The powers in the bill are a huge step forward—we have gone further than the rest of the UK. Our laws will now give stronger protection not just to the daughters of UK citizens and residents, but to the daughters of asylum seekers, foreign students and people under humanitarian protection who are living in Scotland. I am proud that we have been able to take this important and significant step. The bill will also introduce new safeguards here in Scotland for the girls who are most at risk of FGM. Section 6 adds the offences in this bill to schedule 1 to the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, which will make it easier to mobilise our child protection measures. Courts will be able to refer any victim of FGM who is under 17 to the reporter to the children's panel, who can then refer her to a children's hearing. It is not just the victims who can be protected in this way. Any other child who lives in the same household as the victim or the perpetrator, or who does so in the future, can also be referred to a children's hearing. Adding FGM to schedule 1 of the 1995 act also provides additional powers of arrest without warrant and should raise awareness of FGM among social workers and other professionals.  The bill makes all forms of FGM unlawful. The amendments that we have discussed today will ensure that our legal protection remains as strong in the future. Order-making powers will allow us to take account of developments in elective genital procedures and to take account of any new World Health Organisation definition of FGM. Parliament will be able to scrutinise any future proposals for amendment of the act. The bill also changes the words that we use to describe these horrific procedures. In line with international practice, the bill uses "female genital mutilation" rather than "female circumcision". It is important to use the right terminology because the words that we use can affect the way people think. It is misleading to pretend that there is some analogy with male circumcision, because there is not. Other provisions in the bill reflect the seriousness of female genital mutilation. The bill will increase the maximum penalty for the offences from five years' imprisonment to 14 years' imprisonment, which is the maximum sentence that our courts can impose short of life imprisonment. That should make it clear that FGM is not acceptable and it will help to deter anyone who is considering FGM for their daughter. One of the challenges that we have faced is that it is very difficult to find out the extent to which FGM is taking place in Scotland today. FGM is a very private practice that is rarely spoken about in public. I thank the Somali women's action group and Khadija Coll of the African-Caribbean women's network, who have helped us to understand more about FGM and the problems with which it presents them. I believe that some of those women may have come to watch today's debate and I thank them for their courage in speaking out. [ Applause. ] I also thank the Equal Opportunities Committee for its hard work on the bill and especially for gathering such detailed evidence at stage 1. This was the first time the committee was lead committee in a bill's consideration and I know that the experience was harrowing and sometimes traumatic for everyone concerned. I thank Kathleen Marshall, who is Scotland's commissioner for children and young people, for her work on how child protection measures will work in the context of FGM. Female genital mutilation is horrific. Along with other members of Parliament, I have been shocked to find out what can happen and I am determined that no girl in Scotland should suffer such mutilation. I and the Executive believe that the bill will make Scotland a safer place to live for girls who are at risk of having FGM carried out and that, with the extended extraterritorial powers that it contains, it sends out the clearest signal of our  determination to do what we can to eradicate the practice. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I have nothing further to add, Presiding Officer.  Amendment 1 agreed to.

I welcome the Equal Opportunities Committee's strenuous efforts at stage 2 to ensure that every type of FGM would be made an offence under the bill. Amendments 2 and 10 seek to clarify the amendments that were passed at that stage and which added the prepuce to the list of genitalia that are covered by the offence of FGM. We acknowledged that the reference to the prepuce could be interpreted as making male circumcision unlawful. At stage 2, I undertook to remove that ambiguity at stage 3, and the amendments will ensure that only mutilation of the prepuce of the clitoris will be an offence under the eventual act. I move amendment 2.

The amendments in the group will allow Scottish ministers to amend by instruments that are subject to the affirmative procedure certain aspects of the offence of female genital mutilation, and the circumstances in which no offence is committed. The Equal Opportunities Committee proposed those powers at stage 2 and I promised to return to the issue today. Amendment 7 will insert the order-making power that will allow Scottish ministers to add, amend or delete the procedures, as listed in section 1(1), that are unlawful if performed on female genitalia. It will also allow ministers to add to the list of procedures that are not offences under the bill and to add to the list of approved persons who may carry out such procedures. Ministers will be able to amend or remove any new procedures or approved persons that are added to the lists. Amendment 9 seeks to ensure that actions that amount to the offence of female genital mutilation and actions of self-mutilation that it is an offence to aid and abet will always be the same. The other amendments in the group are technical amendments that will be needed as a consequence of the order-making power. I lodged the amendments because there are a number of factors that we expect might change in the future, so I want to ensure that we can modify the offence of FGM to take account of such changes. We want to be able to take account of future developments in elective genital procedures. Some forms of genital surgery can be similar to some forms of FGM, which is why the bill contains specific exclusions that will make sure that operations that are required for physical and mental health are not offences. We are satisfied that the bill deals with those issues effectively and  we believe that it will not make therapeutic surgery, cosmetic surgery, piercing or tattooing unlawful. However, genital cosmetic surgery is developing quickly. Further regulation of such procedures might be introduced and we might need to modify the legislation as a result. The World Health Organisation plans to change its definition of FGM to reflect changing practices. That new definition might include procedures that are not currently offences under the bill, so the powers that I seek will allow us to ensure that such procedures are unlawful, if that is considered appropriate at the time. I have written to the Subordinate Legislation Committee to explain the procedures. The number of women and girls who are either at risk of FGM or who choose to have elective genital procedures is very small and it could be difficult to find parliamentary time to introduce and debate primary legislation on the issue. As a result, I believe that, as the Equal Opportunities Committee suggested, the use of instruments that are subject to the affirmative procedure is the right way forward in this respect. I move amendment 1.

Local authorities are finalising their antisocial behaviour strategies and the outcome agreements on which future funding depends. I expect to see clear indications that agencies are working together to implement the full package of measures under the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, including the enhanced antisocial behaviour order powers.

We will closely monitor the use of the measures that are contained in the act, but the main thrust of the approach is to monitor the outcomes that local agencies achieve through antisocial behaviour outcome agreements. We intend to ensure that implementation strategies are well publicised and that information is published on how local authorities are using antisocial behaviour orders. We will look closely at how the money that we have allocated to local authorities has been used. If it is not being used in a way that we consider to be appropriate, we will reflect on that.  Bruce McFee touched on a different issue, which Scottish National Party members have raised in relation to other matters that are the responsibility of local agencies. I think that he wants Executive ministers to start to dictate to local decision makers what they should do. If he wishes to come back to us with proposals that we should take powers, we will look closely at them. However, implementation of strategies at a local level is the responsibility of the local agencies.

I have met police and local authority representatives in Fife and have seen and heard at first hand how the new powers are being implemented. Indeed, I look forward to further meetings with representatives of Fife constabulary and Fife Council. We intend to issue a good practice note for the whole of Scotland. We want to collect information on how agencies have used their powers and share it with others who are perhaps more reluctant to use such powers. Ultimately, the issue depends on how local agencies implement local strategies. All I can say is that there are examples of the powers being used to good effect and I congratulate the agencies that have used them in that way.

Des McNulty raises a difficult issue. Such circumstances demand appropriate understanding, knowledge and ability. Trish Godman has raised with me and others cases from her constituency involving individuals with autism whom she felt were being inappropriately dealt with by the police and other agencies. I have spoken to the police about that and they are concerned to ensure that their training fully meets the need for knowledge about a wide range of conditions, including autism. I hope that that training and knowledge will be used to ensure that there is an appropriate response to people who have certain conditions and to other matters that need to be handled more sensitively.

The Scottish Executive greatly values the contribution that volunteer firefighters make to the protection of their communities. We have provided generous funding to the Highlands and Islands joint fire board to support its programme to develop many of its auxiliary units. However, the determination of the appropriate levels of fire cover is primarily a matter for the fire board.

I have already put on record our recognition of the contribution that volunteer firefighters make, but I repeat that decisions on the issue are for the local fire board. No one can doubt the Executive's commitment to the fire services in the Highlands and Islands. Between 2000-01 and 2003-04, the Highlands and Islands fire brigade received £8 million in capital consent from the Executive. In 2004-05, we provided a £1.8 million cash grant for general use on capital projects and a further £1.15 million for the board's buildings upgrade programme. This year, 2005-06, we will provide a further £1.8 million cash grant for general use and £0.75 million to assist with building upgrades. There has been a 50 per cent increase in grant-aided expenditure between 2000-01 and 2005-06. We are putting in the money, but how that money is used is a matter for the local fire board, although we expect the local decision makers to take into account the points that Mary Scanlon has raised to ensure public safety and security throughout the Highlands and Islands.

That question is a bit like the one that Roseanna Cunningham asked me last week on the funding of local mediation services. The SNP needs to make up its mind on how it wants the relationship between the Parliament and local decision makers to operate. Does it want the power of subsidiarity, under which local decision makers make local decisions locally, or does it want the Scottish Government or the Scottish Parliament to make decisions and then dictate to the local services? When SNP members have cleared up their thinking on that issue, they should come back and tell us, but until such time they should let the local decision makers get on with it.

My understanding is that in many cases developers ensure that the title deeds of properties that they sell contain burdens that make provision for the maintenance of common areas. The development management scheme, which is to be introduced under the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003, will give developers a model set of title conditions that they can adopt or adapt as necessary.

I am sure that my ministerial colleagues who deal with planning matters will examine those examples closely. The commitment in the partnership agreement to "review planning guidance to set strong minimum standards for including public open space in new developments" will be taken forward through the review of national planning policy guideline 11, on sport, physical recreation and open space. A report is being finalised and we expect it to be published later in the summer.

I am sure that my colleagues who are dealing with the Housing (Scotland) Bill will consider that suggestion. However, that cannot take away from the responsibility of those who buy houses to check the title deeds properly. There is an issue about what local authorities do, but, as I said in answer to an earlier question, local decisions are a matter for local decision makers.

We will look closely at the issue of property factors, some of which work better than others. Over the years, a number of worrying examples have been highlighted that warrant scrutiny. Careful consideration will be given to the matter.

This has been a good debate on a significant issue. Many members have outlined the serious threat that organised crime poses not just in some areas but in every Scottish community. We must ensure that our police and our law enforcement agencies are properly equipped to tackle the threat head on, and a number of members have mentioned our legislative and organisational proposals. Tragically, serious and organised crime impacts on a number of levels. Yes, there are the international aspects, to which I will return; and yes, there is activity within the United Kingdom and across Scotland; but it is when serious and organised crime, operating across national boundaries, begins to impact on local communities that we see the devastating effects. Kenny MacAskill and others have described how things happening in Colombia and Afghanistan can have a direct impact on us. Human traffickers are often engaged in a range of criminal activities. They deal not simply in the trafficking of humans; they also deal in prostitution, drugs, money laundering and other crimes. Pauline McNeill and Michael McMahon spoke about the human tragedy and the devastation that those activities can cause. One of the most horrific articles that I have read in the past few years highlighted the problems of many young Albanian girls when they are trafficked into the major cities of Europe. Innocently and naively, sometimes girls had allowed themselves to be taken out of their country for what they had been persuaded would be a better life. But, horrifically, other young girls were being kidnapped and transported out of Albania. Not only were those young girls forced into prostitution in major cities across Europe, but their families back home were threatened. The girls were told what would happen to their families if they did not co-operate.  The article contained graphic and horrific details—for example, about a young girl who escaped and made her way back to Albania but was then re-abducted and sent back out. Punishment was inflicted on young women. So that the criminals could get their way, women had fingers cut off and were beaten and tortured. The article showed just how cruel, malicious and malevolent those criminals were when trying to protect the profits they earned from organised crime. Stewart Stevenson and others have spoken about how sophisticated many international criminals are becoming. Every time there is a major technological or financial advance, we can be sure that the criminals are buying expertise in the technology to use it for their own advantage. As other members have highlighted, many criminals have front organisations—the so-called legitimate organisations—to hide the nefarious activities that are going on behind. It is incumbent on us to ensure that we are equipped to deal with such criminal activities. We must ensure that we have the best available experts in financial scrutiny. As the Solicitor General said, we are doing that, not only for her department, but for the SDEA. We need access to the best accountants and lawyers; promotion and support for the best police experts; and the best electronic and surveillance equipment and computers to allow us to deal with the issues. However, we also need a legislative framework that supports that activity, which is why we have been determined to advance, slowly but surely, our work on the law. For example, in co-operation with our colleagues at Westminster, we have legislated on the proceeds of organised crime. We have also passed laws to protect victims, to ensure speedier access to justice in our court system and to ensure that we develop partnerships within Scotland and the United Kingdom to tackle serious and organised criminal activity. We are addressing the matter seriously but, as several members including the minister have said, we cannot be complacent, because the criminals are determined that, every time that we make an advance, they will make a further advance in response.

Absolutely. Regular discussions are held with a number of organisations—we need  to learn from, support and co-operate with them. Anything that can be done to our mutual advantage will certainly be done. I will pick up on some of the specific points that have been made. Jeremy Purvis's point relates to Kenny MacAskill's comment about accepting best practice, from wherever it comes. Kenny MacAskill went on to make a plea that we ensure the independence of chief constables. I fundamentally agree that local operational decisions should be left to the police. However, that slightly contradicts what Annabel Goldie was driving at when she suggested that politicians should decide how policing should be carried out locally. That would not be acceptable.

No, I do not have time. In response to another question, the minister answered Annabel Goldie's question about how the SDEA will operate. I give the assurance that regular ministerial meetings have been and will continue to be held with colleagues at the Home Office. Annabel Goldie and other members, including Bill Butler, mentioned the work of the drug dealers don't care, do you? campaign, which had a significant buy-in from local communities—that was what made it successful. That shows that the public will respond if they are given the opportunity to do so. Stewart Maxwell completely missed the point about the operation of the proposed serious organised crime agency and failed to answer the questions that were posed on that. He also made some spurious points about the proposed supreme court—we are not trampling over our unique court system. We have said clearly on the record on more than one occasion that SOCA may carry out activities in Scotland in relation to an offence that it suspects has been or is being committed only with the agreement of the Lord Advocate. The safeguard is built in. We had a strange contribution from Bruce McFee when he intervened on Bill Butler. I know that there are big debates about the future of the SNP and independence, but Bruce McFee has taken that a step further.

No. Mr McFee criticised us for not introducing a Sewel motion in 2001 in relation to the regulation of the private security industry, but the reason why we did not do so was that we were consulting on a separate regulatory body for Scotland—obviously, Bruce McFee did not want that to come about. The reason why we later moved to a Sewel motion was  that our investigation showed that there was a case for a UK-wide regulatory body. There is a first time for everything. The debate has been good and several interesting points have been raised. I welcome the broad commitment that members of all parties have made to reinforce and make progress on our determination to tackle serious and organised crime in Scotland.

The Executive already invests in family relationship support through the national voluntary bodies, including Family Mediation Scotland. We also currently fund 10 local mediation services.

There is no mixed message from the Executive. We have already made clear our support for family mediation services, and we have significantly increased the funding available. However, there is an anomaly, in that we fund 10 local organisations. If Roseanna Cunningham—and her party, which consistently tells us that we should not interfere with local authorities in their decision-making process—wishes us to assume responsibility for making grants to local bodies, I look forward to her correspondence on that matter. However, the responsibility for funding local organisations is best made at local level. What the  Executive wants to do is to transfer the money that we are investing in a more appropriate way to those who are best able to make local decisions. We will not cut the money off; we will try to ensure that it is more appropriately placed. However, I repeat that if Roseanna Cunningham wishes us to make decisions about funding local organisations, it cannot be for only those 10 organisations; it must be for all others. I look forward to her submission on that.

I agree entirely with the point with which Kenny MacAskill finished his speech: prison is used to protect the public from the behaviour of individuals. We punish individuals in that way when we deem their offences to be significantly serious, but, while they are in prison, we have an obligation to consider how we can encourage them to change their behaviour and how we can prepare them for reintegration into society. With that in mind, we must get smarter at evaluating the impact that our interventions have on prisoners. I accept that the issue is complex with many interacting variables, but we need to know whether what we are doing makes a difference and, if so, what part makes the biggest difference. I hope that the research will continue to examine the most effective methods.

I intended to come to that issue. Pauline McNeill, Christine Grahame and others mentioned the importance of family contact, which we recognise. The most recent prisoner survey showed that 91 per cent of prisoners are in regular contact with someone outside the prison and that four in 10 prisoners receive weekly visits. As that contact is important, we are reviewing the role of the family contact development officers. We want to ensure that staff are used correctly and that interventions are appropriate. If we can improve on the service that they deliver, we will do so. I will touch on the issue of short-term prisoners. The minister, Cathy Jamieson, and I have said several times that there are people in prison who  should not be there and that we need to find alternatives for them. We recognise the futility of some very short sentences. Much of our recent work has been focused on those issues. However, it is wrong to say that the SPS does not work with short-term prisoners, although we need to be realistic about what short-term prisoners can obtain from the SPS. The SPS tries to help short-term prisoners who have addictions and attempts to stabilise drug users. It also assists short-term prisoners with health problems, provides help with identifying accommodation and employment opportunities and supports and facilitates family contact. As some members have said, there are significant issues with literacy and numeracy. However, it is not realistic for us to ask the SPS to undo during a very short sentence the damage that has been done in someone's life. We need to strike a balance and ensure that we deliver what is appropriate whenever we can. Jeremy Purvis touched on the home detention curfews. The Minister for Justice said in evidence to the Justice 2 Committee on the Management of Offenders etc (Scotland) Bill that it is estimated that around 25 per cent of those released on home detention curfews would have additional conditions attached that provide for interventions to reduce offending behaviour. Margaret Mitchell asked about the definitions of short-term and long-term sentences. The distinction in the legal definitions was drawn in the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993, which the Conservative Government of the time introduced. We all acknowledge that things have moved on and we need to consider not just what is happening with those who are in prison short term, but alternatives to their coming in. Margaret Mitchell also raised the issue of having adequate staffing levels to allow rehabilitative work, which relates to Richard Lochhead's complaint about prison staff being dragged away to perform escort duties. If my memory serves me right, Richard Lochhead opposed the measures that we took to ensure that prison staff were not dragged away in that manner. That is an example of inconsistency. In general, the debate has been good and we have heard useful contributions. All of us across the parties in the chamber agree that significant work needs to be done. I hope that we can agree about the purpose of prison and I look forward to the committee's recommendations helping to inform our approach to rehabilitation in prisons in the period to come.

rose—

I think that Patrick Harvie is on the record as having said in previous debates that he does not believe that prisons should be used to punish people. Does he believe that paedophiles should be punished?

I thank the Justice 1 Committee for its  useful work and for helping to stimulate a significant debate on addressing offending and reoffending. I will put the subject in context. Last night, we locked up 6,808 offenders in Scotland. Every person in prison brings with them a personal history that is often complex and characterised by a past that can include deprivation and addiction. The prisoner population is not homogeneous in respect of offending or of personal and social circumstances. Those factors make the task of working with individuals in prison extremely challenging. One size does not fit all; we need a range of opportunities in our prisons to encourage offenders to access initiatives that best suit their needs. We are investing heavily in our prisons and rehabilitative work does not happen in a vacuum, so we recognise that we need to provide decent accommodation and a civilised environment as a backdrop for that work.

I refer Richard Lochhead to the extensive discussion of that and other issues in the Justice 1 Committee, which probably addresses the matter more ably than I can in a short time. If any matter is not addressed, he can by all means come back to me. We want to ensure that our current unprecedented estate development programme has an effect. We are spending £333 million over five years—an average of £1.3 million a week—on improvements to the SPS. The inclusion of a rehabilitative aim for our prison service is a choice; a delicate balance needs to be struck in running a penal system. International experience suggests that pursuit of a single set of objectives—for example, custody or rehabilitation—can disrupt that carefully struck balance and endanger the calm and safe running of our prisons. I am pleased to say that our prisons have never been as safe as they are now for staff and prisoners. I record our thanks for the dedication and endeavours of our staff, who have made that possible. Against that background, we can consider what supports offenders in choosing a crime-free life on their release. Much of the focus of the committee's report is on offending behaviour interventions, but simply offering offending behaviour programmes is not enough. Available international experience suggests that badly designed programmes that are poorly delivered and which target prisoners with inappropriate risk and need levels can make their situation worse, not better. That is why, since the mid-1990s, the SPS has chosen a programme  strategy that is based on having in place a service-wide system of risk and needs assessment that ensures that only offenders who have specific needs and risk levels enter programmes. The effectiveness of that approach is being evaluated and refined in order that it can have a greater impact on risk and offending. The rehabilitation and care directorate in the SPS has identified 10 intended outcomes for a prisoner on release. When prisoners are released, they will be physically and mentally well, substance free or stabilised and be able to access the most appropriate accommodation. They will be able to read, write and count and will be employable. They will be able to maintain relationships with family, peers and communities, they will be able to access community support, to live independently and to stop reoffending. They will not present a risk. It would be wrong to discuss rehabilitation without speaking of the links between prison and the community. It is essential for successful resettlement that we prepare and support the offender at that vulnerable time. Preparation for release from prison and provision of support in the community are not just a good investment; they are essential. That is why, in the past two years, we have worked with the SPS and local authority criminal justice services groups to improve the arrangements for prisoners on release. Through the tripartite group initiative, we have provided an extra £4 million for throughcare in the past two years. Local authorities are implementing new plans. The creation of the community justice authorities under the Management of Offenders etc (Scotland) Bill will ensure closer working with a joint purpose for all organisations that are involved in offender management, whichever side of the prison wall they happen to be on. We will require the SPS to play its full part in supporting the new arrangements that are set out in the framework document for the SPS, which was published in March, for example, by ensuring that each CJA has a single point of liaison with the SPS. I will also put in place new performance monitoring arrangements for local authorities and the prison service in order to strengthen accountability for the effectiveness of offender management services. The delivery of those new arrangements is critical to reducing reoffending and to giving the people of Scotland the safer communities that they deserve.

Like other members, I thank Paul Martin for giving the Parliament the opportunity to consider this difficult issue. He has not just enabled the Parliament to reflect on what happened but has enabled his constituents, the Cummings family, to have a voice in the Parliament that was otherwise denied to them. Surely nothing is more devastating than the loss  of a child. Losing a child in such circumstances makes the problem and the grief, the anger and the anguish all the more profound. It is to the credit of the family that while of course they want answers about what happened in relation to Mark, they want to ensure that other families are protected so that they do not have to go through the trauma and grief that the Cummings family have experienced. We all recognise that sex offenders are among the most difficult and challenging group of criminals for the justice system to deal with. They understandably instil fear in our communities. They prey on the most vulnerable. They are very skilled in avoiding detection. They are very manipulative, as we see in the way they manipulate people of various age groups. As Kenny MacAskill said, they are small in number, but create disproportionate concern. That concern is understandable: the consequences of their offending can be profound and long lasting. We know that there are victims who suffer for the rest of their lives, even if they manage to stay alive. It is right that we are all committed to improving public protection, so that we can ensure that people live their lives in safety and without fear. There have been many improvements based on the recommendations of the Cosgrove report in 2001. We strengthened the registration requirements for sex offenders in 2003. The Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003 requires improved reports for sheriffs and judges with better information on risk. The act also gives the Parole Board for Scotland the power to impose electronic tagging as a condition of release on licence. We are encouraging the board to think positively about using that safeguard. We are rolling out a system throughout Scotland to record sexual and violent offenders properly and to keep track of them across police boundaries. I hope that that will make it easier to share intelligence. The Management of Offenders etc (Scotland) Bill seeks to establish joint arrangements between the police, local authorities and the Scottish Prison Service to assess and manage the risk posed by sex offenders, and includes the sharing of information. That will help to ensure that each organisation has a clear understanding of its role and responsibilities in relation to sex offenders.

As Mary Scanlon has identified, there is a need to work with sex offenders in particular. We are concerned that far too many offenders of all natures do not get the proper  rehabilitation and support that they need in order to avoid reoffending when they come out. That is even more critical in relation to sex offenders. However, we want to ensure not only that what happens in prison is properly carried out, but that the proper safeguards, support and help are provided in the community. As Paul Martin graphically illustrated, and as Elaine Smith mentioned, there have been recent cases—not necessarily that of Mark Cummings's death, where someone had completed their sentence—in which all the so-called safeguards have broken down, the agencies have not co-operated and there have been failings. The minister has asked for a report on what happened in those cases, because we need to learn the lessons. We need to understand that assessing and managing the risk posed by these individuals is critical. That is one of the reasons why we set up the Risk Management Authority, which puts Scotland at the forefront of developments. That authority will be responsible for ensuring the effective assessment and management of risk posed by sexual and violent offenders. Paul Martin raised the issue of some individuals' lifelong sex offending. That is one reason why we have introduced orders for lifelong restriction, which will give the High Court a way of dealing with serious violent and sexual offenders. We are working hard to establish the Risk Management Authority fully and to bring on stream the lifelong restrictions as soon as we can. We are also seeking to restrict the activities of individuals who are suspected of being a danger to our children. We want to restrict their activities even if they have not committed an offence. The Protection of Children and Prevention of Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill will allow chief constables to apply to the sheriff court for risk of sexual harm orders and extend the use of sexual offences prevention orders. Mary Scanlon and Paul Martin mentioned housing. Mary Scanlon talked about a case in which an offender was allocated a house in what she described as an inappropriate area of Inverness. I do not underestimate the problem of housing a sexual offender who has completed a sentence. Even if they have been given the proper support in prison, they are still a worry to the community. I cannot comment on the specifics of the case that Mary Scanlon identified, but if she writes to me to identify the areas in Inverness in which she thinks it might be appropriate to house offenders, I will ensure that that information is passed on to the relevant agencies. Paul Martin is right to ask about the wider issues of housing. It is true that people need stable  accommodation when they come out of prison, but the Cosgrove report warned that blanket exclusions of sex offenders in housing allocations would be unhelpful and recommended that they should normally be accommodated in mainstream housing in the local community. Guidance for social landlords on the housing of sex offenders has been in place since April 1999. It is produced by the Chartered Institute of Housing Scotland with our funding. The Cosgrove report welcomed that guidance and advocated the development of a national accommodation strategy to support the practical issues that are highlighted in the guidance. It also recommended the development of an education and training programme for housing providers and their management authorities. We have acted on all those recommendations, but Paul Martin is right that lessons need to be learned. I assure him that the minister, Cathy Jamieson, has made it very clear to all the agencies that were involved in dealing with the tragic death of Mark Cummings that they should examine their practices and procedures to determine what improvements can be made. We have also asked Professor George Irving to review the operation of the sex offender registration scheme and we will shortly produce for local authorities a revised statutory code of guidance on homelessness. Those matters are all continuing and we need to consider them specifically. Paul Martin raised a specific issue on change of name. There is a notification requirement in the Sexual Offences Act 2003 that provides that a sex offender must—I stress that they must—provide their name, any other names they have used and any changes to their name that have not already been notified. That provides some protections, but we will need to reflect on whether that is strong enough and whether anything else needs to be done on that issue. Patrick Harvie mentioned circles of support. They might be worthy of consideration at some point but, to be frank, we know that there are weaknesses in the statutory system that need to be addressed first. Before we can even start to think about circles of support, we need to resolve things that in far too many cases have let people down. I want the statutory arrangements to be made robust, so we will wait and see what comes out of the pilot in England. The Home Office is evaluating the pilot and we will determine whether there are any lessons to be learned in Scotland. I hope that we have given Paul Martin and the Cummings family some assurances.

Yes.

I will certainly ensure that the comments about housing are passed to my colleagues who deal with that issue. Paul Martin knows that we have asked the Sentencing Commission to examine the unconditional early release of sex offenders. Further, we will ask it to examine sentences generally. Work in relation to the sentences that sex offenders serve and what happens when they are released is already under way. The Minister for Justice has written to local authority chief executives, the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service and the chief constables to ask them to review their medium and high-risk sex offenders cases in order to ensure that sex offenders in all areas have been subject to a competent and comprehensive risk assessment and that appropriate arrangements are in place.  I hope that I have given some assurances about the work that is being done. I can be in no way complacent and cannot assume that what has been done and is about to be done will be sufficient. I am sure that there is always more that can be done. However, it is incumbent on us to listen to what Paul Martin and others say on behalf of their constituents and, as Cathy Jamieson has done, to listen to the views of the families who have been directly affected. After all, we are here to represent them.  Meeting closed at 17:56.

Communities look for protection but—I refer members to the debate that we had earlier this afternoon—communities also look for the punishment of people who commit heinous crimes, such as sex offenders and those who offend against children. In the earlier debate, Patrick Harvie suggested that he did not believe in punishment. Notwithstanding what he said about the role of the community, does he believe that people who commit sex offences against children should be punished?

I start with an apology. To some extent, the title of the debate might have taken the attention of some members away from the substance of the motion on which Parliament should be focusing for the purposes of the debate. That is, what can we in the Government and the Parliament do to address some of the deep-rooted and systemic problems in our society, particularly violence and the use of knives? I would be doing the issue a disservice if I tried to engage in some of the party-political knockabout into which the Conservatives want to drag us. Today's debate was initiated by the minister to provide an opportunity for us to think beyond some of the immediate issues that confront us. We know that there is a problem in this country in that there are far too many people in our jails. We recognise that, and we have accepted that something needs to be done about the revolving door system in which people go into prison, come out and go back in immediately. However, we want to encourage something more fundamental in this debate. I hope that there is consensus that the changes that we have initiated in relation to summary justice and High Court reform will make a difference to how justice is delivered in Scotland. I  hope that some of the changes that we have introduced to tackle serious and organised crime will make a difference in our communities. I hope that what the First Minister and Cathy Jamieson have said about the use of knives will be addressed seriously by the Parliament. However, it is incumbent on us to stop and think beyond some of those immediate issues. We have to think beyond the resources and beyond outbidding each other when we talk about the number of police that will be on the streets. We have to think beyond what we say when we talk about the number of available prison places—we have to think about how we can stop such things happening in the first place. I accept that deterrence is an issue and, unlike Patrick Harvie, I believe that in such cases acts of punishment are appropriate and that people should know that their actions have consequences. However, we must stop for a moment and think, "Is there something else that we need to address?" Kenny MacAskill's contribution was helpful in trying to set the tone for some of what followed. There is something profoundly wrong in our society if young men, in particular, can think that it is acceptable to wander our streets carrying knives. Indeed, there must be something wrong with a society in which, unlike in many other western democracies, the link between the consumption of alcohol and the expression of violence, with or without a knife, is all too prevalent. What is it about our society and culture that causes such problems? I hope that the Parliament can take the opportunity of this debate to start thinking about long-term as well as short-term measures. John Corrigan of Strathclyde Police showed a group of ministers a video in which a young man wanders into the centre of Glasgow and randomly knifes some innocent stranger who is simply walking along one of the city's main streets. What causes that young man to behave as he does? What do we need to do to resolve such a situation? I agree that we need to catch such people; that we need closed circuit television cameras; and that we need jails. However, what made that young man think that it was somehow acceptable to walk out with a knife? I had the bizarre experience of visiting a project in Greenock and speaking to a very articulate young man who said that he carried a knife for his own protection. I do not accept that reason for a moment; however, he then went on to say that it was the police's fault and that he would not have needed to carry a knife if there had been more police in his neighbourhood to protect him. Such logic is unacceptable, but unfortunately it is all too prevalent in many communities.  We need to get to the heart of the problem. We need to be able to deter and dissuade these young men, but we also need to change the culture in which they operate. We need to change a culture in which men think that it is all right to get bevvied up on a Friday or Saturday night and to take it out on people in the pub or on the street or to go home and give a woman a doing. We need to change a culture in which violence is an acceptable form of expression. As a result, I hope that this debate can be a starting point for the Parliament to take the issue seriously.

No. I hope that as a result of this debate the minister can start to engage with members across party boundaries in order to come up with another way of tackling this issue. I hope that, with this debate, she can start to engage with organisations throughout Scotland in order to raise the level of debate and identify solutions. Moreover, I hope that we can then translate that into action in the Parliament. We have a lot to be proud of in this country. So many good things are going on and, as speakers have pointed out, Scotland is relatively safe. However, there is something profoundly wrong; as the minister pointed out in her speech, there is a dark side to our culture and psyche. We need to do more. Let this debate be the start of something that will translate into action to make our communities safer, to deter young men from carrying knives and to change the mentality of those who think that violence is acceptable. This debate can be only a first step.

Yet again, Margaret Mitchell and the other Conservatives talk about early release. Given that the Kincraig committee recommended five years as the threshold for automatic early release, can she explain why the Conservatives adopted a lower level in 1993? Given what she has said, why did they adopt any level at all?

Patrick Harvie poses a number of questions on short-term prison sentences. I put on record yet again what we have consistently said: we do not believe that short sentences are effective. We need to consider what they achieve and we need to consider the churn of people going into prisons for short periods and not being properly prepared for coming back out. We are happy to make that point time and again. It is at the heart of much of what we are trying to do.

As set out in the partnership agreement, the Executive is committed to continuing to  modernise the law and legal system. We have already made significant progress through initiatives such as abolishing feudal tenure and reforming the diligence system. More reforms are planned, for instance through the Family Law (Scotland) Bill, which is presently before the Parliament. We are also continuing to support the work of the Scottish Law Commission in reviewing the law and making recommendations for change.

Pauline McNeill's final point is a more difficult one to address. We recognise that there are concerns about the length of time that it sometimes takes for cases to go through the courts system, and we have been considering ways of improving access to justice across the range of our courts. On accessibility and costs, I understand the concerns about how much it takes to get cases resolved. We are anxious to consider a range of options. For example, we are concerned to encourage mediation so that cases can be resolved before they go to court and so that those cases that go to court can be resolved speedily and their costs minimised. We acknowledge that there are issues about affordability and people being denied access to justice through a lack of resources and we continue to scrutinise the matter carefully. The Scottish Law Commission is undertaking a number of reviews at ministers' requests, one of which relates to time limitation, for example for personal injury claims. We expect the commission's discussion paper to be published for public consultation in the second half of the year.

The First Minister launched the drug dealers don't care, do you? campaign on 15 February. There has been an excellent response and 3,339 calls about drugs have been made to crimestoppers since the campaign began—four times the normal volume of calls. The information and intelligence that has been gathered through the campaign is starting to yield arrests and drug seizures.

The campaign that was devised for and implemented throughout Scotland was based on a successful local campaign, Renfrewshire against drugs. Anonymity was a feature of the Renfrewshire campaign. It is particularly important that people who live in communities that are ravaged by drugs should have the confidence to report drug dealing and other such matters to the police. We acknowledge that many people have legitimate fears and concerns about intimidation and downright threats and violence, so anonymity and confidentiality are an important, guaranteed feature of not just the telephone calls, but the thousand responses that I think were received in slightly more than a week to the leaflets that were put through people's doors. That critical feature should give confidence to more people so that they pick up the phone and give information to Crimestoppers not just during the short period of the advertising campaign, but throughout the year. I say again that their valuable information can be given anonymously and in confidence: people will not be put at risk. Their information is making significant results possible for the police in local communities.

I understand that Christine Grahame is disappointed and, to some extent, frustrated by the fact that we have gone over ground that has been covered previously. However, on the whole, the debate has been good, measured and constructive. Members acknowledged generally that there is some consensus, not only about the nature of the problem but about how we address it. Although members raised issues to do with investment, which I will talk about, I did not hear them say that they would do things very differently. However, there is much on which we can improve and indeed need to improve. The only dispiriting aspect of the debate was Margaret Mitchell's ill-judged speech, which was out of kilter not only with the speeches of members of other parties, but with those of her colleagues on the Conservative benches. It takes some going to make Bill Aitken look like a conciliatory moderate. If anyone was guilty of politicking in the debate, it was Margaret Mitchell. Some of her comments about ending automatic early release were completely misplaced and I would be interested to see the statistics that she has in relation to women offenders, which would be affected by her allegations about ending automatic early release. I suspect that her remarks were intended for somewhere else rather than for this debate. However, on the whole we have had a good debate, with some telling speeches. We all acknowledge that there are far too many women in  prison who do not need to be there. The Minister for Justice outlined our aspirations, and I repeat that we want to move forward with three distinct aspects of our policy. First, we want to provide suitable and credible alternatives to custody for female offenders so that as few people as possible are sent to prison unnecessarily. I will return to that point. Secondly, we must ensure that those female offenders for whom prison is the most appropriate disposal receive the services and support that they need. As Christine Grahame, Bill Aitken and others said, there are, regrettably, some people who need to go to prison. Patrick Harvie mentioned that he thought that only a tiny minority of women in prison are there for violent offences, but a snapshot that we took last year showed that 37 per cent of the women who were in Cornton Vale at that time were there for violent offences. That is a minority, but it is not a tiny minority, as Patrick Harvie suggested. Just as significantly, we need to ensure that female offenders receive the services and support that they need on their release. The minister touched on the work of the proposed criminal justice authorities, and the work that we are doing to try to reduce reoffending is pertinent to that. Thirdly, we need to look at the wider social problems of poverty, social exclusion, drugs, sexual abuse and prostitution, because all those factors can and do lead to offending. Colin Fox and a number of other members touched on that, and we are doing some work on all those issues. Stewart Stevenson and others mentioned that short-term sentences, often for failure to pay fines, seem to be more prevalent for women. Other members dealt succinctly with that issue and I do not need to repeat what they said. The fact is that prison is not necessarily the best place for such women and there should be alternatives for them. Pauline McNeill mentioned the 218 time-out centre, and she was echoed by Stewart Stevenson and Bill Aitken. It is interesting that the speeches of Pauline McNeill and Bill Aitken, who are fairly close to the issue, were slightly different from those of a number of other members. Those who mentioned the positive aspects of the centre were right to recognise the good work that is being done, but it is incumbent on us to listen to some of the other comments that were made by Bill Aitken and Pauline McNeill, because they are absolutely right. We have invested a lot of money in that pilot project and we want to see what it delivers. Pauline McNeill's point is the fundamental one: the 218 time-out centre project must be seen as an alternative to custody. It cannot be seen as a soft option for people to get rehabilitation should they need it. Although the project may well help people with rehabilitation needs, if that is all that it  does—if it does not address alternatives to imprisonment—it will have failed. We need to wait and see what comes from the pilot project. There have been some good examples of cases in which the centre has worked with women who have been in and out of prison and their lives have been transformed by their having access to it. However, we need to bear in mind the points that Pauline McNeill succinctly raised. Annabel Goldie was right to say, as a number of us have said, that if the safety of society requires imprisonment, that may be the correct option, but we need to put the matter in perspective. We are talking about a minority of women offenders. She was right to say that judicial judgment should be respected, but Kate Maclean and others mentioned their concerns about the judicial system not using alternatives sufficiently. We need to respect judicial judgment, but equally there is a responsibility on us as ministers to ensure that those who are responsible for sentencing are not only properly informed of sentences, but have confidence in the credibility of sentences. Christine Grahame asked whether the Minister for Justice has had discussions with the Sheriffs Association. The minister has had discussions and our officials are working with the Sheriffs Association to ensure that the relevant information is provided. It is interesting that the association has responded positively to the minister about the success of drug treatment and testing orders. We must ensure that the interventions that we offer are valid, credible and properly accredited. The work of the community justice accreditation panel should help to provide more confidence. Annabel Goldie talked about respecting addicted people's wish not to take methadone and about helping people to stop taking methadone. She is right. The Executive has said more times than I care to remember that those who are on methadone should be offered help to stop taking it and that people who want to pursue abstinence should be helped to do so. In her excellent speech, Rosemary Byrne described another alternative. Some women see a sustainable course of methadone as a way of overcoming cyclical entry into prison. The analysis that all that is involved is not going on to and coming off methadone is fairly simplistic and crude. Methadone has a role to play, but equally, so does abstinence. Rosemary Byrne put the situation in perspective. Colin Fox echoed what several members said about having options outside prison, and I have spoken about issues such as poverty, sexual abuse and physical abuse. Colin Fox said that more day residential services are needed and that the courts need more encouragement to consider such services. Several members, including Linda  Fabiani, talked about the need for more money and for front loading. Linda Fabiani said that we needed reactive measures. The debate is not simply about money; it is about using our resources more effectively.

No, thank you. If a gap exists, we will seek to plug it. It would be a travesty to fail to recognise what has been done. That is not complacency. We have put money into arrest referral schemes, supervised attendance orders, structured deferred sentences and DTTOs. As for the criticisms of Cornton Vale, £3.7 million has been invested in new facilities there, where independent living units have been created and a family centre has been opened. In the community, we have initiatives such as the time-out centre, electronic monitoring and other measures that I have mentioned. We have spent much money on creating alternatives to imprisonment, but that is not the whole answer—to take that view would be crude. The debate was good and well informed. I take comfort from the fact that people are willing to work together. Elaine Smith mentioned excellent initiatives, such as the storybook mums scheme at Cornton Vale. I am also enormously encouraged that the willingness to work together is felt not just among members, but among a range of voluntary organisations throughout the country that want to contribute. The Minister for Justice is keen to hear from them. Our faith communities have also made a significant contribution. The report "Women in the Criminal Justice System" by the joint faiths advisory board on criminal justice examined the subject in detail. All that is encouraging. We need humility and humanity. We need the humility to recognise that we are not getting everything right and to be willing to move forward to operate in a better way. We also need the humanity to recognise that the human tragedies that have been described in the debate demand our attention and something better.

rose—

That is just a bonus.

I do not disagree with some of what Patrick Harvie says, but I struggle to identify in any of Cathy Jamieson's remarks today—or indeed in anything that has been said before—any indication that the Executive believes in punishment for the group of prisoners whom we are discussing today. However, as Bill Aitken has recognised, there is an increasing number of women who are committing violent offences. In those circumstances, it is appropriate to deal with prisoners in a more punitive and severe way. However, in relation to the vast majority of the people whom we are talking about, we share Mr Harvie's aspirations.

Notwithstanding the fact that there may, at times, be a need for more resources, one of the things that I have taken from the debate—for example, from some of the concerns that were expressed by Kate Maclean—is that the resources and options that are available are not being used to their full effect. Although it is right to consider that we may need more resources, is it not right also to consider how effectively we are using what is currently available to us?

Would Colin Fox therefore agree that those who can afford to pay their fines should pay them, but that we should be actively considering alternatives for women who cannot afford to pay them?

The encouraging part of today's debate was the will that exists across Parliament for further measures to be taken to give added protection to young people, and to children in particular. In her opening remarks, the minister graphically and eloquently stated the case for why we need to act. The point was made in a number of contributions that the type of person with whom we are dealing is not just malign in their motivations, not just malicious in their intentions, but can be extremely unscrupulous and devious in the way in which they act in order to manipulate certain circumstances. They are intent on harming children and they will go to any lengths to carry out that harm. It is right that we should update our law to reflect the changes that take place in society and which happen around us, but it would be foolish to minimise some of the difficulties with which the  advent of the internet has presented us. Although it would be noble to have the intention of trying to do as much as we could, the technology and the way in which it can be used are moving on at speed, as members have clearly indicated. However, that is no excuse for us not to try to do everything that we can to introduce sufficient protection. A number of concerns have been raised during the debate. Although I will not have time to deal with each of them, they will all be considered carefully. I have already said that we will reflect further on a number of issues, because we need to get the legislation right. Although it would be right for us to reflect on the points that have been made and perhaps shift in an effort to improve the bill, it would also be right for us to take a firm view and to resist proposals that would have poor or adverse legal implications, even if they were made with the best of intentions. In seeking to help children, the last thing that we want to do is to create more problems further down the line, so we need to proceed with caution. Stewart Stevenson talked about some of the benefits of English legislation in comparison with Scottish legislation, but some of those benefits are implied under Scots law; we do not have to be as specific as English law must be. He referred to section 14 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003, but that provision is ancillary to a number of sexual offences in England and Wales and, as it stands, it would not work in Scotland. That said, it is proper that we consider further whether there is any equivalence that might be helpful. Margaret Mitchell made a number of points that were echoed by other members. She talked about the age of the victim and asked for clarification of whether the burden of proof should lie with the Crown or the accused. We have consulted with the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service and it is content that the burden of proof should rest with the Crown, but we will consider that further to determine whether any improvements can be made. Another issue that was mentioned by a number of speakers, including Mary Mulligan, was breach of the peace and the question whether that should become an offence that could trigger inclusion in the sex offenders register. However, the fact that someone has been involved in a breach of the peace scenario could already trigger inclusion in the register. Under paragraph 60 of schedule 3 to the Sexual Offences Act 2003, the judge can direct that a person who has been convicted of any offence should be subject to the sex offenders registration scheme if "there was a significant sexual aspect to the offender's behaviour in committing the offence."  Other issues to do with the use of breach of the peace in common law have been raised. There are circumstances in which breach of the peace can lead to action. We are not talking about replacing breach of the peace, but about adding to it and still using it when it is necessary to do so. A number of speakers dealt with RSHOs, about which I think there are some misconceptions. It is right to worry about the potential for stigmatisation, but I do not accept Patrick Harvie's arguments, which apply to different circumstances. The proposal in the bill is highly specific. It is right for us to consider giving protection to children to prevent certain acts from happening. I would argue that action is imperative when a child or a group of children are at imminent risk. Issues have been raised about the difference between full and interim risk of sexual harm orders. In some cases, there will be no time to go through the normal process for obtaining a full order. In those cases, it will be absolutely essential that action is taken to protect the child by means of an interim order. In either case, the sheriff must be satisfied that there is a prima facie case for making the order. Annabel Goldie raised—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Annabel Goldie asked whether there was flexibility in bringing charges under the offence of breach of the peace, but one of the benefits of the offence of breach of the peace is its flexibility. She also raised the issue of sending material that is likely to corrupt or deprave. That issue is worthy of further consideration and we will look into it. Other members raised the issue of age limits, which we will have to look at again. The debate was interesting; it properly focused on the issue of protecting children and some useful suggestions were made. The members who said that more work needs to be done are right and it is right and proper that we take the issues back for further reflection. Equally, I pose a challenge to members. The last thing that the Executive wants to do is to act with the best of intentions only to find that we have created further complications. The measures in the bill need detailed and careful consideration, and I look forward to a thorough stage 2 consideration of the bill.

The operational arrangements for nuclear-powered warships are reserved to the Westminster Parliament and all questions of detail on the matter are for the Ministry of Defence.

I repeat that this is a matter for Westminster, and specifically for the Ministry of Defence. It is for the MOD to consider whether any new risks arise from time to time due to any changes in its operational arrangements. It does so in consultation with the relevant local agencies and groups, including the Scottish Executive, and I am sure that health issues, such as that mentioned by John Farquhar Munro, are carefully considered. I suggest that he should raise the matter with his member of Parliament, so that proper representations are made in the proper way through the Westminster Parliament.

The operational arrangements for nuclear weapons convoys are reserved to the Westminster Parliament. The MOD is responsible for risk assessment in relation to the convoys and it carries out regular exercises to test contingency arrangements.

Again, as I said in my answer to John Farquhar Munro, it is for the Ministry of Defence to consider whether any new risks have arisen as a result of operational changes. The proposition that, from time to time, the Ministry of Defence should consider changing routes is reasonable. There would be more security issues if when and where convoys would be moving about were easily predictable. A concordat covers the general principles of the Scottish devolution settlement as they affect defence, which involves arrangements for consultation, the exchange of information, confidentiality and security. However, the communication of information about the convoys is reserved.

The Scottish Executive introduced a statutory victim notification scheme last November. The scheme gives eligible victims the right to be notified of the release of a prisoner who has committed a prescribed offence against them and who has been sentenced to four or more years' imprisonment or detention. The scheme is open to all eligible victims, regardless of when the prisoner was convicted.

Michael McMahon raises pertinent points. Some of the questions that he has posed require a much more detailed response and, if necessary, I will either write to him or speak to him separately. Michael McMahon is right to say that victims need that information at the appropriate time. We have put great emphasis on the need to support victims and to make them aware. The changes that we have brought in are intended to do that. I do not pretend that all schemes always work well—mistakes sometimes happen—but I think that generally we are starting to see improvements in the service and improved notification. However, I recognise that we need to do much more to make victims aware, to support them and to ensure that they are given the pertinent information.

The drug dealers don't care campaign is focused on supporting local communities to get drug dealers off the streets by providing a route for members of the public to provide information anonymously. The campaign is being publicised through national and local press, local radio, posters, leaflets, beer mats and direct mailing.

Recently in Fife we have seen commendable actions being taken on a range of issues, including dealing with antisocial behaviour. Specifically on the drug dealers don't care campaign, which is aimed at tackling the scourge of drug dealing, I have been encouraged by what we have seen so far. There have been 1,227 drug-related calls to Crimestoppers, which represents more than a four-fold increase on the usual volume. We intend this short, sharp campaign to raise awareness and generate confidence in local communities that individuals can take action safely to make their communities better places. However, we see it as only one part of on-going work to improve what is happening at a local level to encourage the various partners to work together. I know from the work that is being done in Fife that some of it is starting to bear fruit.

Guidance has already been published on many parts of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 to help practitioners to take effective and appropriate action in local communities. That has already helped agencies to implement new measures, such as closure orders and powers of dispersal. Further good practice guidance will be published as the antisocial behaviour strategy is rolled out.

The measures that we have taken—in legislation and in resource support to local authorities and other partners—are about ensuring early and effective intervention. We are keen to encourage the use of mediation; we are also keen that disputes and problems should be  resolved as early as possible. However, those who persist in causing problems and mayhem in communities must be dealt with. The powers are now available to ensure that that happens. I commend Fife for the range of measures that is being deployed there and for the imaginative use of the recently introduced powers. All authorities in Scotland should be looking closely at what is happening in Fife. I want the guidance on good practice to be made available so that everyone in Scotland can see examples of good practice and can build on them. As recently as this afternoon, I had a further meeting with officials to reinforce my determination to get that information out to local authorities and others throughout Scotland.

Towards the end of her speech, Linda Fabiani raised a pertinent issue, which echoed points that other members made: female genital mutilation is not an issue for women alone; it is also an issue for men in a number of respects. It is a shame that, when the bill has been considered at committee meetings and in the Parliament, it has been left mainly to women to talk about the issue. Until men are confronted with the implications and consequences for women of the way in which our society and other societies are structured, we will continue to have problems. Female genital mutilation is an extreme example of the problem that is caused by a lack of equality and fairness, and I do not think that any member—or, I hope, anyone in Scotland—could object in any way to the passing of the bill. Although there might be some differences of emphasis or interpretation at stage 2, from what I have heard today, it seems that any argument will not be party political but will be about what each of us thinks is  the most effective and appropriate way of creating appropriate legislation. There is no doubt that we should protect our girls and women from the horrendous procedure of female genital mutilation. I am encouraged by the comments that members of all parties have made and I will emphasise the reasons why we have introduced the bill and explain its effect. The bill will extend the legal protection that we can offer against female genital mutilation by taking extraterritorial jurisdiction in respect of female genital mutilation carried out overseas in certain cases. That is to ensure that the current law cannot be evaded by taking a girl out of the United Kingdom to have female genital mutilation performed. Under the bill, it will be unlawful for a UK national or permanent UK resident to carry out female genital mutilation outside the UK, or to aid and abet female genital mutilation of a UK national or permanent UK resident. The bill extends the maximum penalty for offences relating to female genital mutilation from five years to 14 years. There are three reasons for that: to send a strong message that female genital mutilation is unacceptable; to deter those who might be likely to practise female genital mutilation; and to signal to professionals the importance of protecting girls who may be at risk of female genital mutilation. The bill also changes the terminology used from circumcision to, more appropriately, female genital mutilation. A number of points were raised in the debate. I accept that there is a need for education. Education was not required during the consultation stage and it is not required as the bill progresses; it is what is needed in the aftermath of an act coming into force. We need to consider how we get the message across and ensure that no one in this country or associated with this country is engaged in the barbaric practice of female genital mutilation. I hope that anything that we can do in this country to educate people might influence what happens in the societies from which people in this country came and with which they still have links. What we do here might well produce some benefit in societies elsewhere in the world. I note the comments that were made about the consultation process. I accept that the process was not as long as it would normally have been, but we were anxious to ensure that we took advantage of the opportunity to get a slot in the legislative programme. I argue strongly that getting that slot was the right thing to do although, unfortunately, a number of things happened as a result. The consultation period was not the time to consider deterrent effects but the time to ensure that we got the process moving. Considering the deterrent effects and ensuring that people understand what the act is about will come  thereafter. In the consultation period we could not have told people what the act would do, because at that stage we did not know what its final shape would be. Comments have been made about the WHO guidelines and whether we should include them in the bill. My advice is that the WHO is considering redefining its guidelines and that it could create problems if we put in the bill guidelines that could be changed.

I understand Cathy Peattie's point, but there could be problems in making the definition in the bill the definition in the WHO guidelines, breach of which will be a criminal act, when we do not know what the guidelines might be in the future. I do not think that causing further problems in legislation by being loose in our definitions is the best way forward. I will re-examine whether we can incorporate in the bill something more specific, something wider or something that embraces the spirit of what the WHO is attempting to do. If more information from the WHO comes to us in time, we will certainly consider it. Issues have been raised and comments have been made about asylum seekers. In the bill we have gone further than many might have expected, because we are attempting, where we can, to protect asylum seekers in this country. However, there would be issues of legislative competence and our ability to bring the bill into force if we tried to legislate for what might happen elsewhere in the world. We will do what we can within our legislative competence, but protecting asylum seekers might not always be entirely possible.

Nothing that Rosie Kane says contradicts what I have said. We will protect asylum seekers within the law in our country, but there are issues to do with how we can enforce our law in other countries for people who currently have no legal definition or rights in this country. A  complicated issue is involved, but we will seek to do what we can within our legislative competence. I understand the issue relating to a requirement for two medical practitioners, which we will consider, but the proposals cannot be directly compared with what the Abortion Act 1967 says in that respect. There is also the possibility that if two medical practitioners are required and there is no potential to resort to a court challenge on a medical practitioner's decision, practitioners who are in favour of female genital mutilation might use the law to make a determination and deny an opportunity in court to challenge that determination. We will consider that matter, but we do not want to introduce complexities that could work to the disadvantage of women who are faced with this horrendous practice. However, I will reflect on the points that have been made. I understand the point that has been made about cosmetic procedures, but there are two concerns about what the committee has said. First, making another exception in the bill could create a loophole. Some cosmetic procedures are similar—if not identical to—various types of female mutilation. We want to ensure that there is no weakening of the protection that the law offers against female genital mutilation by permitting a procedure that cannot be easily distinguished from female genital mutilation. Secondly, we must ensure that we do not discriminate by permitting surgery that is requested for western cultural reasons while making procedures that are requested for African cultural reasons unlawful. We must dwell on that matter. We agree that there should be no age limit and we did not propose one in the bill—that point has been well made. I have been advised that the Somali women's action group, which responded, was set up only in July, so we were unable to contact it before then. On how the bill compares with UK legislation, we have already sought improvement. For example, we have made our bill gender neutral, so we are not simply proposing what was passed at Westminster. We have no problem with improving on what has been passed at Westminster, but we do not want to create loopholes or problems by having acts that are so different that they could be exploited in either direction. The issue is not only about consistency—it is about seeking to protect those who are most vulnerable. The debate has been good, well informed and emotional. It has reflected well on the work of the Equal Opportunities Committee, which carried out its task on behalf of the Parliament. Any reason that we need to explain to people why we want to pass the bill and to justify why we are spending time considering it will be provided  by the graphic description that the minister read out earlier, which justifies what we are attempting to do. As more members are present in the chamber now than were earlier, it might be useful for all members to have the opportunity to hear what the Minister for Justice said about why the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) Bill is being debated in the Scottish Parliament. She cited the experience of someone who underwent the procedure when she was five years old: "Mama positioned me on the rock. She sat behind me and pulled my head against her chest, her legs straddling my body. I circled my arms around her thighs. ... Mama leaned over and whispered, 'Try to be a good girl, baby. Be brave for Mama, and it'll go fast.' The gypsy... fished out a broken razor blade. I saw dried blood on the jagged edge. The next thing I felt was my flesh being cut away. I heard the blade sawing back and forth through my skin. The feeling was indescribable. ...I prayed, Please, God, let it be over quickly. Soon it was, because I passed out. When I woke up ... my legs were completely numb, but the pain between them was so intense that I wished I would die. ... My legs had been tied together with strips of cloth binding me from my ankles to my hips so I couldn't move. I turned my head toward the rock; it was drenched with blood as if an animal had been slaughtered there. Pieces of my flesh lay on top, drying in the sun. ... After the gypsy sewed me up, the only opening left for urine—and later for menstrual blood—was a minuscule hole the diameter of a matchstick. I could do nothing but wonder, why? What was it all for? All I knew was that I had been butchered with my mother's permission. I suffered as a result of my circumcision, but I was lucky. Many girls die from bleeding to death, shock, infection or tetanus. Considering the conditions in which the procedure is performed, it's surprising that any of us survive."

The Scottish Executive attaches a high priority to tackling violence wherever it occurs. We have invested to deliver record numbers of front-line police officers and we are doubling the penalty for possession of a knife or offensive weapon, strengthening police powers of arrest and increasing the minimum age for purchasing a knife from 16 to 18. Also, to tackle violent incidents fuelled by alcohol, the forthcoming licensing bill will put in place a robust regime that will help to break the cycle of excessive drinking and crime.

Sandra White mentioned more policing. Perhaps she did not hear me when I said  that we have record numbers of police in Scotland. She also referred to the front-line strategy for policing. That is a matter for chief constables. Unless I misunderstand Sandra White, she is suggesting that the Parliament should take responsibility for dictating how police services should be delivered at local level. That is an entirely different matter, which we shall certainly ponder if she wishes me to consider it, but it would be a fundamental difference from how we have always operated in the past. There might well be issues around the figures that were recently reported. I do not know whether the final figures will turn out like that. Nevertheless, we are not, and should not be, complacent about knife crime. What we are doing is right: we are putting in record numbers of police; the Executive intends to give police additional powers of arrest—I hope that Sandra White and her party will support us in that; and we will tackle the issue of minimum sentences for carrying a knife or offensive weapon. I believe that we must also do more as a country and as a society to examine the culture that still makes it acceptable in some communities for young men to carry knives. That is something that requires more than legislation.

I repeat some of the comments that I made to Sandra White. I believe that it would be dangerous if ministers in the Parliament started to dictate to chief constables exactly where they should deploy police officers. I believe that it is right for local MSPs such as Paul Martin to make representations to the chief constable about how the record resources that have been given to Strathclyde police are being used. However, to suggest that ministers should be able to influence how such decisions are taken is a fundamental step away from that. That would change entirely the environment in which we deliver, operate, manage and account for police services in this country. We have always attempted to keep politicians one step removed from operational decisions. Although local politicians are right to raise concerns, I am not convinced that it would be a  step forward if ministers or other politicians stepped into those decisions.

Steady progress is being made. Firearms offences have almost halved over the past 10 years and last year legislation introduced minimum sentences for the possession of a firearm and provisions for tackling air weapons and imitation weapons. However, we can never be complacent and we will continue to work closely with the United Kingdom Government on what more can be done.

I refer Kenny MacAskill to the answer that my colleague, Cathy Jamieson, gave to his colleague, Stewart Maxwell, on 10 February. Perhaps Kenny MacAskill did not hear her state in relation to that proposition: "I am perhaps sorry to disappoint Mr Maxwell by saying that I disagree."—[ Official Report , 10 February; c 14517.] She also drew Mr Maxwell's attention to provisions that were commenced in January 2004. We believe that firearms offences are serious. The United Kingdom Government is operating on our behalf and in partnership with us. I believe that it is right to have a consistent approach on firearms throughout the United Kingdom. The UK Government has been responsive to anything that we have suggested and I look forward to future partnership with it on the matter.

That is an entirely separate issue. I am not persuaded that we should revisit a very difficult but courageous step that was taken in the aftermath of Dunblane. I see no positive social advantages in trying to widen the potential for ownership of handguns. Generally in society, a broad welcome has been given to the measures that have been taken and there is recognition of why they had to be taken. Although I understand the point that Phil Gallie makes about some of the responsible owners who were affected in respect  of their sport, I am not persuaded that there is evidence—or that it is worth our while to try to get evidence—that seeking to extend ownership of handguns would contribute to progress in this country. I doubt that it would.

This is yet another example of the Conservatives' twisted and inexact logic on so many such issues. Margaret Mitchell conveniently forgets to mention that, far from creating any more danger or problems, the provisions of section 24A(2) of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 will be used only in rape and murder cases to tighten the conditions attached to bail orders where a decision on bail has already been made. In other words, any judge who is disposed to allow someone out on bail must consider monitoring for murder and rape cases. Let me sum up the Conservatives' attitude to different crime issues. When gangs of people were terrorising local neighbourhoods, they refused to back what we were doing. When we attempted to tighten up regulation of the security industry and to take action against some criminal elements, they refused to back us. Now they are refusing to back regulations that would impose further conditions on the release of people who have been accused of or who have committed acts of murder or rape. Shame.

Despite Colin Fox's unwillingness to assume any responsibility for improving legislation in this country, the process has, in general, been a positive one with constructive suggestions being made at various stages. It is right that members of all parties have recorded their appreciation of the work of fire service staff throughout Scotland. The staff are dedicated and professional and their dedication and professionalism have saved many lives. It is unfortunate that sometimes people's habits and attitudes let our fire service down. Many people are still not prepared to assume the appropriate degree of responsibility for fire safety and work on education remains to be done to improve fire safety in this country. If dedicated professionals are to deliver a service, it is right that the legislation should reflect the reality of modern Scotland, as the bill does. During the debate members raised a number of issues, which I will try to address. Stewart Maxwell asked whether BAA would be an example of "any other employer of fire-fighters". The answer to his question is yes. He also rightly talked about equal opportunities and the need for greater diversity in the fire services. The chief officer would not necessarily be a man and it is right that we change our attitudes in that regard. Stewart Maxwell said that he was disappointed that certain powers are not mentioned in the bill. However, we need flexibility to be able to respond to changing circumstances and the approach that we have taken enables us to move more quickly than would otherwise be the case. That approach, rather than the inclusion of rigid provisions in the bill, is appropriate to the circumstances that confront us. I was disappointed that, notwithstanding the consensus on the bill, Stewart Maxwell took the opportunity to create a degree of fear and alarm by making outrageous and unfounded comments about the contracting out of services and privatisation. There is no truth whatever in his allegations. Annabel Goldie asked about control rooms. When the information has been collated and consultation has taken place, we will inform the Justice 2 Committee in writing of the outcome of  the consultation. Annabel Goldie also raised specific issues about diversity, but I believe that we have addressed matters to do with diversity. I will try quickly to address the points that Jackie Baillie made. We listened carefully to what was said about strike action and fire safety provisions. I make it absolutely clear that no provisions in the bill make the taking of lawful industrial action illegal. The amendments that were made to the bill at stage 2 made it clear that an offence would be committed only if a fire service employee failed to carry out his responsibilities for fire safety in the workplace while he was at work. In many respects, the provisions reflect those on health and safety at work for other employees. The approach is in no way out of step with the broader aspects of health and safety at work, which apply to employees in a range of services.

There has been very good scrutiny and people have worked hard. We have tried to allay fears and make helpful amendments. I hope that we have put in place a bill that, when it is enacted, will reflect the needs of modern Scotland, make modern Scotland safer and ensure that our fire service staff have access to legislation that makes their job much more effective.

I am pleased to have the opportunity to open this debate. Today marks the culmination of an extensive process of consultation and parliamentary consideration, which began as long ago as April 2002 with the publication of the document entitled "The Scottish Fire Service of the Future". Our partnership agreement gave a clear commitment to taking forward the 2002 white paper by introducing a fire bill to modernise the service, meet local needs, increase local decision making and improve consultation with the workforce. The Fire (Scotland) Bill is the outcome of that process. The bill's parliamentary passage has been assisted by a great many people, and before I proceed to comment briefly on the bill's key provisions, I want to thank a number of them. I thank those who took time to respond to the various consultations; those who gave evidence to the committees; members of the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee and, in particular, members of the Justice 2 Committee for considering the bill so carefully and constructively; and the clerking teams of those committees. I also want to record in the Official Report my appreciation of the Scottish Executive bill team, which has worked hard to support ministers and has given advice and information to MSPs as requested. The team has done an exceptionally good job. I am also happy to confirm that Her Majesty has given her consent to the application of part 3 of the bill to the Crown in Scotland. Some complex issues were inherent in the bill, particularly in relation to part 3, and we needed fortitude to work through the intricacies of fire safety legislation. Specifically, we have had to address the reserved-devolved divide between general fire safety and process fire safety and how the fire safety regime in Scotland will apply to so-called reserved premises. I can confirm that an order under section 30 of the Scotland Act 1998 is being used to transfer legislative competence for fire safety on special premises and construction sites to the Scottish Parliament. I can also confirm that we have in-principle agreement from Whitehall departments—subject to reaching detailed policy agreement and satisfying the statutory tests—to progress other issues, such as  fire safety on Ministry of Defence premises and on certain ships and hovercraft and including the Health and Safety Executive and the Ministry of Defence fire services as enforcing authorities through a section 104 order under the 1998 act. Work is continuing at official level with Whitehall counterparts on a number of other issues. The bill will deliver modern legislation for a modern fire and rescue service that responds to the demands of the 21 st century. At times, the bill has been portrayed in some quarters as a vehicle for centralisation and micromanagement of the service by ministers—in effect, a takeover by the Scottish Executive. There have also been allegations that the bill will breach our European Union obligations and will make it an offence to take strike action—members will have heard that in previous discussions. That the Parliament's rigorous scrutiny process ably demonstrated that the bill will do none of those things is comforting. Above all, the bill will achieve a statutory framework that places fire prevention and fire safety at its heart. For a country that—unfortunately—continues to have the worst fire fatality record in the United Kingdom, driving down the risk of fire, especially in the home, which is where many fatalities happen, must be a priority. Through the national framework, there will be clear strategic direction for the service, which will ensure local democratic accountability and the local delivery of a key service to meet local needs. The clarification and strengthening of fire and rescue authority powers will provide the means and flexibility for authorities to achieve the best delivery for their areas.

We are still working on issues that were identified in responses from a number of stakeholders. Consultation will take place with key stakeholders, including trade unions, local authorities and the fire boards once we have all the information to hand. We still have some way to go. We have made it clear that we will come back to Parliament, and the committee will have further discussions before anything further happens. We are still some way from any decision or conclusion. It is right that we should take our time to consider the specific concerns that have been  raised about the need for local geographic knowledge and about the financial robustness of certain proposals. Once that information is to hand, there will be full consultation with all stakeholders, including the trade unions. The bill will also enable a co-ordinated and Scotland-wide response to significant and even unprecedented emergencies. In the post-September 11 environment in which we all live, the provisions to ensure resilience are, sadly, necessary and I hope that they will be welcomed. I hope that the various amendments that we made at stage 2 and today have given some assurances to those who were a bit uncertain and unclear. Where we can, we have attempted to accommodate and clarify. I hope that we can consider the bill as being just one part of a change process that is moving the fire service forward. I am clear that the bill is a central plank in that process and I am confident that it will stand the test of time. The process has been long, deliberate and rigorous and I warmly commend the bill to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Fire (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Amendment 15 ensures that regulations that are made under section 54(1) can allow persons with fire safety duties in respect of relevant premises to enter into arrangements with owners or occupiers of other parts of the building in which their relevant premises are located. The amendment will enable co-operation and co-ordination on fire safety matters among occupiers and owners of a multiple-occupied building where perhaps only part of the building is defined as relevant premises. It reflects the whole-building approach that was provided for in the Fire Precautions Act 1971 and which will be repealed by the bill. Such an approach would, for example, enable maintenance arrangements that are made under the bill to cover a system or precaution as a whole, not only those parts of it that are located in relevant premises. I move amendment 15.  Amendment 15 agreed to.

Amendment 16 allows relevant authorities to enter into arrangements with a person prescribed in regulations to carry out such part 3 functions of the authority as specified. The exercise of the power would enable arrangements to be made with prescribed persons in a similar manner to arrangements that can be made under section 56(5), which is limited to the making of arrangements with the Health and Safety Commission. We intend to exercise the power to prescribe the proposed new Office of Rail Regulation as such a person. I move amendment 16.

The exercise of the power in amendment 16 would mirror the exercise of the power in section 56(5), under which the relevant authority "may make arrangements with the Health and Safety Commission" for specified functions "to be carried out (with or without payment) on its behalf by the Health and Safety Executive in relation to" specified workplaces. We would seek to use the powers within those parameters and if anything moved in a direction that we have not described today, I would inform the Parliament of that through the Justice 2 Committee. Our intent is specific.  Amendment 16 agreed to.

Amendment 17 sets out a number of requirements that an enforcing authority may impose on a person in an alterations notice. They include: the keeping of records on the assessment of risk; the recording of arrangements that are made for the planning, monitoring and review of fire safety measures; and, when notifying the enforcing authority of a proposed change to fire safety measures, the provision of a copy of the assessment and a summary of the changes proposed. The amendment strengthens the provisions on alterations notices and clarifies the requirements that can be placed on persons in such notices. I move amendment 17.  Amendment 17 agreed to.

Amendments 20 and 21 extend the protection that is afforded to enforcement officers in the carrying out of their functions under part 3 of the bill to those who accompany and assist them. The amendments insert a new offence and penalty provision that will protect those whom an enforcement officer takes on to premises for the purposes of assisting the officer in the carrying out of fire safety functions. I move amendment 20.

I welcome the positive comments made by both Stewart Maxwell and Sylvia Jackson, who is right to refer to amendments that we will be coming to shortly as well as to amendments 20 and 21, through which we have gone beyond what the Subordinate Legislation Committee wanted us to do. I hope that Parliament finds that acceptable.  Amendment 20 agreed to.  Amendment 21 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.

The Executive amendments in this group respond to the concerns referred to by Sylvia Jackson, which were raised by the Subordinate Legislation Committee following its consideration of the supplementary delegated  powers memorandum after stage 2. Amendments 22 and 23 make the powers at sections 55(2)(c) and 72(7) subject to the affirmative procedure, as the committee recommended. The Subordinate Legislation Committee was also concerned that the powers at section 67, subsections (9A), (11) and (12), were too wide. The committee proposed that those powers should be linked and that the powers under subsections (11) and (12) should be made subject to the affirmative procedure. On further reflection, we considered that the policy can be achieved in a different manner, involving the removal of the delegated powers and a clarification of situations in which due diligence defences will not apply and of those in which a reverse burden of proof will apply. We concluded that, in light of the Subordinate Legislation Committee's recommendations and comments, it would be better to make the policy intention very clear in the bill rather than in regulations, as we had intended. Accordingly, amendments 31 and 32 remove the power under subsection (9A) and include in the bill provisions to make clear the circumstances in which the defence of due diligence will be removed. Amendment 34 replaces subsections (11) and (12) with a provision creating an automatic reverse burden of proof whenever the regulations under sections 53 or 54 impose "so far as is practicable" or "so far as is reasonably practicable", a duty or requirement resulting in an offence being committed under section 67(3). I am aware that the timing of the recent recess brought added pressures to bear on the Subordinate Legislation Committee's consideration of the bill as amended at stage 2 and that amendment 36 has been lodged on behalf of the committee on a contingency basis. I believe that the Executive's amendments, which remove the relevant powers, narrow the range of potential situations in which the disapplication of the due diligence defence and the reverse burden of proof can apply. The amendments clearly display the link between the defence and the reverse burden of proof. I hope that the measures are satisfactory to Sylvia Jackson and the Subordinate Legislation Committee and that, having listened to the detail of our response, the committee's members are satisfied that our amendments make amendment 36 redundant. I move amendment 31.

I am afraid that that is outwith my competence, Presiding Officer.

As members have indicated, the matter was discussed extensively at stages 1 and 2. It is significant that at stage 2, the committee voted against an identical amendment. As Colin Fox is aware, the Executive is consulting on the most appropriate advisory structure for the future and the consultation period will not conclude until early March. In the consultation paper we make it clear that we do not intend to place the advisory structure on the same statutory footing as that of the Scottish Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council. Our experience is that, contrary to Colin Fox's assertions, the council is too restrictive and inflexible and it does not allow for change quickly or easily. Colin Fox suggested that any new body will be toothless. I am not sure what he thinks that the current body has in the way of powers, nor do I think that having an advisory body that requires  the minister to chair it is necessarily capable of offering objective advice to the minister. I believe that there should be a body that is capable of giving advice to the minister. We want to consult on who should be on that body. We are open to considering what that body should discuss and how it should be constructed. Far from removing the necessary expertise—as was asserted—the body would draw in the widest expertise to provide objective and adequate advice on fire matters in Scotland. Colin Fox accused the Executive of not being specific in the bill, but his amendment is vague. It leaves open a variety of matters that would normally be addressed in establishing a body in legislation. The amendment specifies neither whom ministers should consult nor the circumstances in which advice must be given. Therefore, the amendment would provide no framework on which to hang the regulatory detail. Our position is clear. We do not believe that we need to establish the advisory body on a statutory basis. Far from leaving us where we are in legislation, Colin Fox's amendment would cause more problems than it seeks to solve. I hope that he will reflect on that and withdraw his amendment. If not, I hope that the Parliament will reject his proposal.

I welcome Bill Butler's amendments. Consultation with recognised trade unions was the subject of a great deal of discussion at stages 1 and 2, as Stewart Maxwell and Bill Butler both said. I listened with interest to the strong arguments that were made for the bill's having an expressed duty to include trade union representatives in any statutory negotiating bodies that are established under section 45(1). I believe that amendments 27 and 28 will put it beyond doubt that sections 45 and 46 incorporate provisions that will enable any statutory  negotiation body set up under section 45, or any relevant negotiation body as defined in section 46, to include representatives from trade unions "whose membership consists of or includes employees of relevant authorities." It was never our intention to exclude trade unions—we gave a commitment on that. However, Bill Butler's amendments 27 and 28 will give added advantage and I am happy to support them.

I note Colin Fox's point about achieving consensus, which can often be helpful. In the spirit of consensus, perhaps he will reflect on the fact that his suggestion received no support from members at stage 2. Colin Fox says that the concept of being reasonable is discredited—I do not know what that says about Colin Fox's thinking process, but the word "reasonably" is important in the bill. Mr Fox questions whether the bill is EU compliant but, as members know, we could not propose legislation that was not compliant. We have met our obligations. The bill is not, as Colin Fox suggests, in contradiction of any European legislation. I have put on the record a number of times, and I will do so again today, that we are content that the approach that is adopted in the bill will correctly implement the high standards that are placed on employers in respect of workers' health and safety, as set out in the EU framework directive. I repeat that the bill is within the Parliament's legislative competence. Part 3 reflects the duty that is placed on employers in relation to other aspects of health and safety at work in the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974, which the United Kingdom regards as the legislation that implements the 1989 European Council directive in that regard. There are important reasons why amendment 29 should not be agreed to. The Executive does not have difficulty with the proposition that employers should be required to apply the strictest possible standards to the safety of their employees in this area. The United Kingdom's record on health and safety at work is among the best in Europe, but amendment 29 goes too far in that it would impose an unfair burden on employers. If the amendment were agreed to, employers would be required to take measures where it was practical to do so, but with no assessment of whether those measures were reasonable in the circumstances. If employers were unable to conduct some sort of balancing exercises against countervailing circumstances,  that could in some cases lead to absurd results. Employers could be required to take extra steps even if they were manifestly disproportionate to the risk. I accept that the matter is difficult, but I strongly believe that the bill strikes the right balance between the rights and the responsibilities of employers and the paramount safety of their employees. The Executive therefore does not support amendments 29 and 33.

The amendments in the group are minor and consequential. Amendments 1, 2, 7 and 8 are aimed at improving the grammar and drafting of sections 11, 18 and 35A. Amendment 14 will correct an oversight from stage 2, whereby section 52 was not included in the group of amendments that replaced the words "in the event of fire" with "safety ... in respect of harm caused by fire". Amendments 18, 19 and 30 are minor amendments that will correct references in section 65 to part I of the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 to ensure that orders as well as regulations that are made under part I of the 1974 act are preserved if an enforcing authority under the bill is also an enforcing authority within the meaning of the 1974 act. Amendments 24, 25 and 26 will amend schedule 3 and make minor and consequential amendments to other legislation. The amendments will replace references in statute to "fire authorities", "fire brigades", "joint fire boards" and other terms that are used in the Fire Services Act 1947. It will no longer be appropriate to use such references when the 1947 act has been repealed and the proposed legislation comes into force. It is therefore necessary that we replace those terms with the updated terminology that the bill uses. I move amendment 1.

I do not have access to the full details, but I will clarify the matter for Stewart Maxwell.  Amendment 1 agreed to.

In its stage 1 report, the Justice 2 Committee considered that there was merit in Scottish Water's having responsibility for maintaining fire hydrants, but wanted clarification of the financial implications for the fire service were such a transfer of responsibility to be effected. The committee drew my attention to evidence that was taken and invited me to consider the issue further. I am sympathetic to our trying to do what we can to rebalance the costs that are associated with maintenance of hydrants. Mike Pringle lodged two amendments at stage 2 that would have transferred all the costs to Scottish Water, but he withdrew the amendments to enable me to consider further the available options. Ultimately, we are talking about shifting costs. We did not expressly consult on the issue when we drew up the legislative proposals, so it would be wrong to place new burdens on organisations without the necessary prior consultation. I see no benefit in simply moving costs between two public services—fire services and water services. Such an approach would have no positive effect and would raise questions about funding if, for example, there were a transfer of funds from fire grant-aided expenditure allocation or if bills for all water customers were allowed to increase to meet the new costs, which would be contrary to the principle that the charges that users face should generally reflect the costs that they impose on the system. Amendment 3 therefore represents a sensible and flexible solution. It will allow the implications of any policy on hydrant costs to be fully considered. Thereafter it will allow—which is important—consultation of all the relevant and interested parties, in order to identify whether a change in the  existing legal provisions is necessary. For example, in the case of new housing or new industrial or commercial developments, we would consult on whether there was support for a way of requiring the developer—on newly developed or on redeveloped sites—to meet the costs of installing hydrants. I move amendment 3.

Amendments 4, 5 and 6 are minor tidying amendments that will remove unnecessary wording from the powers in sections 23 and 24 and will bring those provisions into line with section 24(2)(a) and section 57, in which similar powers are conferred. The meaning of the affected subsections is unchanged. I move amendment 4.

Stewart Maxwell has, in essence, described why we have done what we have done. We think that it made sense for us to make the proposals in the three amendments.  Amendment 4 agreed to.  Amendment 5 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.

Amendments 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 address an overlap in the bill in section 35B. In that section, "enforcing" authorities are identified as being separate entities to "relevant" authorities. In fact, an enforcing authority can also be a relevant authority. Amendments 9, 10 and 11 will therefore remove the references to "enforcing" authorities from section 35B. The intention of section 35B is to deal with offences that may be committed against employees of relevant authorities. Reference to relevant authorities is therefore, I believe, adequate. Amendments 12 and 13 will improve the references in section 35B(2) to persons operating under arrangements made under section 34. Section 33 is concerned with those who assist relevant authorities; section 34, however, is concerned with those who carry out the functions of relevant authorities. The amendments will therefore remove the existing reference to section  34 and insert a new subsection that will cover persons carrying out functions under section 34 arrangements. I move amendment 9.  Amendment 9 agreed to.  Amendments 10 to 13 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.

In line with our commitments in "A Partnership for a Better Scotland" and our strategy for victims, we are taking significant steps to ensure that communication with victims in the justice system is constantly improved, most notably through our promotion of the victim information and advice service, our support for Victim Support Scotland and the introduction of the victim notification scheme. Moreover, as the Lord Advocate announced this morning, victims will, in future, be given an explanation by the Crown Office if it decides not to pursue a prosecution or to discontinue a prosecution.

That is very much a matter for the Lord Advocate, who I am sure will consider Jackie Baillie's comments carefully. I know that Jackie Baillie is a long-standing campaigner on justice issues on behalf of her constituency, but her specific question is a matter for the Lord Advocate.

As I recently indicated to John Swinney, we intend to publish that paper soon. We are reflecting on many of the arguments and issues, not least of which are the implications of the Clementi review.

The Scottish Executive remains committed to introducing legislation to establish a Scottish human rights commission in the current parliamentary session.

I refer Robert Brown to my previous answer. It is right that we take our time to consider the detailed responses that we received during the consultation. Notwithstanding that, we are continuing to develop the bill and examine the issues that were raised in the consultation. We have considered examples of other institutions in the United Kingdom and abroad. For example, officials have discussed our proposals with the national institutions unit at the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and they have attended a series of workshops that have been run by the British Council in order to learn from the experiences of human rights institutions around the world. We have set out our legislative programme for this year and it would be wrong for me to anticipate what a future programme might look like. However, we remain committed to establishing the commission in the current parliamentary session.

That would depend on which specific aspect was raised. Many of the issues are reserved matters, although there may be some specific instances of devolved competences. The commission's main functions would be promotion, education and awareness raising; providing guidance to public authorities; advising the Parliament on legislation after introduction; general monitoring and reporting in relation to law and practice; and investigating and reporting on generic or sectoral human rights issues. The Dungavel situation would depend on the claim that was made.

It is obvious that the potential for overlap would exist. When a proposal is produced, not only the Executive but the Parliament will need to consider it carefully. The UK proposals that have been developed have several benefits, but we are keen to ensure that we do not have two bodies that examine the same issues at the same time. Detailed consideration would need to be given to protocols and areas of work and a proper understanding would need to exist between the bodies.

It is hard to know where to start, so I will begin with the fundamental hostility that the Scottish National Party has to Scotland's being part of the United Kingdom and, indeed, to the devolution settlement that was voted for by the people of this country. The SNP does not want the settlement to work, and it sees anything that is connected to the rest of the United Kingdom as alien. That is a position of principle for the SNP; personally, I think that it is silly in the extreme. However, the SNP takes that silliness further by opposing policies that are, on the face of it, eminently sensible. I mentioned at the Justice 2 Committee a number of examples in which it would make eminent sense to hold inquiries between two jurisdictions. The Dunblane inquiry, in which there were issues to do with firearms offences but also profound issues to do with child safety and security, was one such example.

On the first point, I am happy to confirm that Bill Butler did indeed press me on the question of the Fraser inquiry, and I repeat that the advice that I have been given is that, if the bill had been in force at the time, the BBC and IWC Media would have been obliged to release the tapes. Any future inquiry will have a power of compulsion that was not available to Lord Fraser. As for the implementation date, that is a matter for the UK Parliament. The bill will need to go through due process there, and thereafter will follow the normal enactment. I am not in possession of a specific date. Essentially, it is an eminently sensible proposal that is before us. It is one that will benefit Scotland—not just Parliament but the Scottish people. The SNP is now on record as saying that it is opposed to motions that give more powers to  Scottish ministers or to the Lord Advocate. I would have more respect for the SNP if it said that it was a matter of principle; however, it cannot be a principle because the SNP supports some policies and opposes others, some of which would transfer powers to this Parliament. What we now have with the SNP is a party that is bereft of ideas, bereft of leadership and, sadly, bereft of common sense.

I hope that it is worth waiting for, Presiding Officer. It is extremely regrettable that, during the debate, neither of the two main parties bothered to address the issue of crime. That is clearly their stated preference. The debate has done Parliament a great service in that it has dispelled a myth once and for all: it is clear from his speech that Kenny MacAskill does have a sense of humour. However, the joke as far as he is concerned will be perpetrated upon the people of Scotland, who will have to take the  consequences of that irresponsible action. In his speech, apart from trying to kid us all on, Mr MacAskill mentioned a number of things and failed to explain matters in detail. He even tried to distort what the Minister for Justice said about the direction of the Scottish police forces. He quoted her as having said: "Only Scottish ministers would be able to exercise this power". He failed to go on to read the rest of the sentence, in which the minister said that that would happen only rarely and only in "extremely specific circumstances" if at all, which will be consistent with the powers that ministers have under the current legislation from 1967. There is no difference. As far as Annabel Goldie is concerned, I think that it was very unkind of certain people to refer to her as a gangster's moll—Annabel has much more to contribute than that. She asked about why the Sewel convention was not questioned when it was going through the UK Parliament. The UK consulted on that in 1999 as this Parliament was being established. In 2001, it legislated. At that point, we thought it best to consult on whether people wanted Scottish legislation and Scottish regulations and the outcome of the consultation was that there was a preference for regulating on a UK basis. We would have been criticised for doing so then without consultation, but we are being criticised now for responding to the outcome of consultation. In a sense, we cannot win. Jeremy Purvis asked some legitimate questions about consultation. I assure him that we have started work on discussions between the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency and the serious organised crime agency to establish robust arrangements. We will come back with more detail on that. I confess that I was extremely disappointed with Stewart Stevenson's speech. He is usually well prepared and accurate, but his whole contribution today was completely and utterly wrong. For example, clause 2(2) makes it absolutely clear that clause 2(3) does not apply to Scotland, so the bill makes it clear that the Serious Fraud Office will not cover Scotland.

No. I shall go on to sum up where we are with the motion that is before us today. I have to say that those who have been tempted to join the unholy alliance of Tories and SNP members ought to think twice. Where are we with the motion? The Tories and the SNP are voting against new powers to investigate serious organised crime.  They are against new powers to impose financial reporting orders on people who are convicted of serious financial crime. The Tories and the SNP are voting against ratifying the United Nations conventions against transnational organised crime and against corruption, and they are also voting against the European Union framework direction on asset freezing. When it comes to criminal records, the Tories and the SNP will not allow Disclosure Scotland access to databases elsewhere in the United Kingdom, so the Tories and the SNP are abandoning Scotland's children. When it comes to witness protection, the Tories and the SNP shamefully want Scots witnesses to have access to greater protection when they are moved to England and Wales, but they want to deny English or Welsh witnesses the same protection in Scotland. Shame! When it comes to the private security industry—when it comes to a choice between crooks and communities—the Tories and the SNP have yet again gone against our communities. So when it comes to the vote, let the record of shame show that when they were asked to vote for safer communities, SNP members have yet again allowed their constitutional obsession to take precedence over protecting decent people in decent communities, and the Tories have once again shown that, just as with the legislation on antisocial behaviour, they are not prepared to take a stand against those who inflict misery on our communities.

Will the member give way?

Members have congratulated Wendy Alexander and I add my congratulations to theirs. By lodging the motion, she has done the Parliament a favour. She has given us the opportunity to focus directly on one football club and she has helped us to consider the action that we need to take to tackle the wider issue of racism by raising the matter in a context that is understandable and familiar to people in Scotland.  We should not underestimate the action that St Mirren Football Club took. As Tommy Sheridan said, it is one thing to talk a good game, but it is another thing to act. St Mirren took action when others were too scared, too worried or perhaps too ignorant to do so. The club's decision might have had repercussions. Not only were there the financial implications that members mentioned, but standing up and doing the right thing does not always make us popular and is not always regarded as the appropriate thing to do—that is an unfortunate aspect of our society. St Mirren FC did the right thing; Stewart Gilmour and his board have done the right thing. They have taken decisions that I hope will guide others. Action does speak louder than words. St Mirren has acted directly on the issue of the two fans and the club has said clearly to its supporters and to supporters right across the country that there are football clubs that are prepared to take action. That counts enormously. Some of the comments that we have heard this evening have demonstrated the breadth of support for taking action to rid our country of the scourge of racism. The Scottish Executive is happy to put on record its support for Wendy Alexander's motion. With your permission, Presiding Officer, I will speak for the Parliament and say that this Parliament is committed to eradicating prejudice, intolerance and discrimination wherever they surface and in whatever form they take. Other members have mentioned the curse of sectarianism in Scotland. The First Minister has said clearly that he and the Scottish Executive are determined to take action to eradicate sectarianism. Racism is another manifestation of bigotry and intolerance and cannot be accepted. As part of the Executive's contribution towards tackling racism, we have made a number of decisions, we have invested and we have launched a number of campaigns. The "One Scotland. Many Cultures" campaign aims to raise people's awareness of the negative impact of racist attitudes and behaviour on individuals and society as a whole. The next phase of the campaign—on television, on radio, in cinemas and through outdoor advertising—will start on 14 February and last for six weeks. I hope that, in the context of that campaign, people will stop and ponder what St Mirren FC has done. We also have to look beyond media advertising. We have taken a number of practical measures: we have tried to set up websites to provide information; we are considering awareness-raising activities, working with the Scottish Trades Union Congress and Young Scot; and we have a race equality scheme, which places a duty on all departments within the Scottish Executive and Executive agencies to eliminate racial  discrimination and to promote race equality. Other members have rightly talked about the significant influence that football has in our culture and society—something that makes St Mirren's action all the more significant. People have talked about the role of St Mirren in Paisley. Tommy Sheridan has said what others believe—that St Mirren should be a Premier League club. However, Paisley's contribution to football does not rest with the contribution made by St Mirren. There were stories in the press this week about a Paisley worker who was sent by J&P Coats over to one of its factories in Brazil. He imported new techniques of football to Brazil and, it is widely believed, helped to influence the development of football there. What Paisley does can have implications beyond the boundaries of the town. In the same way as a Paisley man was able to take new football skills to Brazil, I hope that the stand taken by St Mirren will be copied by others. Members have mentioned the contributions of other clubs, such as Kilmarnock and Dundee. I want to refer in particular to a courageous act by a young Dundee fan, who reported a fellow supporter for making racist comments about two black players during a game in Dundee. That could not have been easy for a 14-year-old to do. Sometimes many of us duck the hard issues; sometimes standing up to be counted is uncomfortable; and yet Scott McBurney, aged 14, took action and reported someone to the police. To their credit, the sheriff, the club and football officials have all taken action and the man has been convicted. The football club has done the right thing. That just shows that the action of one individual can have a profound effect. It is a shame that it took a 14-year-old boy to show the rest of us what ordinary fans should be doing. That boy and Stewart Gilmour and St Mirren FC have demonstrated that we can make a positive impact. In relation to the question that Bill Butler asked about the case that arose at a St Johnstone match, there may be a loophole in the law. I look forward to receiving Bill Butler's letter so that I can find out whether that is the case. Such an outcome could also be the result of the interpretation that the courts make of a particular law. It is not for me to comment on judges' decisions. We will consider the matter to establish whether we have a responsibility to do anything. I want to finish by putting the action of St Mirren FC and the courageous stand that it has taken, which Wendy Alexander has highlighted, in the context of the Show Racism the Red Card campaign, which other members have mentioned. Bill Butler has been prominent in promoting that campaign in the Parliament. Margo MacDonald asked whether we should  concentrate on managers rather than on players in such campaigns. Show Racism the Red Card worked with high-profile players to help to get the message across; it was not saying that players had to change their attitudes. The campaign recognised that players have a certain status in our society and used the respect in which they are held to try to convey its message. Many of our clubs have signed up to the aims of the campaign. Tony Higgins from the Scottish Professional Footballers Association, who is one of my constituents, has played a leading role in helping to promote awareness of the issue, both in Scotland and beyond. That should give us some hope for the future. The fact that an individual such as the 14-year-old boy in Dundee can make a difference and that St Mirren FC has shown the way to other football clubs by demonstrating that the stand that they take can make a difference also gives us hope. We can take comfort and courage from that, because all of us now know that we can make a difference. St Mirren FC has shown the way; it is for others to follow.  Meeting closed at 17:52.

Yes. In partnership with the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, the Scottish Executive continues to publicise the potential dangers of drinks being spiked in pubs and nightclubs through the Executive-funded know the score campaign on drug-assisted sexual assault.

I hope that the drugs industry co-operates with the responsible agencies to effect critical improvements for public safety. Pauline McNeill's idea of working with student and youth organisations is good and I will draw it to my officials' attention. Between 1 April and 30 September 2004, 52 women and 10 men reported to the police that their drinks had been spiked. Of those women, 16 made allegations of sexual assault, which included two allegations of rape.

The paper will set out our firm policy proposals to improve the system for handling complaints against lawyers. We are finalising the paper and will publish it as soon as possible.

John Swinney is right to remind us that we gave a commitment that the paper would be issued by the end of 2004. However, he and other members will be aware that Sir David Clementi's report on the regulation of legal services in England and Wales was published on 15 December 2004. Although there are significant differences between the regulatory arrangements for the legal market here and those for the market south of the border, we thought it appropriate and wise to consider the contents of that report and any implications that it might have for Scotland before we publish our report.

I will start by dealing with Stewart Maxwell's points about the Sewel procedure. He asks what country would hand over control to another country. I remind Stewart Maxwell that the issue concerns giving power to our country and to our Parliament with our representatives. It is hardly our fault that the Scottish National Party at Westminster is irrelevant and ineffective. I suggest that Stewart Maxwell has a cheek to talk about anyone not turning up in the House of Commons. I remind Parliament that SNP members did not bother to turn up to vote for a minimum wage that protects low-paid workers in this country, although I give the SNP credit for turning up in 1979 to vote with the Tories to bring down a Labour Government. [ Interruption. ]

The opposition of Bill Aitken and the Conservatives seems to be more about harking back to their desire to retain the House of Lords in the form in which it has existed for so many centuries. They want the House of Lords to stay as it is. [ Interruption. ]

I sympathise with the Presiding Officer; it is difficult to control the rabble on the SNP benches. Mike Pringle was right to raise concern about whether the separate nature of the Scottish legal system will continue to be recognised, but when we consider the case in principle for the supreme court, we should acknowledge that what the bill contains is an advance on the current position in several ways. The first, which Bill Butler mentioned, is related to the issues that, as Annabel Goldie indicated, the Justice 2 Committee raised. During its consideration in the House of Lords, the bill was amended to ensure that, as part of the selection process for judges, the appointing commission "must ensure that between them the judges will have knowledge of, and experience of practice in, the law of each part of the United Kingdom". That is an important safeguard as far as the Scottish position is concerned. The bill requires that the membership of the court must comprise judges who have not merely acquired a good knowledge of Scots law, but who have experience of practice in Scots law. The bill sets out that safeguard for Scotland in statute for the first time. The second way in which the bill is an advance was also dealt with by Bill Butler. The Lord President of the Court of Session raised concerns that the creation of the new supreme court might lead to an anglicisation of Scots law. Cases that emanate from Scotland that are at present  decided by the House of Lords are binding only in relation to Scotland and cases that emanate from England and Wales that are decided in that way are binding only in relation to England and Wales. The Lord President was keen to ensure that the current position regarding the binding effect of decisions would continue. Like the Justice 2 Committee, we saw the benefit of having a declaratory provision to ensure that decisions would be binding only in relation to the jurisdiction from which they came and a clause to that effect was agreed to during the third reading of the bill in the House of Lords on 20 December. That, too, is a safeguard for Scottish interests that is set out in statute for the first time. The third way relates to some of the concerns that the House of Lords raised on the governance arrangements for the new court, to which Margo MacDonald alluded. Unfortunately, I do not have time to pick up on Margo MacDonald's other points. The UK Government tabled amendments to establish the supreme court as an independent statutory body with its own chief executive, who will be an accountable officer who is responsible in his or her own right. The court will have independent financing from the consolidated fund. Although the Secretary of State for Constitutional Affairs will be responsible for ensuring that the new court has adequate funding and that funding will be ring fenced. It will be up to the chief executive to determine how to utilise those resources to ensure that the court's administration is effective. Even though the criticism that the Department for Constitutional Affairs is an English department was never fair, I hope that the amendments offer reassurance. Those issues are important, but the underlying issue is the principle of whether this Parliament supports the creation of a respected, transparent and modern court that is worthy of its place at the apex of the legal system and is independent from the House of Lords. Unlike the Tories, we do not want the House of Lords to continue in the same old tired way.

We have a choice. By supporting the proposed reform, we can create a court that befits its role in dealing with legal cases of the highest importance—cases that affect the lives and liberties of us all. Alternatively, we can reject the new court and send a signal that portrays the Scottish legal system not as open, mature and innovative, but as insular and backward looking.

If we reject the motion, we will not stop the supreme court coming into existence. It  must and will exist to deal with Scottish devolution issues, as well as cases from the other jurisdictions that make up the United Kingdom. The Conservatives have not addressed the fundamental problem of what would happen if they were successful—which they will not be—in persuading the Parliament to reject the motion. As a modern Parliament, we should support the creation of a modern court to operate at the top of the UK legal system.

I note the opposition of Annabel Goldie's party at Westminster to the principle of the proposed supreme court. However, if she opposes the proposal along with the Scottish nationalists, will she reflect on the strange and paradoxical situation in which the Conservatives in this Parliament would find themselves, if and when the proposal goes through at Westminster? We could have situations in Scotland in which we would deny people the opportunity of that further appeal; in effect, she would achieve what the Scottish nationalists seek to obtain.

The proposals in question are important. There are implications for the administration of justice in Scotland and for the highest court of law in the United Kingdom. For that reason, the Executive lodged a motion for a full plenary debate on 29 January last year, which welcomed the creation of the new court. Following a wide-ranging debate on the proposals as they then stood, the Parliament agreed to the motion. The bill was introduced to the House of Lords in February last year. As a result of the constitutional importance of the issues, the House of Lords has given careful consideration to the proposals for almost a year. Today's debate, which takes place following consideration of the bill by the House of Lords and a second reading in the House of Commons on Monday, proceeds on a motion under the Sewel convention, which applies because certain aspects of the proposal to establish a supreme court touch on areas that are within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament. Those areas relate to the rights of appeal in civil cases from the Court of Session on non-devolution issues. The bill must not be seen in a narrow sense, but in its wider context. It is part of the process of modernising the legal system, which is pretty antiquated in places. The bill also deals with reform of the office of the Lord Chancellor and will create a judicial appointments commission for England and Wales, which—like our Judicial Appointments Board for Scotland—will consider in an objective, transparent and impartial way the appointment of appropriate people to become judges. The process of modernising the justice system is to be welcomed, and we support and encourage it. In Scotland, the review of the High Court by Lord Bonomy and the review of summary justice by Sheriff Principal McInnes are consistent with the drive towards a modern and responsive system of justice that serves the people of Scotland.

I agree entirely with Pauline McNeill that it is fundamentally important that we protect Scotland's legal system and the important aspects of our judicial system. Indeed, that is why we have fought so hard to make changes, some of which have followed consideration by members of the Justice 1 Committee. I am pleased that such changes have been developed. The proposals for the new supreme court will remove an indefensible and unsatisfactory legacy of the way the House of Lords operated in the past. The most senior judges are also members of the upper house of the UK Parliament, which is not a sensible way to operate in a modern democracy. Those who make the law and those who interpret the law should not be the same people. The present arrangements in the House of Lords arose because of an historical accident. They lack transparency and lead to confusion in the public's perception of the two entirely different roles of members of the House of Lords. No one is suggesting that law lords have acted in a way that is not independent or impartial, but the current arrangements run the risk of being seen as lacking impartiality; it is right that we address that. I believe that we all support the independence of the judiciary, so I would be surprised if any member of Parliament defended the status quo in the House of Lords in that respect. We must also ensure, as Pauline McNeill said, that the independence and integrity of Scots law are maintained. The separate nature of the Scottish legal system is an important part of how Parliament can operate differently, reflecting the needs and aspirations of the Scottish people. We have examined the proposals carefully to ensure the continued integrity of Scots law. Some of the specific issues have, quite properly, been of concern to members. Those include questions about the process of appointing Scottish judges. Should there be a quota of judges? Should there be a majority of Scottish judges in all cases coming from Scotland? Those issues were explored by the Justice 2 Committee last spring and in its resumed consideration last month.

That is a farcical and spurious question, and I do not intend to indulge it with an answer. All those issues were explored by the Justice 2 Committee. The Lord Advocate gave evidence to the committee on two occasions as well as giving evidence to the House of Lords Select Committee on the Constitutional Reform Bill. The conclusion of the Justice 2 Committee was to agree the case for the establishment of the supreme court and to agree that it should take on the current jurisdiction of the House of Lords. The views of the Justice 2 Committee in its two reports are broadly similar to the views of the Executive. The committee supported the underlying principle of eliminating confusion about the roles of the House of Lords, which sits both as a court and as a legislature. The Justice 2 Committee, however, raised two related issues that we do not agree with. First, it proposed that there should be enshrined in legislation the requirement for a Scottish majority in the supreme court for cases that emanate from Scotland that give rise to devolution issues. In his evidence to the Justice 2 Committee, the Lord Advocate explained why that was not appropriate. Devolution issues under the Scotland Act 1998 are questions that, by their nature, raise matters of UK-wide constitutional importance, including issues involving the European convention on human rights and matters relating to the reserved-devolved divide. Indeed, all the cases from Scotland that have thus far involved devolution issues and which have been considered by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council have raised ECHR questions. In our view, it would be wrong to create, in effect, a separate Scottish jurisdiction within the supreme court by legislating for a mandatory Scottish majority in cases that, by definition, have broader constitutional importance. Secondly, the committee noted the continuing concern of the Faculty of Advocates that Scottish majorities in cases coming from Scotland would require the use of additional inner house judges as opposed to permanent Scottish appointees. The Lord Advocate pointed out that that is no different from the present position, which has not given rise to problems with the quality of additional judges who have been brought in from Scotland. Also, there is no case, based either on population or level of business, for requiring that three out of 12, or 25 per cent, of the permanent judges be Scottish. There is also no case for artificially increasing the total number of judges to 15 simply to get three permanent Scottish judges; moreover, the use of additional judges would mean that the new court would take away a disproportionate number of valuable and skilled judges from Scotland.  In conclusion, it is key that the Justice 2 Committee supported the creation of the supreme court, despite its concerns. It did not feel strongly enough to reject the principle. The time has come for the creation of a new supreme court that will be clearly independent from the UK Parliament and that will recognise the separate identity of the Scottish legal system. The bill gives us the opportunity to play our part in that overdue reform, and I hope that Parliament will support the motion. I move, That the Parliament agrees the principle of having a clear and transparent separation between the judiciary and the legislature and agrees that provisions in the Constitutional Reform Bill establishing a Supreme Court, and provisions consequential thereto, so far as they relate to matters within the legislative competence of the Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

Perhaps, at her leisure, Margaret Mitchell will give me the source for that statistic and the confirmation of that number.

rose—

Colin Fox might not be fully conversant with the terms on which he was elected to the Parliament or with his responsibilities. The issue that he raises is purely a reserved matter. We are trying to concentrate on our distinctive Scottish legal system. We want both to consider the huge benefits that it offers and to admit that it has failings and weaknesses that we need to address. That is why we are using the powers that are available to us to improve the legal services that our system provides. The issues that Colin Fox raises are nothing to do with this Parliament.

I do not know which policy on policing Bill Aitken is complaining about. Is it the additional and record numbers of police who are on the streets compared with the situation when the Conservatives were in power? Is it the very effective policing that takes place? On there being more crimes, is he also complaining about our attempts to ensure that there is proper recording of some crimes that were not properly recorded under the Conservatives?

I thank Kenny MacAskill for allowing me to develop the reason why we are rejecting the SNP amendment. We do not have a problem with some of its generalities, for example on additional assistance for rehousing and protection. However, the point about a specific Scottish witness protection programme causes us problems. We know that very often witnesses ask to be relocated elsewhere within the United Kingdom, which raises significant cross-border  issues. Changes are being made in the Serious Organised Crime and Police Bill. Notwithstanding some of the differences between us about Sewel motions, we will come back with Sewel motion proposals on some of the measures to strengthen witness protection arrangements throughout the United Kingdom, which would be of benefit. We have a difference with the SNP on that specific point.

I am convinced that, unless the diverse needs of victims and witnesses are properly identified and efforts are made to meet those needs, the justice system will fall short of what we wish to achieve for the people of Scotland. Those sentiments underpin our commitment in the partnership agreement and the criminal justice plan to support victims and witnesses fully. That commitment sets us new challenges to ensure that victims of crime are treated with respect, are recognised as key participants within the justice system and receive services that help them to deal with the impact of crime. In our "Scottish Strategy for Victims", we said that we wanted a system that better understood the needs of victims, ensured that they were better informed and supported and secured for them more opportunities to participate effectively in the administration of justice. Four years on from the strategy's publication, we have in place laws that mean that victims and witnesses will be at the centre of the justice system, where they rightly belong. The Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003 enhanced the rights of victims to be heard in the judicial process. It gives victims the opportunity to make to the court, after conviction and prior to sentencing, a statement about the personal impact of the crime on them. The judge or sheriff is then expected to consider that statement when reaching a decision on what sentence to impose. We are in the middle of piloting the victim statement scheme and, once we have reviewed its impact, we will decide how best to roll it out to the rest of the country. The 2003 act also gives the victims of serious crimes the right to be notified about the release of their offenders. The victim notification scheme also gives victims the right to be told when the offenders are to be considered for parole and the opportunity to give to the Parole Board for Scotland a statement on the crime's impact on them. It should be remembered that although the victim notification scheme came into effect only on 1 November, it is open to all victims of serious crimes for which offenders were imprisoned for four years or more and are still serving their sentence in custody or on licence in the  community. Those are significant steps towards involving the victim in the release process and represent a major advance over previous practice. We also know that appearing as a witness in a trial can be very distressing and upsetting. That is why we now have the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004, which will formalise existing special measures and introduce new ones that are aimed at reducing the stress that until now has meant that many witnesses were prevented from giving their best evidence. We are phasing that act's commencement. Just as the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003 improved victims' rights of participation, so the Criminal Procedure (Amendment) (Scotland) Act 2004 will increase the certainty of victims and witnesses about the progress of High Court trials. The prevention of unnecessary adjournments will mean that victims and witnesses have a much better idea of when a case will be called. The result will be a reduction in waiting in court, delayed trials and the distress and anxiety that that causes. The Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Act 2002 has given victims of rape and serious sexual assault increased protection. I know that that law and others that deal with rape and sexual offences have come under increased scrutiny recently and that is why the Minister for Justice asked the Scottish Law Commission to examine the provisions as part of a wider review of the law on sexual offending and to make recommendations for reform. It should be clear from that round-up that our commitment to victims and witnesses has underpinned our legislative reforms of the criminal justice system. It has also informed our thinking about how we can improve our judicial processes and change the culture of the justice system to meet the needs of victims and witnesses better. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service has done much commendable work to raise awareness and improve practices relating to victims and witnesses throughout the Scottish prosecution service and the Solicitor General for Scotland will highlight some of that work. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service has been a key player in developing policy for victims and witnesses. A notable example is the work on supporting child witnesses. I am delighted to report that much has been achieved in implementing the recommendations of the Lord Advocate's working group on support for child witnesses. Recommendations that have been implemented include those on the publication of guidance on best practice for child witness court familiarisation visits, interviewing child witnesses and questioning children in court.

That is a complex issue that strikes at the heart of many fundamental aspects that we take for granted. Such a definition would change considerably the status of 16 and 17-year-olds in our society. We need to consider which recognised age definitions can coincide, but we must proceed with caution before accepting 18 as a universal definition. A debate is needed in relation to a range of issues, not least some of those that Stewart Stevenson mentioned. Another good example of partnership work is the recent publication of an advice pack that provides family and friends with information about the aftermath of a homicide. The advice covers not just what to expect from the criminal justice system but practical issues such as finances, housing and compensation, which can cause anguish adding to the pain of a sudden loss. As well as promoting a culture change through publishing guidance on best practice, we are supporting others to provide services directly to victims and witnesses. Victim Support Scotland has an unequalled record in the voluntary sector in supporting the diverse needs of victims and witnesses. With the assistance of our grant, VSS makes more than 80,000 contacts with victims per year through its Scotland-wide network of professionals and volunteers. It also works with more than 60,000 witnesses a year through the witness service, which is now present in every High Court and sheriff court. One form of specialist support that involves VSS and is assisted by the Executive is support for victims of youth crime. In a recently completed 12-month pilot, Victim Support Scotland and the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration delivered a service that provided generic and case-specific information to victims of youth crime at key stages of the children's hearings process. We are reviewing that work. Court procedures need to be considered. They are being adapted and improved in ways that will be of direct benefit to victims and witnesses. I touched on reform of the High Court, but other initiatives are also making their contribution. One benefit to victims and witnesses of the youth court pilots in Hamilton and Airdrie is that fast tracking  young offenders allows them to be dealt with quickly and results in a swift outcome. The youth court model is being replicated in Glasgow with the piloting of a dedicated domestic abuse court, which it is hoped will secure the same benefits of fast tracking for victims and witnesses. The Glasgow pilot comes with the assist project, which is supported by the Scottish Executive and is specifically aimed at supporting the information, advice and support needs of victims and their families. We have supported a permanent Scottish domestic abuse helpline, which now provides a 24-hour service every day of the year, and 57 local projects have been supported by the third round of the domestic abuse service development fund. All those projects are meeting the needs of victims and their families. I recognise the importance of meeting the diverse information and support needs of victims and witnesses, but I also appreciate how threatening and intimidating physical surroundings can appear. As a result, the Scottish Court Service is carrying out a major review of its estate. That includes considering the provision of better waiting facilities for witnesses and up-to-date video transmission and recording equipment that will greatly assist child and vulnerable witnesses to give their best evidence. There continues to be much discussion about the use of restorative justice. At its simplest, restorative justice invites the offender and the victim to meet, to try to reach an agreement about what reparation, if any, can be made, and to try to give each person an understanding of the other's viewpoint. We have applied the principles of restorative justice to youth justice and are in the process of increasing the number of places that are available to young offenders on various restorative justice programmes from 3,000 to 6,000. We think that such early interventions represent a real opportunity to tackle reoffending among young people. The jury is still out on the effectiveness of restorative justice for adult offenders, but I am sure that any restorative justice scheme must give full attention to victims and ensure that the offender takes full responsibility for his actions. I turn to future developments. Members will know that we are in the midst of a review of summary justice. I want the needs of victims and witnesses to be just as central to any procedural changes in the summary court system as they have been to the reforms of the High Court. Protecting our children is a priority for the Executive and we must ensure that the law in that area is robust and allows for early intervention in order to help to prevent predatory sex offenders from targeting and abusing children. Use of the  internet by paedophiles is particularly worrying, and the Protection of Children and Prevention of Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill, which was introduced in October, makes grooming a specific offence. We think that that will greatly help. I recognise that there is much to do to change attitudes and processes. We are in the throes of updating the Scottish strategy for victims. Over the past few months, we have worked with key stakeholders on that strategy. In the revised strategy, we want to meet the support needs of families and friends who are bereaved by murder and culpable homicide, improve the training and awareness of all organisations that might come into contact with victims and assess the local delivery of services to victims. We want to identify gaps and overlaps in service provision and opportunities for improving local capacity and co-ordination. There are a number of other issues that I do not have time to develop, unfortunately. In particular, there are issues to do with developing national standards of service that victims can expect to receive. That is critical. We must do more to support child witnesses, and further information and guidance will be produced on that following work by the Lord Advocate's group. I do not have time to talk about work that is being done on the pilot of vulnerable witness officers, which could be critical. In conclusion, a huge range of work has been done to change legislation, culture and practice to improve services for victims and witnesses. I understand some sentiments in the SNP's amendment, but a couple of specifics in it lead me to reject it. Unfortunately, the Conservatives' amendment simply replays the same old gramophone record and it has more to do with an election than with the needs of victims and witnesses. The Executive is committed to making improvements. Changes to laws and procedures are only one side of the coin. We must change and challenge inappropriate attitudes and assumptions throughout the criminal and civil justice service, but we must remember at all times that the rights of victims and witnesses are essential to the proper working of Scotland's justice system, as are the rights of the accused. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges that the interests and diverse needs of victims and witnesses are central to criminal justice reform; welcomes recent legislation that improves the status of victims and witnesses in the justice system, including the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004 and the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003; notes the progress made in implementing the Strategy for Scottish Victims and the recommendations of the Lord Advocate's Working Group on Support for Child Witnesses; notes the major steps that have been taken within the  Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, in particular the establishment of the Victims Information and Advice Service and the instigation of a detailed review of the investigation and prosecution of sexual offences, and recognises the Executive's commitment to make further improvements for victims including the reflection of their interests in proposals for reducing re-offending.

We are determined that the nuisance and offence that are caused by kerb-crawling should be criminalised. The expert group on prostitution considered possible ways of dealing with kerb-crawling as part of its report on street prostitution. I recently published that report for consultation and we will consider how to proceed in the light of the responses that we receive.

We are determined to see through the commitment that we made in the partnership agreement. I welcome the expert group's acknowledgement that action needs to be taken against men who cause a nuisance by attempting to purchase sex in areas such as those in Frank McAveety's constituency. The expert group echoed many of the comments made by Frank McAveety and others and its report reflected the general point in the partnership agreement. The  report is a welcome contribution to a complex debate. I look forward to the responses to the consultation. Once they are in, we will give them proper consideration and, I hope, come forward with a package of measures that will start to make a difference in local communities that suffer from the problem of kerb-crawling. Those measures should also contribute to resolving some of the wider, more complicated and fundamental issues involved in prostitution.

Boy racers cause significant problems in a number of communities and we are taking action to help local agencies to deal with problems in their areas. Additional powers for the police to stop and seize vehicles that are being used in a manner causing alarm, distress or annoyance to members of the public will come into force shortly. We have also given the police national targets to reduce the number of road accidents, introduced a national driver improvement scheme and supported safety camera partnerships.

There are two separate issues. As far as powers are concerned, police take their responsibilities seriously. It is for the local police to identify whether a crime has been committed and to act appropriately. The information will then be notified to the prosecution authorities, which will consider the case; they take such incidents seriously and will prosecute when the evidence is available that there has been a criminal offence. I advise Mr Rumbles that, if there is any evidence, it should be brought to the attention of the police. I would hope that the police in those areas would act appropriately. On the wider issue that Mr Rumbles raises, I believe that the additional powers will make a significant contribution in many areas where there have been problems. The issue was raised when we were considering the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill. My colleague Marilyn Livingstone identified significant problems in her area, which was partly why we moved in the way that we did in that legislation. I believe that the additional powers given to the police in that legislation will help in areas such as Kirkcaldy, in Marilyn Livingstone's constituency, where there is a particular problem. I hope that, through the use of existing powers, linked to the new powers, there will be a significant improvement in communities that are afflicted.

I am aware of the problem in the Aberdeen area, as Richard Baker has raised it before. Local members take that problem seriously and are working hard to remedy it. Frank Doran, the local MP, chairs a group considering the problem. Lewis Macdonald is closely involved in that work. I hope that that effort by local politicians in co-operation with appropriate agencies will, using the existing law and the new legislation, start to make a difference. I commend all those in Aberdeen who are working hard to improve matters.

Frank McAveety has done a service to the Parliament by stimulating the debate. The almost total unanimity among members on the need to face up to a serious problem in society that has profound and tragic consequences reflects the seriousness with which knife crime is viewed throughout the country. Although the Evening Times is a newspaper that has done me no favours over the years—I have had to live with some problems as a result of it—I echo what Margaret Curran and Paul Martin said about its work. I recognise that the Evening Times has consistently campaigned on many issues in a considered way. It presents problems in a way that is not hysterical or sensational, but that draws people together to seek solutions. Its portrayal of some of the knife crime problems has been commendable and has helped to progress the debate. I congratulate the Evening Times on that. I will tackle the debate in two ways. First, I will talk about the bigger picture and pose questions. Why, in comparison with other countries, does Scotland have such a serious problem with young people carrying knives? Why, in comparison with other countries, do many people here die or become maimed or injured as a result of young  people carrying knives? Why is the situation in the west of Scotland much worse than that in the rest of Scotland, which is not to say that no problems exist elsewhere? Why is Glasgow much worse than the rest of the west of Scotland? We need to understand profound cultural and social issues, which many members touched on. We need to consider the culture in which young people are brought up; poverty; educational issues; and the responsibilities of families, parents and communities. As Tommy Sheridan said, why do many young people think that carrying knives is acceptable? On a visit to Inverclyde last year, I met fairly articulate and intelligent young people who were part of a youth project and who had been involved in crime. I was profoundly depressed when they tried to justify their carrying and use of knives and—bizarrely—blamed the police, who they said were not present to protect them, which was why they carried knives. That is completely illogical and unacceptable. Why have we as a society failed to take action against some of the dire consequences of knife crime? The police recently showed me a video. It could be argued that it showed two gangs clashing, but it also showed a tragic murder by knife of a person who was walking by, minding their own business in Glasgow city centre, and who had nothing to do with those who were involved in the groups. Being in the wrong place at the wrong time cost that person their life. We cannot accept that. Something must be done. Frank McAveety graphically explained the dire and tragic consequences of people carrying knives and others echoed him. We must understand the situation and have a more profound debate, separated from party politics and point scoring, about why we have the problem. The Minister for Justice is determined not only to debate the criminal justice plan, but to go beyond that into a debate about violence in Scotland and profound cultural issues. We are determined to do that and we hope to return to Parliament with ways of progressing the debate. As well as having that wide-ranging and profound debate, we need to consider specifics. Frank McAveety and others asked for a response. The First Minister recently announced a five-point plan on knife crime, which made it clear that we regard the issue as a high priority. We will return to the Parliament with further details. Several initiatives are already happening and they confirm what we have heard tonight. For example, the sixth safer Scotland campaign, which is run by Scottish police forces and the British transport police, targeted vandalism, drinking in public places and knife crime in an eight-week  period that ended on 3 December. During the campaign, police officers seized more than 700 offensive weapons and charged just under 700 people with more than 1,000 reported knife crimes. The extent of such crimes is a tragedy and a disgrace. I do not have time to describe specific examples, so I will move on to what we intend to do under the five-point plan. As Frank McAveety has requested and as others have mentioned, we will look into introducing a licensing scheme for the sale of non-domestic knives and similar instruments. It is bizarre to see some of the weapons that are available and that people think are acceptable for sale. However, we should not kid ourselves on that that alone will solve the problem, as Sandra White and others said. If people are determined to carry a knife and commit crimes, they will find some other type of knife. At the very least, however, we should demonstrate our determination to do something. It has been suggested that we should increase the age of purchase from 16 to 18. I know that some would even wish to extend it to 21. We at least have to consider an increase from 16. We also want a general ban on the sale of swords. Why in the name of humanity would anyone want to be able to carry a sword in public? The climate is right for us to give the police the right to make more use of stop-and-search powers and powers of arrest for suspicion of carrying a knife or offensive weapon. We also have proposals to double the sentence for the possession of a knife or offensive weapon from two to four years. I welcome the comments made by Tommy Sheridan, who said that he would back the rest of the Parliament in considering tougher sentences. However, I hope that he is prepared to face up to this issue: if he wishes to promote mandatory sentencing, which would have even more profound implications for the prison population than the severe sentences that many of the rest of us are talking about, I hope that we will hear less criticism of talk about the need for more prisons and more prison places. There is a consequence to saying that there should be mandatory sentences for carrying knives. I hope that we get a change in argument from Tommy Sheridan and his colleagues when it comes to knife crimes. We have heard about the murders and the mayhem and we have heard that the problem could even be worse than we realise. That is absolutely right. However, the number of deaths could be greater but for the fact that many incidents take place in the centre of Glasgow within fairly close proximity to the Royal infirmary. Had it not been for the ability of our emergency services to get people to the infirmary, many more  young people could have died. The Royal infirmary has available a range of skills that is probably unsurpassed by any other hospital in Britain, if not Europe. It is a tragedy that we have developed those skills on the back of knife crime, but that is how many of them have developed. I know that some of the things that we have proposed will have implications. I know that there are issues around people who are involved in certain cultural and sporting activities, for example, but we need to have the debate. What is certain is that we cannot do nothing. We cannot stay where we are and we cannot ignore the problem. Bill Aitken was right to say that we need speedier justice and I hope that we can make progress with some of the recommendations of the McInnes review. I will consider the point that Robert Brown made to the Lord Advocate on issues in Glasgow in particular. There might be reasons—I do not know. Tonight's debate has demonstrated that there is a mood and a determination to do something. There is a realisation that too many families are being destroyed as a result of knife crime. Tonight, Frank McAveety has given us an opportunity to put down markers for what I hope will be a more detailed and longer debate in the Parliament, through which we can demonstrate to the people of Scotland that we will do something to protect them from such crimes.  Meeting closed at 18:19.

The debt arrangement scheme provides for the payment of debts free from the threat of diligence or sequestration. The scheme provides a more stable financial environment and reduces the risk that debtors in a debt payment programme will use unsafe lending. Illegal moneylending is a matter for the Department of Trade and Industry, but I can say that a project to tackle loan sharks has been established in Glasgow.

I congratulate the two money advisers in Fife who have been approved. Access to trained, qualified and experienced money advisers is essential if people are to be given the best possible advice, and the debt arrangement scheme relies on people having that accreditation. Some 150 advisers throughout Scotland have undergone the necessary training, although many of them have still to be assessed. I urge money advisers throughout Scotland to come forward, to go through the training that the advisers in Fife have been through and to be accredited so that we can ensure that those who suffer most from the  activities of loan sharks and illegal moneylenders have access to the best quality of advice.

It is certainly not the same, because I had to make up my earlier speech as I went along and I cannot recall it word for word. Before I talk about the value of the debate, I will deal with the Tories. As Stewart Stevenson said, Annabel Goldie has a problem with figures. We have seen her and Bill Aitken struggle this morning. On her call for more police officers, I remind her that there are more police officers today than ever before—nearly 1,000 more than when the Conservatives were in power. That is clearly having an impact, which is why the number of recorded crimes is down, why the number of house-breakings is down and why the incidence of car crime is down. The record number of police officers means that the police are clearing up more crime than ever before—47 per cent, which is the envy of other parts of the United Kingdom. However, that is only a start, because we recognise that serious issues in relation to violent crime need to be addressed. Annabel Goldie also seems to have problems with her memory, as Stewart Stevenson pointed out. She made an issue of early release. I remind members that the law dealing with early release was set out in the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993. Perhaps Annabel Goldie would like to tell us which Government that was under. It was, of course, the Conservative Government.

No, thanks. The Conservatives are clearly hypocritical and inept. In general, the debate has been good. All parties except the Conservatives believe that we need a mature and serious approach to the issue and they are willing to engage in a serious debate about what we need to do. I admit that there will be differences of emphasis and some small points on which we disagree, but none of the parties except the Conservatives disagrees on crime's links to poverty, deprivation and mental health problems. As Kenny MacAskill and Cathy Jamieson have said, we can agree that poverty is not an excuse for crime, but we can see the links between the two. The parties agree that, as Colin Fox mentioned, we must reflect on early release, which is why the First Minister and Cathy Jamieson have given a commitment to consider the issue in relation to sex offenders. It is right that we should start by considering people who have  committed serious crimes, but we have also given a commitment to ask the Sentencing Commission for Scotland to consider the more general issue of early release as a priority. We agree that community sentencing must be effective and that the judiciary and the wider public must have confidence in it. We agree that improvements can be made and that more work needs to be done in prison on rehabilitation to ensure that offenders are prepared properly for release and supported when they are back in the community. Many of those points on which we agree can be progressed confidently and positively. The Conservatives' first point in the debate was to accuse us of having failed to have a debate on our criminal justice plan. We will have a debate on our proposals; we have already had such a debate, but we will give members the opportunity to debate them further, not just in one debate in the Parliament, but in the committees. Members will have an opportunity to engage because the problem that faces the country is far too serious to be swept under the carpet.

Will Mr Harvie take an intervention?

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. You took me by surprise. I thought that I was merely speaking at the end of the debate but obviously the arrangements have changed somewhat.

Members may well hear it twice. I never fail to be astonished at the effrontery and sheer brass neck of the Conservatives when they try to lecture the rest of us on what should or should not be done in our communities. Annabel Goldie talks about police numbers, but does she seriously want us to go back to the level of policing that was available in our communities under the Conservatives? Does she want us to cut the number of officers patrolling the streets so that we reach the level that was established by the Conservatives? The truth is that since the Tories were kicked out of Government we have increased the number of police who are available in our communities—

I will take an intervention in a few minutes. The members should let me get started—I am just warming up. We have steadily increased police numbers. Since the Executive came to power the partnership has delivered extra police on our streets. We are going further: we have also significantly increased funding for police services. Between 1999-2000 and 2004-05, spending on police increased by 31 per cent—more than twice the rate of inflation—and it will rise by a further 17 per cent in the period to 2007-08. We do not want crocodile tears from the Conservatives or their hypocrisy when they talk about police numbers.

There is a range of complicated issues in Annabel Goldie's comments. We are committed to ensuring that police officers do the job for which we employ them and we are making sure that they are taken away from jobs that can be done more effectively by other people. We want the police to tackle crime and we have a record of commitment in relation to that. It is true that we now live in a more complex society but it is for the chief constables to decide how to use the record resources. We should reflect on what Audit Scotland said in a recent report on police and fire performance indicators: clear-up rates for recorded crime are at the highest ever level, housebreaking is down, car crime is down and drug seizures continue apace.

I certainly want more seizures of drugs such as heroin and cocaine and we must remain vigilant about our continuing drug problem. However, the number of crimes recorded by the police is at its lowest level for nearly a quarter of a century. We should try to put some perspective—

No, thanks. I have taken two interventions already. We must put the debate in perspective. It is for that reason that we tried to bring some sensible structure to the debate on what we do on crime, criminality and offending in Scotland, and that is why the Minister for Justice brought forward her proposals to tackle reoffending. We have taken a number of steps in relation to police and enforcement, including consideration of court reform, a comprehensive programme of modernisation of prosecution services, the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004 and hugely expanded youth justice programmes, but we know that there are other, more complicated issues that we need to address. Why do so many people in this country go to prison and why do so many people reoffend when they come out? Is there a better way to address the problem? I pay tribute to members of the Justice 1 Committee, who are examining in a detailed manner what can be done to tackle that pernicious problem. It is a cheap shot for Annabel  Goldie to say that the Executive opposes sending people to prison. The Minister for Justice has made it clear that she believes that those who commit serious offences should spend a serious length of time in prison. Prison is about not just rehabilitation but punishment and the protection of the community, and we have demonstrated clearly that we are committed to that.

Keith Raffan probably gives too much credit to the Conservatives. I do not think that they have a clue about what they want to do in relation to criminality and offending. We believe that prisons are an important part of our judicial system. They are places where people should be punished and the community should be protected by our putting people away, but we must recognise that there is a certain point in a sentence when many people come back out into the community and we need to prepare them appropriately.

I do not have time. In "Supporting Safer, Stronger Communities: Scotland's Criminal Justice Plan", we unveiled an ambitious and wide-ranging programme to reduce reoffending. We believe that we need to press forward with reforms to protect communities, prevent crime and tackle drug-related crime. We want to continue to reform our courts, and we need effective interventions. The Minister for Justice is clear that we can start to make a difference: by bringing together different parties and getting the Scottish Prison Service to communicate with local authorities more effectively; by creating new community justice authorities; by getting people to co-operate at a local level; and by having an overarching, strategic national framework with local delivery. We need to reflect on why people are failing when they come back out of prison. It is right to ensure that someone at a local level takes responsibility. For too long, no one took responsibility: work was done in prisons and in the community, but there was no consistency or continuity and people fell through the gaps. Local community justice authorities will have responsibility for tackling reoffending and ensuring  that there is joined-up thinking. The minister has reserved the power to take action if those authorities should fail. We have listened carefully to people who told us to leave the staff where they are just now and to leave responsibility with people locally, albeit in some new configurations. We agree with that and will work with people in their local areas. We want to ensure that they engage more effectively with the Scottish Prison Service and that the Scottish Prison Service engages more effectively with them. I argue that what we have set out in our criminal justice plan is a very radical proposal, and I think that it will be effective. I must say in all honesty—not just to the Conservatives, who prompted the debate, but to other members of the Parliament—that there is no easy solution. We would be doing a disservice to the Parliament, to communities and to the wider public if we thought that we could come forward with a cheap slogan that would solve everything within a couple of months. Some of the issues that Kenny MacAskill raises in his amendment are the right ones. What is it about our society, in which people drink too much, take drugs and turn to violence, which makes it different from some other societies in Europe and other western countries? We must get behind and address some of those problems. If we do nothing else, we will serve the country well if we encourage a mature and sensible debate. The Tories are, yet again, scrabbling for some cheap votes with some cheap shots on issues that they do not really understand. Instead, we need a mature debate, which I think should continue for a number of months. I hope that we can reach some consensus in the Parliament on this issue.

Sorry, Presiding Officer. I move amendment S2M-2158.3, to leave out from "unacceptable" to end and insert: "Criminal Justice Plan's acknowledgement that the rate of reoffending occurring in Scotland today is unacceptable; agrees that prison should be used where prison is the appropriate punishment but notes that prison is also intended to rehabilitate the offender, deter the prospective offender and protect the public; agrees that prison must sit within a range of different sentencing options to address reoffending, and therefore notes the increase in police numbers compared to the numbers delivered by the Conservatives, the establishment of the Sentencing Commission to consider a number of issues including early release, and that the recently published Criminal Justice Plan includes measures to tackle Scotland's high reoffending rates, reduce crime and the fear of crime and strengthen confidence in the country's criminal justice services."

The Executive is reserving its position on the proposed bill until we have had the opportunity to consider the consultative response.

I am well aware of the pressures on retail staff throughout the year, particularly in the run-up to Christmas. I am quite sure that many would appreciate some time off after a hectic period that leads into another hectic period of sales. We are keen to reflect on the balance of the replies received. We know that those working in the industry have the strong opinion that they should have some well-deserved time off. Equally, retailers are concerned that they should be able to respond to the demands of tourism and open on new year's day, for example. We are not aware that Scotland's traditional welcome to people who are celebrating the new year is hampered hugely by stores being closed, but we have to take into consideration the acute concerns of retailers. We will reflect on the balance and we will listen, but we are aware of the pressures on both sides of the argument.

As I indicated, we are reserving our position. At this stage, I will not express a view one way or the other on whether we intend to support the legislation. However, I accept Mary Mulligan's proposition that, if the proposed bill were passed and stores were prevented from opening on Christmas day and new year's day, it would create a level playing field and prevent one store of a certain size from having an advantage over another. That is just a fact.

We are committed to tackling antisocial behaviour wherever it occurs. Agencies were given new powers to deal with antisocial behaviour in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. Local authorities and police are required to prepare strategies to deal with problems throughout the local authority area, including antisocial behaviour in private housing. We have given funding to local authorities to improve services across all tenures. New measures in the 2004 act to tackle irresponsible private landlords will come into force in November 2005.

We have provided the legal framework for tackling antisocial behaviour and the financial resources to allow local authorities to implement the legislation and to respond to antisocial behaviour. It then becomes a matter for local decision makers to determine exactly how they should best respond in their areas. I hope that local authorities will be imaginative in their use of the extra resources that we have provided. I cannot speak specifically for Brian Adam's area, but I tell him that in imaginative local authorities in Scotland, members of staff already act as witnesses. I encourage Brian Adam's local authority to contact my local authority, Renfrewshire Council, which has had a scheme for some time that enables staff to assist as witnesses where required. I believe that the scheme is by no means unique.

The Scottish Executive is in regular contact with the UK Government on a wide range of issues, including the misuse of drugs. I understand that there are no plans to introduce an offence of that nature.

Excessive consumption of alcohol and alcohol-related crime remain issues throughout Scotland. We have invested significantly in education programmes to make people aware of the dangers of alcohol and to promote safe alcohol consumption. As part of our review of licensing laws, we are encouraging a debate about the need for those who sell alcohol to act responsibly and for those who purchase and consume alcohol to take responsibility for their own safety and protection and the safety and  protection of the wider community.

We discuss a range of issues with our UK colleagues and I am sure that they will continue to review the limits of various substances in the bloodstream in relation to driving. The message must go out that people who take substances that affect behaviour should be careful and, in fact, should not consume them when they are considering driving.

Racially motivated attacks have no place in today's Scotland. We are committed to challenging racism, whatever form it takes and wherever in Scotland it occurs. Where cases are reported, the Lord Advocate has made clear his desire to see the police and procurators fiscal improve the prosecution of race crimes. The police and other agencies across Scotland are also working hard to reassure and support all our communities.

Everyone has that responsibility. Members of the Parliament have a responsibility to be careful in what they do and say to ensure that they do not inflame racial prejudice. Members of the public should take particular care about what they say or do and should try to avoid offence or stirring up racial prejudice. Equally, members of the media of whatever form should be careful in what they report so that unintended slight does not occur, words are not misconstrued and people do not suffer as a result. We all need to think very carefully about what we say or do. We need to think carefully about our responsibilities to other members of our society.

The criminal justice system extends the same protection against abuse to lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender young people as it does to all young people. The Executive is committed to a three-year child protection reform programme to help ensure that all children and young people get the help they need when they need it.

The question of training is a matter for the police themselves and for chief constables. However, I know that the police take seriously the legislation that Parliament has passed and the policy intentions that it has articulated. I also know, from discussions with the police, that they are committed to training on a range of issues, including equal opportunity issues, and to ensuring that people are not discriminated against because of personal matters such as sexuality, religion, culture, race and so on. It is to the credit of the police that they also do training now on issues such as how to cope with problems from people who have Alzheimer's disease.  We will encourage the police to give due attention to the problem that Mark Ballard highlights, but how training is implemented at local level remains a matter for chief constables.

We received 20 formal responses to the consultation on the control rooms report. Our intention is to do further work to address the issues that were raised in the responses. We will discuss with stakeholders the outcome of that work when it has been completed and before any final decisions are taken.

I appreciate the concerns that Maureen Macmillan has expressed about the uncertainty. I recognise that it is in everyone's best interests to know what is intended for the future. However, during the consultation that we have undertaken to date, some complex and specific issues were raised, one of which was the questioning of the financial basis on which the calculations were made in the consultants report. I have given a commitment that we will re-examine the figures. I intend to return to first principles and ensure that all the figures are accurate. A number of members have raised specific questions on the issue of locality and the fact that local knowledge is imperative. During the debate on the Fire (Scotland) Bill last week, some very different examples were raised, one of which was the fact that, although the Highlands and Islands covers an area the size of Wales, no locality issues seem to be involved—people can understand each other across the area. Other members raised issues with regard to the central belt and the north-east of Scotland. We intend to go back and look carefully at the issues. The only assurance that I can give Maureen Macmillan is that we will do that work thoroughly. We will take as long as necessary to ensure that we have examined every aspect of the argument.

The Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004 will be implemented in phases. The first phase will start from April 2005, when measures assisting child witnesses in High Court, sheriff court solemn cases and children's hearings court procedures will be commenced. The Scottish Executive will establish a monitoring and evaluation system before then to track how well the act is working once it has been implemented.

I hesitate to go into the details of the case that the member mentions. My understanding of that case is not quite the same as was expressed. Nevertheless, I will examine the matter. We have said that we will look at implementation in stages. We know that there is a need to have adequate training and that the various partners that are involved in the process are committed to that. I have been impressed by the enthusiasm and dedication that have been shown. People want to make the act work. It is inevitable that there will be problems in any new system, but they will not occur for the want of trying or commitment. We will certainly learn from any mistakes that are made. If people identify problems as the act starts to come into force, they should by all means come back to the Executive. Information on how well the act is working will be made available by the usual processes. I have no doubt that the committees of the Parliament will keep an eye on the matter and on other pieces of legislation that are implemented to ensure that they have the desired effect. Frankly, there is no point in passing legislation if we do not examine its effect. I am sure that members will do that in due course through the committees of the Parliament.

The minister knows her NPPGs.

This has been a good debate. It was dominated by one or two issues, but members touched on a vast range of issues that need due consideration. I assure members that although I might not touch on all those points in my reply, I will look carefully at the individual points that were made. I say at the outset that I thought that John Scott had a cheek. He has now beetled off, with his brass neck, but for him to tell us that the bill is a cost-cutting exercise—that comes from a Tory who supported cuts in public services for years—is the height of hypocrisy. He accuses us of trying to make cuts in the fire service. We have put more money into pay, pensions, modernisation, improvements in emergency equipment and into the Highlands and Islands, but John Scott sees that as cost cutting. If the Tories ever get back into power—God help us—we will know all about cost cutting and cuts in public services.

I ask members to forgive me if I am suspicious of the implications for public services of the return of a Tory Government. I will touch on control rooms, but I will not go into much detail, because I covered them in my first speech and in some interventions. I listened carefully to the points that were made and I have given the assurance that we will carefully consider the provisions. Several valid points have been made. We need to consider whether the cost  calculations are robust and to examine the locality issues that have been raised. We must consider whether problems occurred when we reduced the number of fire control rooms from 13 to eight. We need to examine the issues that Bruce Crawford raised, counterposed with the points that John Farquhar Munro made about the need for local knowledge. We need to reflect on what Stewart Maxwell said about being lost in the wilds of Scotland. Incidentally, if he tells us which rescue service was responsible for bringing him back to us, we can avoid joining it. Several valid points have been made and we will take them into account. I assure members that nothing that would impact on public safety will be done.

No. I will move on, because I am pressed for time. Various speakers touched on the number of brigades and said that the agenda was to move on quickly from control rooms to brigades. That is far from the truth. We have no plans to change the number of brigades. Annabel Goldie talked about the Tories' suspicions of our intention in taking the power. Even if the entire bill were rejected—never mind just parts of it—if the position remains as it is, the Executive has the power to change the number of brigades if it so desires. Rejecting the bill would make not one iota of difference to whether we could act as Annabel Goldie suggests. She implies the existence of another agenda when it does not exist. Current powers allow change at the behest of fire authorities, but also allow ministers to act. All that we will do is refine the wording in the legislation. Maureen Macmillan, Colin Fox and several other speakers talked about industrial action being made unlawful. I am happy to put it on the record that the Executive has no intention of making industrial action unlawful by introducing the bill. That interpretation of section 67 is incorrect. Nothing that we are doing will provide any opportunity for powers to be used in the suggested way. That is not our intention and would not have our support. What has been suggested is not what the section says. I hope that that assurance removes some doubts. The bill will not make industrial action unlawful. I hope that I have dealt with trade union recognition. If we need to examine more matters, I am willing to assure speakers that I will reconsider whether there is anything that we can do to make the position absolutely clear. Our intention is that trade unions will represent employees and we are not undermining trade unions' right to do that. Kenny MacAskill and others talked about  emergency powers. In the circumstances, the best that I can do is to repeat the assurances that I gave the Justice 2 Committee. I was asked in what circumstances emergency powers would be used and I said: "It would be hard to specify all the situations where the powers under" section 11 "could readily be invoked. If we were able to foresee precisely everything that might happen, we could easily just spell it out in an exhaustive list. Part of the problem in dealing with emergencies is that it is often the unforeseeable and unexpected that causes the problem. In those situations of unexpected emergency, we need to be able to respond. There could be natural catastrophes that no one could ever have imagined, or there could be terrorist incidents ... I would therefore hesitate before giving a precise definition of those circumstances, other than to say that the situation would be one to which the response would be beyond the normal activities of any of our brigades or ... agencies."—[ Official Report , Justice 2 Committee , 28 September 2004; c 1062.] That sums up where we still stand. Several comments were made about whether the replacement advisory council should be statutory or non-statutory. In general, everyone agrees that the Scottish Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council does not work, is inappropriate and must change. I am not persuaded that determining in the bill what the advisory committee should be, what it should do, how it should operate and whom it should involve is appropriate. Questions also arise. If the advisory committee advises the minister, should that minister chair it? We want to engage with the widest range of stakeholders and we intend to exclude no one. We want an effective and efficient body that has a purpose and will make a difference. I take into account all the points that have been made, but I remain unconvinced that provisions should be in the bill. However, I will give that further thought. Stewart Stevenson talked about local procurement and questioned why we have chosen the route that we have. One problem that we sometimes face is that local procurement results in different equipment levels, different standards and different specifications. Increasingly, we must rely on co-operation—the Stockline Plastics disaster in Glasgow showed that. When we must bring people from different areas together, the job is made easier if equipment and specifications are consistent. Those are the reasons for our position, which also enables us to consider developing specialist teams more effectively for disasters such as that which I mentioned. Colin Fox suggested that we had abandoned much of the pathfinder work, but we have not discarded it. We have encompassed many elements of it in the integrated risk management plans. His suggestion was wrong.  I acknowledge and will reflect on what many speakers said about charging for services, particularly when repeat, malicious or inappropriate calls are made. Complex issues are involved, but the points were well made. On hydrants, I have undertaken to discuss with my ministerial colleagues who are responsible for water services whether more appropriate action can be taken, but we must recognise that however we proceed there will be a cost to the public sector, whether that relates to those who are responsible for water services or those who are responsible for fire services. We need to work out where appropriate responsibility lies.

Is it about hydrants?

In that case I will not take the intervention. Unfortunately, the member spoke and left the chamber. I will not indulge him by picking up a spurious point when he has returned late. I will examine what Jackie Baillie said about non-fire emergencies and what Mike Pringle said about the loss of income from certification. A small loss might occur, but brigades will be freed up to do other work more effectively and efficiently. That will counterbalance any small loss. The debate has been good and many points were well made. There is a spirit of consensus. We all want to make progress and to ensure that whatever legislation is passed is fit for purpose and serves best the people whom we represent. Scotland will be a safer place for having proper legislation. We also seek to ensure that the fire services that we deliver are equipped for the 21 st century. We recognise the valuable work that is done by the men and women who work in all aspects of the fire service and do a fantastic job. We need to bring the legislation up to speed to ensure that that continues.

The comment that John Swinburne has just made is absurd. He talks about the bill's introduction being in retribution for action that was taken. The bill was consulted on and, indeed, the process started before any industrial action took place. Leaving aside that issue, the bill has been welcomed this morning by every party of every colour, including the Scottish Socialist Party. Everyone recognises the need to advance the bill. Although we might differ on some of the fine detail; it is absurd to try to categorise the bill as John Swinburne has done.

I take the point that John Farquhar Munro makes very seriously and I give him an assurance that anything that we do in relation to any aspect of the service will be about improving efficiency and saving lives. Nothing will be done that would jeopardise lives. It is unfortunate that control rooms are dominating the debate, because there are many aspects of the bill that should properly be considered. There seems to be a contradiction in what John Farquhar Munro and Bruce Crawford have said, which I would be interested in teasing out. I recognise the valuable contribution that the Inverness control room makes and I have received representations from John Farquhar Munro and other members who represent the area. John Farquhar Munro says that the control room covers an area the size of Wales and should be retained  because of the local knowledge of staff. However, Bruce Crawford suggests that local knowledge would be lost if a centre were to be moved 10 or 50 miles down the road. He would not countenance a control room of the nature that John Farquhar Munro defends. The members seem to have completely different views about what area is consistent with local knowledge. When we consult on the matter, I would value further clarification on that.

John Scott talks about cost cutting. Will he tell me when, since the creation of the Scottish Parliament, we have cut the budget to the fire services? Has the budget increased? In which instances and where, specifically, has the budget been cut?

Will the member tell us how many local authorities are represented by those three brigades?

Maureen Macmillan's point relates to an issue that was also raised by Kenny MacAskill. Section 45 clearly states that any negotiating body should include representatives of employees. I have no doubt whatever that that would include trade unions. The difficulty with amending the bill to include a reference to recognised trade unions is what the definition of "recognised trade unions" would be. Defining that would cause other complexities. I am happy to give the assurance that, as far as I am concerned, representatives of employees should and would include trade unions.

I am baffled and would welcome further discussion with Annabel Goldie about exactly how the situation would change. The power has existed since 1947. All we are doing is recognising that, when matters come to ministers for approval, we are, in effect, taking the decision. What we are proposing and the draftsmen have suggested is simply a tidying-up measure that explicitly says that the reality is that ministers are not simply approving but taking the decision. If we are making a decision, we should be seen to take that responsibility. The bill simply clarifies something that has, in a sense, always been the case.

I hope that Mr MacAskill recognises that, as I explained to the committee, only one of the powers that he refers to—that of emergency direction—is exercisable by ministerial direction. The remainder are all exercisable by order and, as such, would be subject to full consultation and, more important, full parliamentary scrutiny.

Kenny MacAskill has indicated that others in his party will comment on the issue of fire control rooms at some length, but I must point out that the bill is not about fire control rooms—there is much more to it. Indeed, I remind him that, if local authorities want to change the number of fire control rooms, they can do so even before the bill is passed.

I am delighted to open the debate on the general principles of the Fire (Scotland) Bill on behalf of the Executive. Our partnership agreement gave a commitment to introduce new fire legislation. The bill forms an important part of the Executive's strategy to modernise the fire and rescue service to meet local needs, to increase local decision making and to develop the work force, all with the aim of contributing to a safer Scotland. Our main priority is to save more lives and to reduce injuries from fire. The bill will help us to achieve that by placing a greater emphasis on fire safety. The number of domestic fire deaths in Scotland, which in 2002 had reduced to 62, is one of the lowest on record but, frankly, it is still too high—proportionately, the figure for Scotland is higher than that for any other part of the United Kingdom. We can and must do better. The single largest cause of domestic fire deaths is smoking in the home—perhaps in bed or in association with the consumption of alcohol—so the key to making further progress lies in increased and improved fire prevention measures. That is why the bill makes community fire safety a statutory function of fire and rescue authorities. As well as recognising the fire and rescue service's traditional role of firefighting, the bill acknowledges the service's extended role in dealing with road traffic accidents, for example, and in responding to the greater threats that environmental disasters such as flooding and the increased threat of terrorism pose. The bill underpins our wider strategy for fire and rescue services in Scotland. Our aim is to provide improved fire safety for communities throughout Scotland through the introduction of integrated risk management plans that tailor each service's action to the risks and needs of its area. The publication  of a national framework will set out the Executive's priorities for the fire and rescue service and how we will work with the service to ensure that the modernisation agenda is delivered effectively. The work force will receive a range of improvements. As well as significant increases in pay, considerable resources have been committed to a new integrated personal development system, which will meet the development needs of all fire and rescue service staff from point of entry to retirement. There will also be a new approach to recruitment, appointments and promotion. We believe that all those improvements and initiatives will mean that fire and rescue services in Scotland are even better placed to make our communities safer. The bill is the culmination of more than two years of formal consultation, which began in April 2002 with the publication of our first consultation paper, "The Scottish Fire Service of the Future". The paper sought views on a wide range of proposals that were aimed at improving the service and at making the best use of its resources. Its many recommendations received considerable support. The process continued with the publication just over a year ago, on 1 October 2003, of "The Scottish Fire and Rescue Service: Proposals for Legislation". Those proposals were subsequently debated in the Parliament on 8 October 2003. I am grateful to the Justice 2 Committee and its staff for their careful consideration of the bill and for producing a comprehensive and clear report. I am pleased that the committee has endorsed the principles of the bill and that, in general, the bill and its policy intentions were welcomed by the people who gave evidence. It is particularly encouraging that both the committee and its witnesses were content with the Executive's approach on the provision of a statutory underpinning for the principal functions of the fire and rescue service. The bill provides a flexible means of adding to those functions to reflect change over time. It is good to have some consensus about the way forward in a key public emergency service. I welcome the constructive recommendations that the committee made. I will of course write to the committee shortly, to respond to its report and to indicate what amendments the Executive intends to lodge at stage 2. There is no doubt that stage 2 will provide an opportunity to examine the issues in more detail and we will continue to listen carefully to members of the committee and to stakeholders. I turn to some of the main observations that were made in the committee's report. First, I will deal with the comments on the role of chief fire officers. When I gave evidence to the committee, I  made it clear that the fire and rescue service is a local authority service that will continue to be managed locally. I believe that the bill strikes the right balance between local and ministerial powers. However, I am happy to reflect further on what the committee and others have said about the need to clarify in the bill the chief fire officers' responsibilities and their relationship with, and accountability to, the fire and rescue authority or the joint fire and rescue board. The committee also asked whether the bill needs to clarify the role of the senior fire officer in relation to the control of incidents involving fires. We will consider that, too. I note that some committee members had concerns about the power to amalgamate fire and rescue authorities being used to reduce the number of such authorities in Scotland. However, I remind members that the power in question is not new, as it has been carried forward, in a slightly modified form, from the Fire Services Act 1947.

I will deal with the issue of fire control rooms in a minute; if I may, I will stick to amalgamation. The power to amalgamate fire authorities has existed since the passing of the 1947 act and it will continue in a modified form. All that we are doing in the bill is confirming that ministers will take any decision to amalgamate rather than authorising or approving it. We think that we should take such significant decisions, although fire authorities will still have the opportunity to put forward proposals for amalgamation if they feel that that is appropriate.

There is no intention to rule by diktat. Any action that the Executive took on any such issues would follow thorough consultation and full discussion. We have no proposals to change the number of fire and rescue authorities. I would expect full consultation to take place on such matters, including any proposals that local boards made. Full consultation would be necessary not only in the area concerned, but nationally, because any such change would have wider ramifications. I am encouraged that the Justice 2 Committee considers that the proposed powers are appropriate. I reassure the committee that, if any amalgamations are proposed in the future, there will be clear and comprehensive consultation with all the interested parties. Furthermore, we will lodge an amendment that will change the parliamentary procedure for the necessary order so that it will be subject to the affirmative procedure rather than the negative procedure. That will mean that the Parliament will have the opportunity to comment on relevant matters. I hope that that provides the reassurance that members seek, addresses the point that the committee's convener and others have raised and demonstrates our commitment to the Parliament's scrutiny role. John Swinney mentioned control rooms. That issue has raised a great deal of interest and concern. We note the comments in the committee's report and its invitation to consider carefully the concerns that have been expressed and to address them specifically in a further round of consultation. That is exactly what we intend to do. I also note the points that John Swinney made about the worries in rural areas and the concerns that others expressed about the financial calculations that were used and the basis of those calculations, as well as concerns about response times and other matters. When I gave evidence to the committee, the consultation period on the consultant's report had only just ended. We received 20 formal responses to the consultation on the report, primarily from the fire authorities, other areas of local government, the trade unions and staff associations. Although two thirds of the responses expressed a desire for no change, a third—including three fire authorities, which represent 23 of the 32 local authorities—were in favour of rationalisation to three control rooms. However, we take on board the criticisms that have been made and the concerns that have been expressed and we will consider the matter further. Our intention is to do further work to address the issues that have been raised in the responses and the criticisms of the financial aspects of the consultant's report. As the committee  recommended, we will have further discussions with the stakeholders in the coming period.

I would be happy to do that. It is my intention that, after we have reflected on the comments that have been made and done further work on the calculations, we will come back to the Parliament through the appropriate mechanism to notify members of the conclusions that we have drawn from that work.

No, I do not, because a number of the responses argued for the status quo. The issue now is whether we are prepared to do further work and give the matter further consideration. We are doing that and we will come back to the Parliament on the question. The issue is important and we need to balance local concerns against the case for improved delivery, improved resilience and the significant investment that is required on the new United Kingdom-wide radio communications system for the fire service. I note what the committee said about the merits of making the water supplier responsible for maintaining water hydrants. We recently consulted on the principles that should underpin water charges and the investment levels that will be required in the water industry for the next eight years. We want to find a solution, but we must ensure that it is consistent with the principles that have been set out. I will therefore discuss the matter with the Minister for Environment and Rural Development and his deputy, who have responsibility for water, and I will let the committee know the outcome as soon as possible. The fire safety duties that relate to places where people work are also important. The removal of multiple and overlapping fire safety provisions and their replacement with a single fire safety regime based on risk reduction will reduce the burden on businesses and allow more efficient and effective  enforcement. As the committee acknowledges, there are a number of complex technical legal issues in part 3 of the bill. Since I gave evidence to the committee, my officials have met the Fire Brigades Union Scotland to discuss those matters and to offer explanations and clarification where they were required. I hope that that dialogue will continue once the draft regulations are available. I am concerned that we have perhaps not sufficiently clearly explained to the committee our policy that the fire and rescue authority should be the main enforcing authority for fire safety issues and how that affects properties that are subject to houses in multiple occupation licensing or to registration by the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care. I assure the committee that the multi-agency approach will stay intact. For example, HMO properties currently receive a visit from a fire officer; that will continue. The fire officer feeds the outcome of the visit into the HMO licensing process as a whole; that, too, will continue. The process and the interaction will look and feel the same. The only difference will be that, on fire safety—and on fire safety only—the fire and rescue authority will be the enforcing authority. It will have the final say on what is acceptable to secure people's safety in the event of a fire. It is right and proper that the professionals should have that duty and power and I am confident that the public at large and those responsible for the licensing schemes will welcome that approach. We need to ensure that information and education on the new fire safety regime are available in appropriate forms and at the appropriate time for those who need it. We are considering options for publicity and information. For reasons of time, I will skip over that, but I assure members that we believe that the money will be available and we will continue to consider the matter. I will touch on a couple of other issues that the committee raised. The first is firefighting at sea. I confirm that we will amend the bill to provide for the necessary duties and powers to enable participation in the sea of change project. Secondly, on assaults on firefighters, I am aware that stage 2 consideration of the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Bill begins next week and that provisions in that bill will protect those acting in that capacity. We will lodge the necessary amendments to meet our commitment to protect all fire and rescue service personnel while they are on duty. I indicated earlier that the consultation process associated with the bill is still on-going. We recently shared our first draft of the national framework with the committee and key stakeholders as part of a pre-consultation  exercise. Once we have considered their responses, we will issue a full consultation draft to all stakeholders. At the beginning of next month we will issue three consultation papers. The first will cover charging. I confirm that it will make it clear that fire and rescue authorities will continue to be able to recover full costs for services that they provide for other organisations, such as training. Secondly, we will consult on our additional functions order under section 10 of the bill. Thirdly, we will consult on a replacement body for the Scottish Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council, which the bill will abolish—a move that, I note, the committee supports. The consultation period will last for three months in line with good-practice guidance and we hope that that—together with a first draft of the fire safety regulations, which should be available for stage 2—will contribute to the scrutiny process and provide further clarity and reassurance. I hope that what I have said will give reassurance on some of the issues that I have addressed and that we have gone some way towards addressing the concerns of the Opposition parties that have lodged amendments to the Executive motion. We will return to many of the issues at stage 2, but it is important that the Parliament should endorse the need for the bill. The bill replaces legislation that is, in some cases, more than 50 years old and it represents a clear opportunity to help to create a modern and efficient fire and rescue service that can meet the challenges of the 21 st century. For that reason, I commend the bill to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Fire (Scotland) Bill.

I am not sure that the precedent that has been set in Parliament by members who wear tee-shirts in inappropriate circumstances is what we would want to see in our courts. The attire that is worn in the courts is largely a matter for the bench and the bar, rather than for ministers. Colin Fox makes the fundamental point that our courts need to be modernised. We must ensure that people feel comfortable when they are in court seeking justice. That is why we have put so much effort into modernising court procedures. We have examined the High Court system and we are examining the sheriff court system. We have also considered giving better support and protection to witnesses and to victims. Those, rather than what someone is wearing, are the fundamental issues that really matter. However, I am sure that the points that have been made will be taken into account by judges and by the legal profession. It would be wrong to suggest that no changes have been made to modernise our court systems.

I am quite clear that there is a mood for change to the threshold for small claims, but there  are still a number of issues that need more consideration before I can propose a new figure or a specific timetable.

We need to act sooner rather than later. I congratulate John Home Robertson on his tireless efforts to promote the debate in Parliament and beyond. Something needs to happen. Mr Home Robertson makes a valid point about small claims—the case for change—and he made a specific point about personal injury claims. I have received representations from a number of organisations, including trade unions and law firms that are involved in such work. More deliberation and consideration is needed because I would not want, by acting on one issue, to cause problems elsewhere. We are trying to come to a resolution that will be fair to all concerned. There will have to be change in relation not only to small claims, but to other limits as well. That change is long overdue.

We have announced our intention to make free legal aid available for welfare applications under the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000. We have also arranged for the secondment to the Executive of a senior and experienced person from the voluntary sector to take forward further work in implementing the act over the next two years.

Jackie Baillie is right to point to the benefits that have been identified from the change. I know not only from the voluntary organisations but from a number of individuals how pleased many people are about what is happening. We hope to be able to bring in changes soon—I hope that they will be brought in over the next couple of months—in relation to advice and assistance. The changes to legal aid for welfare guardianship proceedings will be in place as soon as the details have been worked out. I have asked officials in the Executive and the Scottish Legal Aid Board to deal with the issue as a matter of urgency. I have also asked officials to  discuss the proposed changes with the relevant stakeholders, to enable them to make any comments that are required.

Alasdair Morgan has the better of me on that matter. In respect of the specific issues relating to dealing with adults with incapacity, the changes are being warmly welcomed. However, if he or others have identified an anomaly, I will have it investigated and will report back to him as soon as I can.

In one respect, I agree with the Tories: the debate has been depressing. What is depressing is the pure political cynicism that they have displayed this afternoon in trying to distinguish themselves from other parties in the Parliament. I do not believe that their policy is a matter of logic or even that it is necessarily a matter of principle for them, because I hear senior Tories in Scotland and elsewhere in the United Kingdom admitting privately that some of the things that they are saying are unacceptable but that they have to say them for political reasons. It is depressing that, as a result, the Tories are prepared to gamble not only with the lives of many young people in Scotland, but with devastation in communities. We know, as Kenny MacAskill was right to say, that there is no easy solution, because we all know that drug misuse has its roots in poverty, deprivation, lack of opportunity and lack of hope. That is one of the reasons why this debate cannot be seen in isolation from those that we are having on education, on investment in the early years, on the sure start Scotland programme and on the work that is being done in primary and secondary schools to improve opportunities for young people. Nor can this debate be seen in isolation from the work that we are doing on looked-after children. We know about the problems that children experience if they move out of care and into drug addiction and, often, into prison. The debate cannot be seen in isolation from what we are trying to do to improve the health of people in this country. It cannot be seen in isolation from the debates that we are having about making Scotland a more prosperous country, where people have opportunity. People are absolutely right to say that this debate is but one facet of a much wider debate. There are also immediate issues that we need to address in the Parliament, and there are things that need to be done. As Cathy Jamieson has said not only today but on previous occasions, we admit that things are not as good as they should be, that improvements could be made and that  much more needs to be done. That is why she announced today some of the investment decisions that have been taken to build on the already substantial investment that has been made. I will now refer to some of the specific issues that have been raised in the debate. Stewart Stevenson talked about the know the score website, as did Annabel Goldie and others. Stewart is absolutely right to say that we cannot know too much about drugs. He is also right to talk about parents being informed and being able to help their children. For Annabel Goldie and others to portray know the score as giving children information on how to hide drugs is a complete travesty of the facts: the advice was taken from a publication telling parents where to look if they suspected that their children might be hiding drugs. Such a portrayal is taking something positive, twisting it and telling lies—it is as blatant as that.

No, thank you. Stewart Stevenson also raised the issue of heroin prescribing. He took a balanced approach compared with that of Tommy Sheridan and Patrick Harvie. He was right to talk about the experiment that has been conducted in Switzerland. Tommy Sheridan's conclusion is that we should do the same thing here. I visited a heroin-prescribing project in Holland. What came across very clearly from that very small experiment is that the Dutch have an aging population of heroin users. It is not a growing problem among young people there, which is unlike the situation that we face in this country.

No, thank you. The Dutch believe that their approach of heroin prescribing is appropriate for the small number of heroin users there. Stewart Stevenson is right to suggest that we should reflect on the experience abroad. We will also reflect on the experience of the pilot projects to be undertaken in England and on the conclusions that are reached there. If there are lessons to be learned, we will learn them. Stewart Stevenson is right to say that we should not blindly jump in and follow what is happening in other countries. I was asked about DATs and whether we will take control of them. Some members asked about monitoring. We will monitor, but we will also set service level agreements, because we expect DATs and other bodies to deliver. If they do not deliver, action will be taken. I will now return to some of the disgraceful  comments that the Conservatives made. They accuse the rest of us of being wooed by the politically correct. In essence, they have been regurgitating the politically incorrect and the politically unacceptable. Annabel Goldie held up Sweden as the example to follow. She is right to draw attention to some of the things that are happening there, but she went on to talk about drug deaths and the experiments that have been carried out. The number of drug deaths has in fact quadrupled in Sweden in recent years. Is that a policy failure? If such a policy were tried in Scotland, would a comparable increase in deaths here be the price of the so-called moral high ground that the Tories want to take? The Conservatives are prepared to dice with the deaths of young people for a few cheap votes in this country, which is a disgrace. What we have from the Executive is investment and a balanced and caring approach. We care what happens in our communities. Des McNulty is right to set this matter in a community perspective. We care deeply about what goes on and I assure members that we will not gamble with the lives of young people. We will not gamble with the devastation in communities. We will do what is right, but we will do it on an informed and principled basis.

Bill Aitken said clearly that he supports a zero tolerance approach. His statement echoes some of the comments that were made earlier, about supporting abstinence. I assume that if a drug addict took the abstinence route under which they did not get treatment but were required to abstain, they would no longer need to use needles. Surely the Conservatives' proposals mean that needle exchanges would no longer apply? Would the Conservatives immediately stop needle exchange programmes?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I note Patrick Harvie's point that drugs misuse should be seen as a health issue, rather than a justice issue. Will he explain which part of the health service should deal with tackling drug dealers?

I take the point that Margaret Smith makes about the integration of services and the need to ensure that different agencies work together. Does she accept that one of the key groups that we are currently failing is that of the ex-prisoner? I am thinking of the break between the treatment that offenders receive in prison and that which is available in the community. Does she agree that the integration about which she spoke needs to be put in place so that prison-based services are integrated with those in the community?

Could Annabel Goldie use the rest of her speech to explain whether she would remove the availability of methadone for those to whom it is currently available?

Will Miss Goldie give way?

On that matter, Presiding Officer, the problem is not just interference on the microphones. There is a terrible echo when members are speaking, which makes it difficult to pick up what is being said.

The Scottish Prison Service has introduced new ways of working with substance-misusing prisoners and existing interventions have been updated to reflect the shift towards treatment and rehabilitation. The newly introduced services will enhance the work already in place and provide a more supportive and focused environment in which substance misusers can address their offending behaviour.

The SPS takes the issue of drug addiction very seriously. I commend some of the programmes that it has introduced to tackle the problem. I accept many of the points that Richard Lochhead has made on the connection between drug addiction and crime. However, we must recognise both that it is often very difficult to solve the complex problems of those who have drug addiction and that it is difficult to get them off drugs. That is why I am encouraged by some of the innovative work that has been carried out. Some very dedicated staff are developing their skills and expertise, but I recognise that more needs to be done and that additional investment is required. I also accept the point that if we can reduce dependency on drugs we will make a major contribution to reducing crime in Scotland.

I hesitate to take such a simplistic approach. In response to a different question some weeks ago, I attempted to look back to find out how successful the Conservative Government had been in making our prisons drug free. I was saddened to find out that it had been unable to ensure that prisons were drug free. That is not to be complacent; we need to ensure that drugs are not allowed into prison. There are very strict enforcement regimes, some of which I have witnessed. I have also seen from some of the videotape evidence people's ingenuity in getting drugs into prison and have heard from the prison authorities the extent to which threats and intimidation are used to try to get people to take drugs into prison. The prison authorities are very vigilant and try to minimise the use of drugs. Following on from the points that Richard Lochhead made, as well as attempting to stop the flow of drugs into prison, we need to try to wean people off their addiction because even if we make the prisons drug free, if we do not cure prisoners of their addiction, they will return to their old ways when they get back out. We see a significant number of people dying as a result of their use of fairly high levels of purer drugs. We need to factor that into our consideration of what is a complex issue. We need to treat people and to encourage them to reduce the level of, and to overcome, their addiction, but at all times we must be vigilant in stopping the flow of drugs into prisons.

Tommy Sheridan mentions an important point that is at the heart of our discussions on trying to reduce reoffending and to ensure that our criminal justice social work services are best placed to help people. We firmly believe that we cannot tackle the problem by taking separate views of what happens in prison and what happens in the community. Tommy Sheridan is right—there needs to be integration. The planning for the release of a prisoner needs to start when they are in the prison  and that work needs to continue seamlessly and in an integrated way when they return to the community. That is why Cathy Jamieson, as the Minister for Justice, has made clear her determination to oversee changes that will better integrate criminal justice social work services with the work of the Prison Service.

Like previous questions, Des McNulty's question suggests that the situation is complex. Frankly, it is inexcusable if people are simply working in their own silos. I believe that throughout the country there is a great deal of good practice that involves people working very well together. Anything that we can do to ensure that there is proper continuity, that people are properly supported and that there is adequate planning needs to be supported, and I will certainly take up the issue that Des McNulty raises.

I commend the Law Society of Scotland for the recent improvements that it has made to complaint handling, but I agree with the thrust of Phil Gallie's question. It remains a matter of concern that, in a significant proportion of cases, the Scottish legal services ombudsman asks the Law Society to reconsider.

As required by statute, I have consulted the Law Society of Scotland about the case for increasing compensation levels. I also discussed the matter with the Law Society on 6 September, and I and my colleague Cathy Jamieson intend to introduce orders to increase the levels later this year. I am keen to ensure that any increase should reflect the support of the consultation responses that have been received on the issue by the Justice 1 Committee.

We have reflected carefully on the ombudsman's comments. We need to keep things in perspective and recognise that only an extremely small proportion of all cases handled by solicitors will result in complaints. I commend the Law Society for accepting most of the ombudsman's recommendations to reconsider its decisions or to reinvestigate the complaints in the 42 per cent of cases referred to in Phil Gallie's question. John Swinney makes a valid point. The Justice 1 Committee has considered a number of matters and recommended that the powers of the ombudsman should be enhanced. We want to build on the recommendations of the Justice 1 Committee, and we shall issue a public consultation paper on our firm proposals for improving the complaint-handling system at the end of this year. The majority of the recommendations that the Justice 1 Committee made to the Executive will require legislation if they are to be implemented, and we are currently considering options for addressing that.

We are developing policy on reform of the handling of complaints against solicitors, including complaints about their conduct. Our agenda builds on the recommendations that are contained in the previous session's Justice 1 Committee's report to Parliament, which was published on 27 November 2002. We will at the end of the year issue a public consultation paper on our firm proposals to improve the complaints handling system.

As I said, there will be a consultation paper and we will respond to that consultation as quickly as we can. John Swinney is right to highlight issues that the ombudsman identified. Discussions have taken place between the Law Society of Scotland and the Minister for Justice; they are also keen for improvements to be made in the way complaints are handled. There is a general recognition that things could be done better and there is willingness on all sides to consider how that might be achieved. We must consider whether the best approach would be through self-regulation or through legislation, but whatever we do we are all pledged to ensuring that there is a more effective system for handling complaints in Scotland.

Trish Godman spoke eloquently and movingly about the heartbreak that we see all too often in many communities in Scotland. It is nothing short of a tragedy to see so many children suffering so much, their lives blighted, and sometimes destroyed, when they have hardly started. Speakers such as Kenny MacAskill are right to point out the complexity of the problem that confronts us. I wish to God that there were an easy answer, so that we could simply say that by this time next year—or even, as Trish Godman said, in five years' time—we would have a solution, but we know that it is not as simple as that. Keith Raffan, whose comments were echoed by Kenny MacAskill, was right to remind us that, although what we are debating tonight is the problem of children of drug misusers, there is still a huge and fundamental problem with alcohol abuse in Scotland. That problem blights far too many families and far too many children. I can stand before members tonight and give some account of the extra money that we are spending and the initiatives that we are taking, and I shall do that, but I want to preface my remarks by saying that the nature of the problem is such that, no matter how much we spend, there will still be a problem before us unless, as Kenny MacAskill said, we start to confront some of the wider societal and cultural problems.

I intended to come to that point and I fundamentally agree that we need to consider good practice and persuade others to share and engage in it. I was trying to make the point that there will always be a problem, no matter how much we spend. However, we all need to be much more rigorous—whether that is at Executive level or as individual members of the Scottish Parliament who have influence in our communities and who work with councils and voluntary organisations—in asking questions about the money that is spent in  communities. What is that money achieving? How can the situation be improved? Yesterday, during a discussion about the problem and similar matters, I heard about good initiatives that are being developed in communities and schools, such as the initiatives at Forthview Primary School and Firrhill High School, which support children and parents who abuse substances. We need to encourage much more of that good practice. We are spending significant amounts of money and we have issued policy guidance on a range of matters. In February 2003, we issued "Getting our priorities right: Good Practice Guidance for working with Children and Families affected by Substance Misuse", which sets out our expectations of organisations that work with families in which parents or carers misuse substances—alcohol as well as drugs. The document covers some of the key issues that Trish Godman identified, such as referrals and information sharing. David Davidson spoke about the problem of exchanging information and it is critical that we try to resolve those problems, which are caused sometimes by preciousness and sometimes by a desire to hide behind legal issues—I know that Paul Martin has mentioned that in other contexts. We need to get people to work together and share information. Trish Godman posed fundamental questions. When should we intervene? We want children to stay with their families if possible and we want families to take responsibility for their children. We do not want a situation in which the state simply assumes all the responsibility. There is a critical point at which we need to intervene. If we intervene too early, we interfere inappropriately, but if we intervene too late, the damage might well have been done, as Trish Godman rightly pointed out. Christine Grahame talked about young carers and the effects on children who are made to assume responsibilities that are way beyond their years. The Executive published "It's everyone's job to make sure I'm alright: Report of the Child Protection Audit and Review", which highlighted the impact of parental drug use on child protection work. The First Minister announced a five-point plan to deliver improvements to child protection services, including a three-year reform programme. We want to ensure that our approach is child focused rather than systems driven and we need to talk more to children themselves. Through our carer strategy, we support young carers and we have almost quadrupled the amount of money that we spend on young carers. I am sure that we could always do more. In the partnership agreement, we made a commitment to expand respite care.  In "A Framework for maternity services in Scotland", we made a commitment to improve practice in helping pregnant women who have drug and alcohol problems. We want to work on improving information management and sharing arrangements, to help to identify children who are at risk as a result of parental drug and alcohol misuse. It is true that we have an idea of, but do not know exactly, the scale of the problem. We need to do much more to get behind the statistics, stop relying on anecdotal evidence and ascertain the scale of the problem so that we can target resources more accurately. I mentioned two schools that have done excellent work. Schools can play a key role. As far back as 2000 we issued "Guidelines for the Management of Incidents of Drug Misuse in Schools", which made it clear that if a child is at risk as a result of parental drug use, child protection procedures should be followed. A working group is currently exploring how schools can help to build relationships with hard-to-reach parents, including drug misusers, because many parents who misuse drugs are suspicious of professionals. We are spending more money than ever on early-years services. We have to begin early. We are providing facilities to offer pre-school services to three and four-year-olds. In communities in Glasgow and elsewhere, we have excellent integrated early-years services that address not only education but support for parents, health initiatives and so on. However, the tragedy is that some parents do not access those services. The worst problem is that those parents do not come because they do not want to be seen and do not want to engage. There is a hidden problem, because children are left at home during very important years of their development. Their development will be permanently impaired if we cannot reach out to them. I assure the members who have participated in this excellent debate that we are spending more money than ever before. However, we have to think about how we spend that money. We are committed to doing even more but we have to identify the scale of the problem and we have to ask ourselves what we are achieving. We have to tell all the services involved that they cannot work in isolation. They need to co-operate and to integrate; they need to work across their boundaries. People have to stop being precious about what they do. Trish Godman has left us with a series of questions that could not be answered easily tonight. She asked about sustainability, about focusing on the child, about grandparents, about the appropriateness and quantity of services,  and—quite rightly—about the statistics. We have to use this occasion as a useful stage to allow us to move the debate forward. I assure members that we are committed to doing that. We will reflect on the "Hidden Harm" report and consider what needs to be done. However, as Kenny MacAskill suggested, we should not kid ourselves that this is easy, that money alone is enough, or that we can legislate the problem away. There is a big problem that we all have to address—across our party differences and across our community differences. I hope that, after five years, we can come back to Trish Godman and say that, even though we might not have solved the problem for each and every child in a family with a drug misuser, we did make an effort and we did make progress. I hope that we will be able to show her examples of how we have changed the lives of people in our community for the better, because we will never be able to put a price on transforming the life of a child beyond all recognition through interventions.  I thank Trish Godman for stimulating this debate tonight. It has been a very good debate, but we all have much more to do.  Meeting closed at 17:43.

Will the member give way?

The Executive will reserve its position on the proposed bill until we have considered the responses. Consultation will be important, as there may be a range of views on the proposals. The Executive will study the public response closely. We will wish to assess the balance of opinion on the slightly different issues raised by the proposals to ban large stores opening on Christmas day on the one hand and on new year's day on the other.

Like others, I am encouraged by the increase in tourism that Scotland has witnessed around the new year period, which has been achieved despite the fact that large stores do not open on new year's day. However, we will wait to see what the retail industry and other interests have to say on the matter. Karen Whitefield is correct that the views of those who would be required to work on both Christmas day and new year's day should be listened to. Both days have become important family holidays and Christmas day still has a religious resonance with many people in Scotland. Any decision to open stores on those days would have a considerable social impact, which we would also want to consider.

I am grateful to all members who have contributed to this short debate. I agree that the subject is worthy of a much longer debate. Not only were some thoughtful and telling speeches made, but there are clearly significant issues that it would be worth our teasing out in more detail. Margaret Mitchell's criticism of the decision to have the debate was a little bizarre. I say to her that we have already spoken to and consulted a huge range of organisations. The debate is simply part of the process of ensuring that people in the chamber and beyond are aware of what we propose to do, so that the consultation can be as wide and thorough as possible. I hope that the consultation will be telling.

We will have the opportunity to have that very debate when the consultation is finished and when we introduce the bill. If members from all parties firmly believe that having the opportunity to have a debate such as the one that we have had today is not fruitful and should be stopped, we will listen to them. I think that it is more productive to have such debates, because they allow us to reflect on some of the comments that are made so that we can then include them in the legislative process, rather than having to react at a later date. However, we will be guided by Parliament if it takes the view that I described. Far too many points have been made today for me to take up in the available time. If members want clarification on individual points, they should write to the Minister for Justice or to me and we will attempt to clear up any matters. When Annabel Goldie told us in her contribution that the form of words associated with marriage was not one that she had used, I thought that she was busy preparing her curriculum vitae for a situations vacant column—I thought that we were going to hear much more than we did. Brian Adam and Margaret Mitchell asked for further clarification on the differences between civil partnerships, cohabitation and marriage. As we make progress, we will try to clear up some of those points. If members would find it helpful, I will ask officials to provide details in diagrammatic form and to ensure that they are anatomically correct so that the members can understand exactly the differences of which we speak. Maureen Macmillan raised some pertinent issues about domestic violence and she asked for more discussion of the subject, which is definitely worthy of more consideration. We are committed to tackling domestic abuse and we will consider the evidence, as requested, to ensure that what we do is right. I hope that Maureen Macmillan and others will have the opportunity to get involved. I hope that Nicola Sturgeon took the points that the minister made in all sincerity—that there is no great difference in emphasis in the Executive motion and the SNP amendment. It is important that the Parliament unites around a reform that reflects the significant status of marriage in our society and that recognises that there are many people in our society who, for whatever reason, choose not to get married, but who still need legal rights in their relationship and in relation to their children. I return to the point made by not only the minister, but others throughout the debate.  Whatever we do in this Parliament in relation to family law, it must be with the best interests of children in mind. Children's best interests must be the cornerstone of family law reform in Scotland and we have a responsibility to put their needs first. That will be an important concept when we come to the thorny issue of grandparents' rights, which a number of members raised—we recognise that powerful and emotional argument. Equally, in responding to some of the powerful and emotional needs of grandparents, we cannot damage the interests of children. I concur with Annabel Goldie that we need to be cautious in how we proceed on the matter. Although the debate has been short, it has been useful, and I look forward to introducing legislative proposals that will make a huge difference to children in Scotland.

I thank members for their contributions to this very short debate. Perhaps the fact that time has been short has focused people's attention more sharply, because good points have been made concisely and clearly on all sides of the argument. I fear that Michael Matheson is under a misapprehension about the Sewel process. It is clear that Westminster will not legislate on devolved matters without our consent. He suggested that there is a new convention on how we deal with Sewel motions, but it has always been the case that significant changes to proposed legislation are brought back to this Parliament. Other ministers and I have given the Parliament that assurance on a number of occasions.

Yes. In theory, Westminster could vote to abolish this Parliament if it wanted to do so. However, the Sewel convention has never been broken. I suspect that, once again, SNP members are crying wolf. They are using the debate not to further the interests of the people whom we seek to support and who will benefit from the bill, but to introduce constitutional niceties and to advance their own political point of view. I regret that. During the debate, we have recognised that same-sex couples are denied the opportunity to have their long-term, committed relationships recognised in law. Same-sex couples should be allowed legal recognition and they should be able to access basic rights that are available to opposite-sex couples who marry. The bill fulfils  that intention comprehensively and consistently through our relationship with the United Kingdom.

That is a separate issue. People who want to marry in a religious ceremony may do so, but I am not aware that any minister of religion who is authorised to conduct religious services has asked for that right to be extended. I do not see Linda Fabiani's point. A number of issues have been raised during the debate.

Whatever we did, we would still have the argument. Churches have been well aware of the debate for a considerable time. No church other than the Metropolitan Community Church, which one member identified, has raised the issue as a concern. I am not sure that making such a change at this late stage would make any considerable difference. Nicola Sturgeon talked about the interaction with the proposed family law bill. We would be criticised if we attempted to pre-empt the provisions of future bills. Passing a Sewel motion does not preclude the Parliament from returning to the issue in the future. Michael Matheson suggested that the evidence on the bill has been limited. However, we set out a comprehensive and extensive Sewel memorandum and we gave formal letters and informal briefings to the Justice 1 Committee. Extensive contact and discussion have taken place. Bill Aitken's point about home sharers is a red herring; that is a different issue and it should not distract us from the important issue of legal protection for same-sex couples. Linda Fabiani talked about English ministers being appointed as registrars but, to the best of my knowledge, that is not correct. Ministers of the Anglican church, as authorised persons, can record a marriage in a register that they keep for the purpose, but they are not appointed as registrars of births, deaths and marriages.

I am sorry, but I am running out of time and I have already taken a number of interventions. Linda Fabiani also mentioned ECHR compliance. Westminster must take cognisance of the ECHR and the bill has been given a certificate under section 19 of the Human Rights Act 1998, which means that it is compliant with the ECHR. Donald Gorrie, echoing Michael Matheson, said that the details of the bill were vague, but they have been fully set out and there has been consultation. I dispute fundamentally the point that there is vagueness in the discussions that we have had so far. Patrick Harvie talked about a missed opportunity to signal support for equality. I put on record yet again that the Executive firmly believes that Scotland has no place for homophobic prejudice or discrimination. There are many examples of the work that the Executive is doing to promote equality in all its forms but, unfortunately, I do not have time to specify them. I thank the Parliament for a constructive and positive debate. I understand some of the concerns that have been expressed, but I argue yet again that the procedure that we are following is the best and most comprehensive way of dealing with this complex bill. I hope that, even at this late stage, all those in the Parliament who say that they believe in equality and argue that same-sex couples should be afforded the same rights as others to have long-term relationships recognised will put aside their constitutional prejudices and vote for the motion.

I am quite happy to give Donald Gorrie the assurance that I gave to the Justice 1 Committee. If there are any significant changes to the bill that impact on this Parliament's legislative responsibilities, they will be brought back here for consideration.

If that is the case, will Linda Fabiani explain how separate Scottish considerations could deal with the non-devolved provisions, given that the responsibility lies elsewhere? If the Parliament were to take her advice and that of her colleagues—who support the principles but will vote against the motion today—how long would the SNP be prepared to wait for measures to be enacted? How would the SNP deal with the reserved provisions?

The issue of civil partnerships has provoked strong reactions and considerable debate on both sides of the argument. Some people would prefer not to provide legal recognition for same-sex couples at all, while other people would want to go much further than the Civil Partnership Bill and extend marriage to same-sex couples. Many commentators have paused over the details of the bill, and major and minor points have been the subject of much discussion. However, it would be unfortunate if the irreconcilable push-and-pull factors that have been evident in public debate thus far were to overshadow what the bill is about and why the Executive believes strongly that Scottish provisions should be contained in a comprehensive UK bill. The Civil Partnership Bill will provide the means for same-sex couples to register their commitment to each another, gain legal recognition for their relationship and secure a package of rights and responsibilities that are relevant to people who seek to organise their lives jointly. The fact that the rights and responsibilities straddle devolved and reserved policy areas means that a UK bill is the most sensible way forward and any other approach would give rise to unduly complex and unwieldy legislation that would be understood by few in our society, particularly among those whom the legislation is supposed to help. I recognise that it would be conceivable for Scotland to legislate separately on the devolved areas, but that would not be in the best interests of consistency or clarity, and doing so could lead to problematic cross-border issues.

I recognise Lord Sewel's significant contribution towards Scotland's developing legal and political relationship with the rest of the United Kingdom. However, that contribution does not mean that Lord Sewel is the final arbiter or the only person who can have a view on what should, or should not, be included in Sewel motions. As I have argued in respect of the bill that we are discussing, which involves a range of issues that are reserved as well as devolved, what we have proposed is the appropriate vehicle for dealing with the matter. We believe strongly that a Sewel motion is the best way forward and we are pleased that our consultation found significant support for that view. Some 86 per cent of respondents agreed with the proposal legally to recognise same-sex couples and 74 per cent agreed with the proposed use of a Sewel motion. The Civil Partnership Bill has just completed the committee stage in the House of Lords and I am pleased to say that there has been a welcome level of consensus for the principles behind the bill. Some people might think that the House of Lords did not scrutinise the specifically Scottish parts of the bill in sufficient detail, but the principles that underpin the Scottish clauses mirror those that apply to England and Wales—the only difference is that the Scottish clauses are, rightly, based on Scots law. In the debate on the clauses for England and Wales, the House of Lords considered at some length the underlying principles of civil registration for same-sex couples. There was no reason to go back over those arguments of principle when the equivalent Scottish clauses were reached. There has, of course, been detailed scrutiny of our proposals for civil partnership registration by the Scottish Parliament. In response to the Executive's consultation, the Equal Opportunities Committee took evidence from a wide range of equalities organisations, church representatives and legal experts. We welcomed the committee's strong support for our proposals to take forward civil partnership registration for same-sex couples and we have taken on board the committee's recommendations. More recently, the Justice 1 Committee examined the Civil Partnership Bill, paying particular attention to the need for the Scottish clauses to adhere to Scots law and considering the extent to which the bill mirrors legislation on marriage. The committee received written submissions from several bodies as well as taking oral evidence. Members will have received a copy of the Justice 1 Committee's report. I welcome that report, which has helped to define some of the finer legal details. We have already responded to most of the points that it raises, and I have written to the convener in response to the committee's report. As a result of the welcome input from the  Equal Opportunities Committee and the Justice 1 Committee, the Executive is confident that the Civil Partnership Bill is a sound bill that is appropriate to the needs of same-sex couples in Scotland. Today's debate is about the broad principles of the bill and ensuring that same-sex couples in Scotland can secure the same legal protection as same-sex couples in other parts of the UK. I hope that the Parliament shares my commitment to ensuring a comprehensive and consistent approach throughout the UK. I hope that members, despite some reservations that they may have about the use of a Sewel motion, can rise above the differences of semantics and mechanics and vote to endorse an important principle. I hope that Parliament will agree that including Scottish provisions in a UK bill is the only way in which to achieve that, and I urge members who believe in the principles that are set out in the bill to support the Sewel motion. I move, That the Parliament endorses the principle of giving same sex couples in Scotland the opportunity to form a civil partnership and agrees that the provisions in the Civil Partnership Bill that relate to devolved matters should be based on Scots law and considered by the UK Parliament.

The SNP group of councillors in Renfrewshire has described American and British forces in Iraq as thuggish. Does Mr Swinney agree with that description? If he does not, will he condemn it?

We have no plans on that issue. The Executive's property law reforms in the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003 will help owners to take decisions in sheltered and retirement housing. However, those reforms are concerned with property ownership. In a shared equity arrangement, the needs of occupiers who do not own the properties are dealt with in individual contracts.

The Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003 is concerned with property ownership. In shared equity arrangements, the owners do not own the property, so what the member described as an oversight is not actually an oversight. We do not plan to amend the Tenements (Scotland) Bill to take account of that issue, as the bill deals with  ownership in tenement blocks. The difficulty in the situation that Ken Macintosh describes is that there is a different legal arrangement.

Murray Tosh referred to this being a small gathering but, having heard the contributions, members will agree that it is the quality, not the quantity, that counts. We have heard some excellent contributions. Jackie Baillie, in her usual passionate, yet methodical, style, has brought to the attention of the Parliament something of local significance in the area of the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park that has a resonance way beyond its boundaries, which takes into account the support that has been provided to people from many parts of Britain and the world. Jackie Baillie, Sylvia Jackson, Stewart Maxwell and Murray Tosh have paid tribute to the people who crew the rescue boat service. It is worth putting on record our welcome for, and the significance that we attach to, the work that is done by many people who are involved in volunteer rescue services throughout the country, whether in the hills and mountains or in the seas and lochs. We recognise the time that they give up to provide those services and we acknowledge the fact that they work in very difficult circumstances, sometimes in dangerous and inclement weather. They risk their own life and limb aiding the police and other emergency services in saving lives. I do not think that anyone should underestimate the work that they do. It is right to recognise the fact that we have a proud tradition of volunteer rescue teams in Scotland, which is highly valued. We should further recognise that those who provide such volunteer services not only give their time; they often contribute significantly to raising those services' running costs through the support and generosity of the public. Many volunteers are  quite ingenious in the fundraising activities that they undertake. It is not just the collective effort of responding to emergencies but the collective effort to raise money that makes those services such effective teams. A camaraderie is established that bonds members of the team and makes them singularly effective and efficient in what they do. It is right to put the debate in the context of that volunteer effort. Jackie Baillie and others have rightly paid tribute to the Loch Lomond rescue boat service, which is widely recognised for the quality and effectiveness of its work. As Sylvia Jackson said, Loch Lomond is one of our great national assets and it is enjoyed by many people throughout the country and the world. It is a vital attraction for developing our tourism industry. It is not just welcome, but essential, that services such as the Loch Lomond rescue boat service exist to help those who enjoy the facility of the loch. The service exists not just to rescue, but—as members have said—to encourage a better awareness of the dangers of using the loch. The service educates people by promoting various aspects of safety. It would not be appropriate for me to engage in a debate on the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Bill during this members' business debate, but suffice to say that extensive consultation has been carried out and the Minister for Finance and Public Services has reflected carefully on what he has heard from a range of people employed in different professions throughout the country. I think that he has come up with a considered package. No doubt he would take into account some of the comments that were made by Stewart Maxwell, but it would be inappropriate for this debate to be turned into a debate on what might or might not be included in the next stage of the consideration of that bill. The decisions that have been made on what should and should not be included have not been made lightly and have been made for good reason. We understand the pressures that search and rescue teams face, but it is also right to say that we do not generally provide funding to volunteer rescue teams—although there is a specific issue in relation to mountain rescue. Similarly, we do not provide financial support to a range of local voluntary organisations throughout the country. Perhaps, in the fullness of time, the Parliament might want to take part in the debate about whether the Scottish Executive should provide direct support to local organisations, as Jackie Baillie, Stewart Maxwell and others have suggested. It might be that we should top-slice money for many of the organisations that would like us to provide the money directly to them rather than through local authorities, the police or other services. That is a legitimate debate for the Parliament to have in the future but, generally,  local services are supported by local agencies rather than by the Scottish Executive.

If my timetable can accommodate it, I would be more than happy to take up that offer. Jackie Baillie pre-empted what I was about to say. While we do not provide central, national funding to local organisations, I recognise the strength of the case that has been made. Following this debate, prompted by Jackie Baillie and others who have spoken, I will draw some of the powerful comments that have been made to the attention of the police forces, who have primary responsibility for land and inland water search and rescue services. I will ensure that they appreciate the level of support that exists for the organisation we are discussing and ask what their plans are for future provision of the service. Indeed, I will also make inquiries of the local authorities in the area to find out what assistance they intend to provide. I acknowledge that they make a small contribution at the moment.

I was just about to mention that authority. However, I will not direct it to provide assistance; I will highlight the points that have been made tonight. I will draw them to the authority's attention, indicate the level of support and ask what its intentions are with regard to the provision of the service. I recognise that, at the moment, the funds that are provided by the police and other bodies are only a relatively small part of the running cost of the service. As has rightly been pointed out, people need some feeling of stability and continuity. That applies to other organisations as well. I hope that the points that I raise with the bodies I have mentioned will be given proper consideration by those concerned. Jackie Baillie has mentioned that as a requirement. Having said that and put it into the context of where responsibility lies, I am happy to make  appropriate inquiries on behalf of those who have spoken tonight. I hope that, as a result, I can ensure some wider recognition of the invaluable service that is provided by dedicated volunteers whose efforts are all too often underplayed—not by them, but by the rest of us. I know that they are not doing what they do to gain plaudits, recognition and credit: the fact is that, without them and others like them throughout the country, not only would many more people have a poorer quality of life but, as has been pointed out, many people—not only drunken sailors—would find their lives in danger. The volunteers provide a valuable service and are to be commended. I thank Jackie Baillie for bringing this matter to our attention.  Meeting closed at 17:40.

A full package of measures will be announced later in the year to address the problem of attacks on public service workers. In the meantime, the Executive is supporting a number of measures to address the problem of attacks on transport workers, including the installation of closed-circuit television cameras in all buses operating in Dundee and a trial CCTV project in Glasgow on buses operated by FirstGroup plc. Train and bus operators have implemented a number of initiatives, often in partnership with local police authorities and the British Transport Police. We strongly welcome those partnership approaches, which are already delivering results.

The Scottish Executive is not directly involved in those initiatives, which are the responsibility of the transport operators. I share Christine May's disgust and concern at the type of incidents that she describes and I very much welcome the work that is being done by ScotRail in issuing swab kits. As she said, that scheme is already beginning to demonstrate some success. The initiative has also been tried out in the west of Scotland by First, where, again, it is proving to be  a success. Far too many transport workers, whether on the rail or bus network, are being attacked in such a way. Anything that can be done to ensure the conviction of those responsible is to be welcomed. I encourage other operators to learn from what ScotRail and First are doing in order to see whether they can give the same protection to their employees.

The 2002 act did two things. First, it replaced poindings with the new diligence of attachment. Secondly, it set up the framework for the debt arrangement scheme, which is a new mechanism to help people to repay multiple debts while they are protected from enforcement.

The new scheme is a significant step forward in protecting those who are most vulnerable because of excessive debt. We want to examine the effectiveness of the new arrangements, so we will monitor closely how they work. After a year we intend to carry out research through the central research unit to see whether any arrangements need to be improved. We will seek information from all people who have direct experience. We will liaise closely with the Accountant in Bankruptcy to ensure that we have that relevant information. We will seek to engage with parliamentary committees on the progress and effectiveness of the scheme.

Our colleagues at Westminster are aware of the situation that Christine Grahame describes, and they are concerned about it. We had discussions with our colleagues at Westminster when we were considering the scheme that we wanted to put into effect. General concerns about access to loans have been raised in this chamber before. I know that, as a member, the Deputy Presiding Officer Trish Godman has raised the issue of irresponsible lending. We will continue to feed any information that we have to our colleagues at Westminster, but much of the matter is, as Christine Grahame indicated, reserved.

It is important to have a debate at this stage and I reassure Colin Fox that there is nothing sinister in its timing. We are genuinely  trying to encourage a discussion on an issue that is not just complex, but troubling for our communities, for us as politicians and for many people who engage with the system. Before I move on to the particulars, I will reinforce some of the points that Cathy Jamieson made. The context of the debate is that all members in the chamber, and too many people throughout our communities, know someone whose life has, directly or indirectly, been affected, damaged or blighted by crime, which has sometimes been committed by someone who has reoffended. Families are touched by robbery or the robbery of a family member. Houses are broken into. People are assaulted or mugged. People's lives are blighted and damaged by others who behave irresponsibly around them. Families are tragically damaged by the actions of someone who commits a criminal offence. Many parents despair because they see their child enter into a life of crime owing to drugs or drink, for example. Some families try to help the child and devote themselves and their time and money to get the child out of the problem; sometimes they fail, they despair and their health is affected. We all see the human consequences that crime and reoffending bring. Colin Fox graphically described the tragedy that many people who end up in prison face before they get there. People enter into a life of crime for a variety of reasons. Some have come through the care system, some have reading and writing difficulties and some come from difficult family backgrounds. That is not to excuse their individual actions or to deny their individual responsibility, but it is right to try to understand what brings people to that desperate situation. A number of members have spoken about the need for more social workers and asked whether our proposal is an attack on them. It is absolutely not an attack on social workers. It is right to consider the need for more social workers. Indeed, I have to say that, even before she was the Minister for Justice, Cathy Jamieson probably did more than anyone in the Parliament to try to increase the number of social workers who are employed in Scotland and the number of people who are training to be social workers. She has a long personal and professional commitment to improving the social work profession and its status. That fundamentally remains our approach, but we also need to recognise that to give everyone who has a criminal conviction a social worker is not the solution. The unique skills and influence that social workers can bring are imperative, but we should not underestimate a person's individual responsibility to change their life for the better and we cannot emphasise enough the responsibility that they have to the community.  In an excellent speech, Kenny MacAskill talked about a range of factors, but particularly the change that drugs have brought to our communities and to the criminal justice system. We know the damage that drugs—sometimes building on an alcohol problem—can do. That all needs to be addressed, whether in the community or in prison. We know that, when a person ends up in prison, a link is damagingly broken between them and the community so that they are unable properly to engage with family, friends and others. They are then sometimes not properly prepared for coming back into the community. We need to address that problem and we are worried that no proper work is being done in that respect for short-term prisoners. We believe that it is necessary to do something. Nicola Sturgeon needs to make up her mind. She said that we need action, not talk, but then she said that we need a debate. That contradiction is typical of her. In fact, we need a debate, then we need action. I say to her and to other members that COSLA and others were engaged in the preparation of the consultation document, which Stewart Stevenson described as thin, but from which Stewart Maxwell was able to quote extensively. We have made an attempt to engage a wide range of people by asking questions. We know what the problem is—we all know that there is a difficulty—but very few of us have a clear solution. What I have heard today is a general consensus. Although there are difficulties, no one is prepared to take the bold step of saying, "The system isn't working. Here is what we propose to do." COSLA and others are talking about the need for radical and bold policy changes. Well, we are anxious to hear what those bold and radical policy changes should be. What we propose in the document is a recognition that the current system is not working and that something better needs to be put in its place. As Nicola Sturgeon said, there needs to be better integration; as Annabel Goldie said, there needs to be an improvement in rehabilitation; and, as others have said, we need to consider greater use of DTTOs as a way of ensuring that people do not go to prison. Pauline McNeill made an excellent suggestion. We are talking about structural change, because the present system is not working; we are saying not that the criminal justice social work service is not working, but that the prison system is not working; we are saying that prisoners are not being properly prepared in prison for returning to the community; and we are arguing that something else should be put in place of prison sentences. Given all that, why, in any new agency, should there not be—as Pauline McNeill said—better local accountability and better opportunities for  local politicians and local communities to influence what goes on in our prisons? Pauline McNeill's suggestion offers us an opportunity to secure better local accountability, which will be a critical part of any proposal that we make. Jackie Baillie's comments on the problems of providing rehabilitation for people who have short-term sentences are critical. She is absolutely right to say that, if prisons were providing the answers, we would not be having this debate. We need early intervention. It is clear, from the comments that have been made, that some members are not persuaded by our proposals at this stage. They may not be persuaded by what we are saying just now, but no one seems to be persuaded by the system that we currently have. I offer a challenge to every member. We want them to engage in the debate, to be political leaders and to go back to their communities and hear what is being said not just by social workers, the Scottish Prison Service and the voluntary organisations, but by the victims of crime. We want them to go back to their local communities and ask the families of prisoners what they believe is necessary. We want them to take some responsibility in this process. We want them to be leaders and to believe that they have a contribution to make. If, at the end of the process, those members are not persuaded by what we say, they have a duty to tell us what alternatives would make the present system work better, given that they have said that it is not working. We have a duty to the Parliament, the wider community and the whole country. The present system, which is not working, needs to be improved. If we simply do nothing and go on delivering what we are currently delivering, we will have failed.

Comment has rightly been made about the need to prevent crime and we have heard that in some circumstances it is right both to punish the individual and protect individuals and the community. Colin Fox describes, graphically and correctly, a tragic situation whereby too many people are in prison because they are the product of individual circumstances, family circumstances and the kind of community that they come from. I accept everything that he is saying. However, does he accept that the difficulty that we face is that the current system is clearly not delivering in the ways that he suggests it should? We are trying to find alternatives to a system that is clearly failing.

A number of members, including Kenny MacAskill, have criticised the amount of consultation. Does Kenny MacAskill suggest that we should stop consulting completely and just act?

As long as you leave it at the minister.

Annabel Goldie raises an interesting concept when she not only talks about the need for additional police in communities but questions the ability to influence operationally the way in which those police are used. She correctly points out the fact that the Executive, local councils and so on cannot dictate operational matters to chief constables. What would her solution be to ensure that politicians ensure that police are deployed in the way that she wants them to be?

The Scottish Executive continues to support an increase in the jurisdiction limits for small claims and summary cause actions. Officials have been in contact with bodies such as the Scottish Consumer Council, the Consumers Association, Citizens Advice Scotland, the Scottish Trades Union Congress, the Law Society of Scotland, the Scottish Court Service and the Department of Trade and Industry, and with members of the public, to obtain further views. Their responses will help me to decide how to take matters forward.

On the first point, I note the significant support for a change in the limit from within the Parliament. John Home Robertson lodged a motion, which was supported by two independent members and by every political party except the Scottish Senior Citizens Unity Party. I recognise that there is genuine cross-party support. A significant body of opinion suggests that we need to make a change. We hope to do that at the earliest opportunity. Paul Martin raised a pertinent point about not just changing the limits, but empowering people to use the system once a change has been made. We have already examined how to improve the quality of the material that is provided to people so that they can understand and use the system. He makes a pertinent point about providing support to people who want to make legitimate claims for sometimes relatively small amounts, so that they can access justice appropriately. We will reflect on the points that he made and see what improvements can be made to the system.

We heard Colin Fox articulate a new political philosophy when he said that abstaining is the way forward. Today marks an important step in reforming our legal system and our criminal justice system in particular. It is right that thanks should be recorded in the Official Report to a number of external agencies that made significant contributions during the progress of the bill. The final product is a good reflection of people being able to contribute through the committee system and of the Executive working closely with committees in order to bring proposals to the Parliament. I thank the committee for its rigorous examination of the bill and for a full debate. We recognise that we have shifted position and that we have made changes, and the final product is better for having had such a debate. Like Cathy Jamieson, I want to record in the Official Report my thanks to the bill team, who worked hard in difficult circumstances and within difficult timescales to produce information and to progress the bill. I want not only to thank those who are here today, but to record in the Official Report Cathy Jamieson's thanks and my thanks to Moira Ramage, who is one of the bill team. She cannot be here today because she was injured yesterday in a car crash. I send her our and the Parliament's good wishes and hope that she has a speedy recovery. [ Applause. ] There have been welcome improvements to the bill and a number of members have discussed significant changes. Members have rightly talked  not only about the legal changes that we are making, but about the cultural changes—the shifts in attitude—that will be required to put the measures in place. That is a big challenge for many people who have been set in their ways for many years. I would like to hear from Nicola Sturgeon who is up for the change and who is not; perhaps at some point she will put on record the names of the guilty and the names of those who are willing to move forward. Today marks a very important change. I hope not only that the right of the accused to a fair trial will be properly reflected in the future but that the bill will be seen as a continuing part of a process that fundamentally recognises the rights and needs of witnesses and victims. What we have achieved today is a very good package of proposals and I commend them to Parliament.

I oppose amendment 72 and the amendments that are consequential to it, because they are similar to amendments that we discussed at stage 2. I will repeat the points that I made then. New section 24A(1) of the 1995 act offers the court the option of an additional condition of bail, which can be used in cases when it considers that the monitoring would provide the additional security sufficient to allow someone who would otherwise be remanded to remain in the community. We have had the debate about that previously and I hope that, if Margaret Mitchell does not agree to not move amendment 72, Parliament will oppose it.

At stage 2, I undertook to review the options that would be available for regulation-making powers under proposed section 24B of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, which is introduced by section 14 of the bill. My undertaking was given in response to the committee's desire to have some scrutiny over the areas in which the provisions would be piloted. Amendments 56 and 57 address the matter by providing for an affirmative regulation-making power in relation to the first set of regulations to be made under section 24B, which will apply to the pilot scheme. A negative resolution power would be used for subsequent regulations. That arrangement will provide Parliament with the opportunity to debate the first regulations under affirmative procedure for the pilot scheme. At that point, we would be in a position to provide any detail that was required on the proposed operation of the pilot schemes. The pilot schemes will be subject to evaluation and I propose that the results of the evaluation be made available to the committee. Amendment 58 is a technical amendment to rectify a typing omission. I move amendment 56.

We do not consider that it is necessary to require police constables to serve  citations in person on people whom the prosecutor wishes to precognosce. We do not believe that that is the best use of resources. It is recognised that there will be confidential communication between an accused and his legal representative. The provisions must be read against the background of the general law, and we do not believe that anything in them could be taken to require information to be disclosed if the witness has legitimate grounds for refusing to disclose it. That applies whether those grounds are based on confidentiality or on some other protection that is afforded by the law, such as the right not to give information that would incriminate oneself. We do not believe that it is appropriate to introduce specific provision in relation to one ground on which a witness might refuse to disclose information. I hope that amendment 120 will be opposed and that amendment 121 will not be moved.

We are quite happy to shift to changing the test to on cause shown, as described by Pauline McNeill. We support amendment 90.  Amendment 90 agreed to.  [Amendments 63 to 67 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.]

The amendments are technical. They clarify that, in all cases in which a trial has been fixed and is not proceeded with for whatever reason, the Crown is not precluded from reindicting under proposed new section 81(5) in the 1995 act. I move amendment 36.  Amendment 36 agreed to.  [Amendments 37 to 39 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.]

One of the bill's objectives is to achieve earlier communication between parties with a view to the court being provided with a written record of their state of preparedness at the preliminary hearing. The record will follow the discussions that parties are required to have under new section 72E of the 1995 act, which the bill seeks to insert. Those discussions will be informed by the information that is supplied by the Crown to the defence. The Crown Office has drafted a practice note that is the subject of consultation between it and those who practice in the High Court. When the practice note has been finalised, it will be published and will become a public document. It will set out in detail how and when the Crown will inform the defence of the progress of its case. At the preliminary hearing, the court will be able to ask the Crown whether it has complied with the practice note and, if not, why not. It is perhaps more important that, if the practice note has not been complied with, the defence will be able to say what effect that has had on its preparation for trial. We would expect that to be reflected in the written record that is lodged with the court. We believe that those safeguards are sufficient and that Nicola Sturgeon's amendments are unnecessary. Therefore, I ask her to consider seeking to withdraw amendment 101. New section 72E of the 1995 act, which section 2 will introduce, provides that the prosecution and defence must prepare and jointly lodge a written record of their state of preparedness for trial not less than two days before the preliminary hearing. Amendments 15 and 17 seek to strengthen that provision by providing that the prosecutor and the accused's representative shall "communicate with each other with a view to jointly preparing" the written record to be lodged with the court. Amendments 16, 18, 19, 20 and 21 are consequential. The intention of the bill is that parties have a discussion about their case and prepare a written record of the state of their preparedness. It is implicit that, in their report to the court, parties are expected to be as full and frank as is consistent with their duty as officers of the court. However, it is recognised that there will be communications between an accused and his legal representative that are confidential, and I emphasise that the bill does not seek to require an agent to breach that confidentiality. We believe that if, in accordance with his responsibility as an officer of the court, a legal representative indicates to the court that to  disclose something in answer to a question from the court would involve the divulging of privileged information, the court will accept that that is the case. We believe that that is the present situation in criminal proceedings. We are doing nothing to change that and we see no need to legislate on the matter. I hope that Nicola Sturgeon will accept that assurance and not move amendments 102, 104 and 106. One of the effects of amendment 15 would be to make amendment 103 redundant, so I hope that Margaret Mitchell will consider not moving it.

A number of points have been raised in the debate, which I will try to address. Nicola Sturgeon asked about amendment 44 in relation to amendment 40. Our view has not changed and is still that amendment 44 is a consequential amendment. I would like to address some wider points. Nicola Sturgeon spoke about some difficulties with having a trial in the absence of the accused. In passing, I gave some examples and it is worth re- emphasising the types of traumatic case that we are discussing. One example is of a sensitive sexual case involving two young girls. The case had finished. The judge's charge was all that remained and the case adjourned over the weekend. The accused absconded. The witnesses—the two young girls—then faced having to give evidence again about a serious sexual assault. Moreover, they had the uncertainty and distress of knowing that the perpetrator was free and unable to be dealt with by the courts until he was—

Not at all. It is not about using emotion. The situation that I mentioned is a graphic example of the consequences of accepting the amendments in the name of Nicola Sturgeon. It is not about emotion, apart from the emotions that would be felt by victims and witnesses in such situations. I will come back to whether concluding the trial would in fact prejudice any conviction and lead to further appeals. The point that Bill Butler made and which Margaret Smith re-emphasised is that the issue is about striking balances and providing safeguards. I will come back to the point that Margaret Smith made about the ECHR. Margaret Mitchell raised the issue of appeals, as did Nicola Sturgeon. Margaret Mitchell said that she believed that the accused absenting himself would mean that he should forgo his right as a witness. Unfortunately, that is not the case and if we accept amendment 115, the case could still be abandoned if the accused absconded. Colin Fox said that there must be better ways of doing this and that a safe conviction could be jeopardised because a fundamental right has been breached. Stewart Maxwell also referred to a fundamental right. Let us put the matter into perspective. We already have some trials in absence in Scotland in summary cases, so it is not as if such trials are completely alien to Scots law. There are already trials in absence in other parts of the United Kingdom—they happen in England—and trials in absence are widespread throughout  Europe, so let us not talk as if we are doing something that is unknown in western democracy and western judiciary. I come back to the important issue about the ECHR that was raised by Margaret Smith. I refer her and Parliament to paragraphs 81 to 84 of the policy memorandum, which are on the impact on human rights. Paragraph 83 states: "there is nothing in the Strasbourg jurisprudence to suggest that a trial of a criminal defendant held in his absence is inconsistent with the ECHR (see Lord Bingham in R v Jones [2002] All ER 113)." Furthermore, paragraph 82 states: "In relation to trials in absence, the provisions in the Bill in section 11 raise issues in connection with the rights of the accused under Article 6 of the ECHR. Article 6 confers a right to a fair trial, and in terms of the ECHR jurisprudence that includes a right of the accused to be present at and to take part in a hearing into his case that is adversarial in nature. The European Court of Human Rights has not found a breach of the ECHR where a defendant, fully informed of a forthcoming trial, has voluntarily chosen not to attend and the trial has continued." Therefore, the policy memorandum makes the situation clear. I also make it clear that no legislation that is in breach of the ECHR can be passed by the Parliament. We are committed to fulfilling our obligations on that. I further argue not only that there is no breach of the ECHR but that we provide more protection to the accused than is required under the ECHR. We have met all our obligations.  The Executive is committed to striking a balance between the rights of the accused and the rights of victims and witnesses. We listened to the arguments of a wide range of people and to the arguments that were put forward at the committee. We agreed to the amendment at stage 2 and, because we thought that a bit more needed to be done to give it meaning, we reflected further and lodged amendments at stage 3. We have agreed to move even further in relation to amendment 40A, in the name of Bill Butler, so we have shifted considerably. We have listened to the arguments and we believe that we have struck a proper balance between the rights of all the parties. I urge members to accept that we are not abandoning anything fundamental and that we are not in breach of our obligations. For the first time, we are beginning to strike that proper balance, when in the past many people were let down by the justice system.  Amendment 12 agreed to.  [Amendments 13 and 14 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.]

The amendments relate to section 11, which amends section 92 of the 1995 act in relation to the circumstances in which a trial may take place in the absence of the accused. As introduced, the bill provided for trials in absence of the accused from the outset of the trial. However, at stage 2, we indicated that we accepted in principle an amendment from Bill Butler to the effect that trials in absence could take place only after evidence against the accused had been led. We believed that it was right to accept a compromise on that position. At that stage, I indicated that I wanted to consider the precise terms of the amendment and whether any further amendments would have to be made to clarify the matter. From comments that  were made in the committee debate, it was apparent that the intention behind Bill Butler's amendment was that there had to be a body of evidence before the court before it could allow the trial to continue when an accused had absconded. Indeed, there was an amendment at stage 2 that was similar to amendment 115, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, to the effect that all the evidence would have to be led. I acknowledged what Bill Butler and the committee sought to achieve at stage 2 and I indicated that we would reflect on the necessity for further amendments. That is why we have lodged amendment 40 today. Amendment 40 requires there to be evidence that implicates the accused before a trial can be allowed to continue when the accused has absconded before the end of that trial. In addition, the court must be satisfied that it is in the interests of justice for a trial to proceed in the absence of the accused and must have regard to the stage that the trial has reached when an accused absconds. I stress that it is only when the court is satisfied on all three elements that it will allow the trial to continue. We have considered amendment 40A, which seeks to strengthen further amendment 40, to strengthen what was agreed at stage 2. I recognise that it is the will of the Justice 1 Committee that, and there is a body of opinion that holds that, the Executive ought to move from its original position. We have moved and I am prepared to accept that we should move again and accept amendment 40A. However, we believe that it is right that the court should have the discretion to decide whether it is appropriate that the trial should continue in the absence of the accused. The amendments before Parliament today strike the correct balance between the rights of the accused, of which we are acutely aware, and—I stress this—the rights of victims and witnesses. Amendment 44 is consequential on amendment 40; the wording removed by the former will be incorporated in the latter. Amendment 45 removes wording that is considered to be unnecessary. Bill Butler's stage 2 amendment spelled out that if the trial proceeded in the absence of the accused, a verdict could be returned. However, if the trial is allowed to continue, the normal procedure of leading evidence and returning the verdict would follow. The words are therefore unnecessary and we seek to delete them. Amendment 115 in the name of Nicola Sturgeon—the subject matter of which was debated fully at stage 2—would mean that a trial in absence could take place only after all the evidence had been led. However, the accused person is a competent witness at his own trial, so if the accused failed to attend after the conclusion  of the Crown evidence, his agent could intimate that the accused was to be called as a witness and the trial would have to be abandoned. All the witnesses would then be required to come back to court to give their evidence—some of which might be distressing—all over again. That cannot be right. In cases involving serious sexual offences, the victim might be forced to give traumatic and distressing evidence for a second time. We argue that that is not right. That is why I ask members to reject amendment 115. We agree that accused persons, even if they abscond, should continue to be legally represented. Amendments 42, 43, 46, 47 and 48 provide for that. Amendments 12 to 14, 49 to 54 and 63 are consequential on amendments that were made at stage 2 that provided that trials in absence against accused individuals may take place only if the accused has absconded after evidence has been led. The possibility of a trial in absence from the outset will remain for bodies corporate. Amendments 12 to 14 provide that, where a body corporate has been cited to attend a preliminary hearing and fails to attend, the hearing may continue in the absence of the body corporate, which will be treated as having pled not guilty so that a trial diet can be appointed. Amendments 49 to 54 and 63 make further consequential amendments for the application of the trial in absence provision to bodies corporate. I move amendment 12.

The amendments in relation to the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004 bring the procedure on preliminary notices into line with the procedure that is to be introduced by the bill. They do not in any way change the policy intention behind that act. The bill will introduce preliminary hearings in the High Court and we hope that all preliminary matters will be dealt with at that hearing. Included in that will be hearings ordered by the court where the court is not satisfied that the special measures in the notices lodged under the 2004 act are the most appropriate for the purposes of taking that witness's evidence. That is the substance of amendments 64 and 65. The 2004 act prohibits, in certain cases involving child witnesses under the age of 12, an accused person from conducting his defence personally. Amendment 25 extends that prohibition to preliminary hearings. The other amendments are of a more minor and technical nature. I move amendment 1.  Amendment 1 agreed to.  [Amendments 2 to 10 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.]

At stage 2, I undertook to see whether it would be possible to provide a further affirmation of the policy intention that fixed diet trials should be the first option when the court fixes trials in the High Court. We believe that that will be the case, but good court management dictates that standby cases should utilise court time that is freed up when cases go off at the last minute due to unforeseen circumstances. Amendment 11 allows that by providing that the court may appoint a trial diet to be a floating diet if it indicates that when it fixes the trial diet and if it considers that to be appropriate. We believe that in appropriate cases the court should be able to appoint a trial as a standby trial for a limited time. It would be wrong to state the type of cases that we consider should be included, as that depends on the facts and circumstances of the case that are given to the court at the preliminary hearing when the parties indicate that a trial is necessary. Equally, we do not believe that there should be an on-cause-shown test before  the court can appoint a standby trial, as Nicola Sturgeon's amendment 11A suggests. We believe that the matter is primarily one of court programming, based on information that is provided by the parties at the time and subject to the court being satisfied that the facts and circumstances of the case mean that it is appropriate to appoint a floating trial diet. Section 8 introduces new section 83A to the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 and provides for the continuation of trial diets. Amendments 27, 28 and 29 extend those provisions to cover floating trial diets that have been called and adjourned. It provides that cases that have been appointed as floating diets may be continued from day to day, without being commenced, up to the maximum number of days to be prescribed in the act of adjournal. We do not know the number of days that will be prescribed, so it may not be possible to indicate that 48 hours' notice must be given subsequent to the appointed diet. However, as parties will need to be present at the appointed diet, it should be possible to give an informed view at that stage about when the trial will commence. We therefore believe that amendment 107 is unnecessary. In addition, parties will give notice of the availability of counsel at the preliminary hearing and the trial will be fixed within that window of availability. Therefore, the competing claims for counsel's time that we see at present should not occur. Floating trials are standby cases and they should be able to commence with the minimum of delay. That is another reason why we think Nicola Sturgeon's amendments 107 and 108 are unnecessary and I ask her not to press them. If she does, I ask the Parliament to reject them. With those assurances about fixed trial diets becoming the norm, I move amendment 11.

I have nothing further to say.  Amendment 11 agreed to.  [Amendments 92 to 100 not moved.]

Specifically on the question that Stewart Maxwell raised about amendment 30, it would be for the court to determine whether the provision introduced by the amendment is consistent with the precedent in section 32(7) of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 whereby the prosecutor appeals against the grant of bail. Giving the court discretion allows for investigations to be made, and for the court to take account of any other special circumstances that might arise. That discretion provides the desirable flexibility and I will be content to move and press amendment 30.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. [ Interruption. ]

The bill contains a package of measures that were proposed by Lord Bonomy, which we believe will be workable in relation to defence preparation and trial planning. Amendments 91 to 100, 110 to 112 and 114, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, are similar to amendments that were lodged at stage 2, and I repeat what I said then. One of the key objectives of the bill is that parties are fully prepared for trial, and that trials proceed on the date set by the court. That will create greater certainty for victims and witnesses, and reduce the unacceptable level of adjournments. The retention of the 110-day time limit, as proposed by those amendments, would jeopardise the package of measures. The proposals in the bill retain the right of an accused to have a hearing within that timescale, while at the same time allowing adequate time for preparation, and therefore allow for greater certainty that trials will be ready to proceed on the date fixed. The amendments would undermine the objectives of the bill, and would disturb that balance, therefore I ask Margaret Mitchell to withdraw amendment 91 and not move amendments 92 to 100, 110 to 112 and 114. If she does not do that, I ask the Parliament to reject them. Section 9 seeks to amend the current provisions relating to breaches of the custody time limits. It provides that if the custody time limit is breached, an accused would be entitled to be admitted to bail, but proceedings against him may continue subject to the 12-month time limit. That prevents the situation where an accused can be released from custody and be forever free from prosecution on the charges of the indictment because, for example, of an administrative error in calculating the time limits. By allowing the accused to be entitled to be admitted to bail, we are striking the right balance between the accused's right to a fair trial and the victim's right to expect to see an accused face trial. Colin Fox's amendments 109 and 113 would retain the current position. As Lord Bonomy pointed out in his review, the effect of the present provisions is that someone who is charged with a particularly serious and odious crime could be released and not tried on that charge due to a human error of miscalculation. Surely that is not right. We accept that the accused should not be detained in custody any longer than is necessary. I believe that the provisions in the bill safeguard that right, as well as protecting the rights of victims and their relatives. I therefore ask Colin Fox not to move amendments 109 and 113. If he does not do that, I ask the Parliament to reject them.  Executive amendments 30 and 59 to 62 are consequential upon section 9, which will introduce for the first time an entitlement to bail for accused persons at the expiry of the custody time limit, where that custody time limit cannot be met. Amendment 30 provides for the continued detention of the accused for a period of up to 72 hours, where the prosecutor appeals against a refusal to extend the time limits. Amendments 59, 60, 61 and 62 seek to modify the general provisions on bail in part III of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 so as to fit with the particular circumstances of bail granted because the custody time limits have not been met.

Our aim is to provide the courts with a full  range of disposals that meet the needs of offenders, including residential programmes, although residential accommodation is not always the best answer.

I make no comment on Fergus Ewing's ability as a mediator or peacemaker within the SNP. Given some of what happens within the party, he has a hell of a lot of work on his hands. I accept that, where we can identify schemes that work well, we want to see that good practice spread throughout the country. In many respects, service delivery is the responsibility of local authorities, although many voluntary organisations also make a significant contribution. I will consider with interest the scheme that Fergus Ewing mentioned, but a number of schemes are already proving successful and we would hope to see them taken up throughout Scotland.

A number of issues are involved in Robin Harper's question. First, we are continuing to fund Fairbridge for another year, although we have made it clear that we will be discussing with it over the course of the year a rigid set of  expectations. Secondly, he asked about other organisations and the withdrawal of funding. Fairbridge and Airborne were, to some extent, unusual, because most projects are funded through local authorities, not directly by the Scottish Executive—only a small number of projects are funded in that way. I disagree profoundly with Robin Harper's view that Airborne was extremely successful; it was not and I can provide more information on that if he wishes. Airborne was not successful, which is why we took the decision to withdraw its funding. Any organisation that delivers a service to the Executive or to any other funder should expect to be asked questions about its ability to deliver on what it says it will deliver and to have its success measured. I repeat—we have said this time and again—that Airborne was very expensive, did not recruit the number of people that it should have recruited and had a high drop-out rate. We made the correct decision in reinvesting that money elsewhere.

Anything that can be transferred to other organisations will be considered by the voluntary and local authority organisations to see whether it can enhance their ability to deliver locally. I accept what Karen Gillon says. Some aspects of the course may well have something to add to other organisations and I am sure that those organisations will look into that. Some of them are already in discussion with staff from Airborne to see whether there are opportunities for them to use those staff and I wish them well in that.

The need for additional security is kept under constant review by the police, taking account of the current threat levels and intelligence. For obvious reasons, it would not be appropriate to reveal the costs that are associated with such measures.

All police forces in Scotland, including Lothian and Borders police, received additional funding in the light of the pressures that arose following the 9/11 incident. On the specific question about other pressures on Lothian and Borders police, we are waiting on information from that police force. We will reflect on that information and we will make a decision about the distribution of resources throughout police forces in Scotland taking account of various factors. We want to be fair to all the forces in Scotland. If one force, such as Lothian and Borders police, has specific needs, those needs will be factored into the decision. When we have received the information and assessed it, we will come to a decision that will be reflected in future years' funding.

The Executive has systems in place to provide compensation in appropriate cases for those who are freed from prison after a miscarriage of justice. Although support in adjusting to their new circumstances is generally available to ex-prisoners, ministers have decided that there should be a service that makes separate and distinct provision for those who have suffered a miscarriage of justice. The Executive is currently considering the most effective way in which to provide such a service.

Bill Butler is right to say that the Justice 1 Committee has considered the matter, which the Minister for Justice has reflected on; she has, indeed, replied to the committee.  The services that might be available could be advice services on benefits, which can often be complicated—and there could be added complications for people in such circumstances. Services could include advice on access to appropriate housing, on financial management and compensation and on how to manage any compensation that has been provided. A range of matters need to be carefully considered. In some areas, individual organisations could be well placed to provide such advice, but in other circumstances, advice could come from organisations with specific expertise. We will consider such matters. I emphasise again to Bill Butler that there needs to be provision that is separate and distinct from that which is provided to ex-offenders.

On lessons that can be drawn, all parts of the justice system reflect carefully on conclusions. Obviously, we expect the police to consider how any case has been handled and the Crown Office reflects on how things have been taken forward. If there was anything upon which ministers with responsibility for justice had to reflect and decide, that would be done. We must consider carefully any miscarriages of justice that have been identified, not only for the sake of those who have suffered but to ensure that no one else suffers in such a way in the future. On the more specific point, about the treatment of compensation, charging for board and lodgings has not been the practice in Scotland and ministers in Scotland have no intention of introducing such a practice.

My comments to Nicola Sturgeon apply equally in response to Colin Fox. We will consider carefully the outcome of the specific cases that Colin Fox mentioned and any decisions that must be made. However, it is a bit early for us to draw specific conclusions at the moment.

Under the Executive, police numbers in Scotland have reached record levels and that is delivering results. We want to make Scotland a safer place, in which people feel safer. Our aim—which we share with the police service—is to reassure the public where it is right to do so. Numerical measures help, but they are not the whole answer. Measuring fear of crime in a way that guides policy is a complex matter and we are working with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and others on how best to do that.

I am not sure that the Conservatives learned anything from our debate in the chamber yesterday. The matter was referred to again today; we heard people urging caution on politicians who try to dictate to journalists and broadcasters how they should operate. There seems to be an inference in Annabel Goldie's question that politicians should dictate to chief constables exactly how they should police local communities. There is an important distinction between what politicians do and how chief constables and police boards reflect policy in local communities. On the wider issue about the fear of crime, a working group from the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and other bodies is considering the matter and we will reflect on the outcome when that group reports back.

I share Johann Lamont's concerns about the victims of crime. That is why we have put so much emphasis on supporting not only vulnerable witnesses, but the victims of crime. In relation to the specific distressing case that Johann Lamont describes, I can well understand how badly the family feel about that. I know that Johann Lamont has raised the matter with the Solicitor General, and Cathy Jamieson, the Minister for Justice, is also aware of it. They will both look closely at what happened and if improvements can be made, they will be made.

The home delivery of alcohol requires a licence under the Licensing (Scotland) Act 1976, which restricts home deliveries in several ways. The permitted hours for purchase and delivery are 8 am to 10 pm on Mondays to Saturdays and 12.30 pm to 10 pm on Sundays. A contract for sale can be made only within those hours, but delivery can be made at other times. The seller has to keep certain records about the order and the customer, and those records must be carried by the person who delivers the order.

I deplore the illegal sale or provision of alcohol by any organisation. The company to which Cathy Peattie refers, like other companies, is required to operate within the constraints that I outlined. However, we certainly do not want to take action that would restrict responsible suppliers who arrange home deliveries. The Nicholson committee discussed the matter and we cover the issue in the draft white paper, which says that we intend to give consideration to the matter. We need to strike a balance between the use of modern technology by responsible companies and ensuring that the police and other agencies take appropriate action when people flout the law.

The debate has been remarkable in a number of respects. It has been remarkable partly because of the consistency of views but also because of the extremely bold attempt by Bill Aitken to rename the McInnes report the "Aitken report"; it is a long time since we have seen such effrontery carried out in such a modest manner, but our Bill is never one to hide his talents. I will help the members who said that they did not manage to reach the end of report. I will read out the last couple of sentences for their convenience. It states: "A number of outcomes may result in subsequent prosecutions or referrals to other agencies, for example if a condition such as payment of a fixed penalty is not complied with. For simplicity, these pathways are not shown in the diagram." There is no need for Mike Pringle to worry himself tonight. I accept the point that Bill Aitken made about the SNP's amendment. We do not have any great difficulty with what the SNP says in the amendment, although we cannot really understand the point of it. However, we do not understand why in a debate such as this the SNP would want to delete a reference to considering "the continuing modernisation of the criminal justice system to be an important priority". If the SNP does not consider modernisation of the criminal justice system to be a priority, I wonder what the rest of its amendment is about. Had it not been for that, we would have been happy to endorse much of what else was said by the SNP. I will re-emphasise some of the points that have been made by Cathy Jamieson and a number of members during the debate. We recognise that summary justice is a vital component of our justice system. It deals with 96 per cent of all criminal cases that go before the courts, but we also recognise that many of those cases are minor and could be dealt with more effectively. However, it is also right to say—as a number of members, including Kenny MacAskill, mentioned—that although they may be minor cases, they have a real impact on the quality of life of victims and communities. For their sakes, we need to get it right. We are talking about a comprehensive review of the criminal justice system. McInnes suggested many radical proposals and, deliberately, we have said that we want to listen. As Cathy Jamieson said, McInnes is different from Bonomy because there are aspects that we can move on without necessarily introducing legislation. Therefore, we want to hear people's views; it is right that we listen to what people have to say.  We recognise that there is a minority report on lay justices, which I will come back to. That is another voice that must be listened to on the issue and we will give it due consideration. However, I wonder about a point that was made by Michael Matheson, and by Stewart Maxwell in his closing speech. We were criticised for not saying ahead of the consultation what we want. However, if we said ahead of the consultation what we intend to do, they would criticise us for that. It appears to me that they would criticise us irrespective of what we said. Theirs was an unfortunate note in the debate. Most members commented on lay justices. Valid points were made about the sterling—I want to put this on the record—contribution that is made by lay justices throughout the country. They have, over the years, shown remarkable commitment to the justice system and have put in many hours of effort on behalf of their communities. However, we want to reflect on what the McInnes report said about improving the system—we will listen to what has been said. Patrick Harvie asked whether we will consult lay justices. We will consult and we will consult more than just the lay justices and JPs. We want all those who are involved in the system to express their views. We want local authorities to express their views and—beyond that—we want the people who are directly affected, such as victims and witnesses, to express their views. We will ensure that consultation is wide; copies of the report will be sent to all the district courts. There will be a direct mail shot of the report to all the JPs who made representations throughout the McInnes process. There will be thorough consultation. There was a remarkable speech this afternoon from the SNP benches. It was an exceptionally constructive and balanced speech and although I could not quite see who made it, it sounded like Kenny MacAskill; however, I am not sure. He made some valid points; we have an open mind on his suggestion that we should consider taking different approaches in different parts of the country. That point was echoed by Bill Aitken, and it is worth considering, although I do not know what the conclusion will be. Kenny MacAskill made a number of constructive suggestions. Colin Fox complained that resources in the Crown Office are not going to the front line, but that is just not true. Since March 2002, we have recruited more than 60 lawyers, nearly all of them to the front line. We have set up a civil recovery and criminal confiscation unit which, although it is in the front line, may not be—[ Interruption. ]

I am grateful for your support, Presiding Officer. Staffing levels in the Crown Office are up 15 per cent and much of that increase will be used to create a more robust structure in local areas, for example by providing better management support for procurators fiscal in the front line. We are moving and we are investing. Stewart Stevenson raised questions about costs, but some of his points were not directly relevant. The report acknowledges that research that was carried out by Professor Rod Morgan in England and Wales is not directly relevant to Scotland. It illustrates that the salaries of judges are not necessarily the most significant cost elements. Stewart Stevenson suggested that there would still have to be clerks even in the sheriff courts. The difference is that clerks to the sheriffs would not necessarily be legally qualified. Summary sheriffs would also not necessarily require legally qualified clerks, so there are some differences. I acknowledge that that is not the most significant issue, but I want to put the matter in the proper context. Karen Whitefield made a point about speeding up the system—as did many others—and talked about the contribution made by the lay justices in her area. I echo the view that they make a valuable contribution. Pauline McNeill also referred to them when she talked about speed and Bill Butler talked about their contribution to lay justice. I think it was Pauline McNeill who said that we are right to be cautious and that there would be no guarantee of consistency if we abolished lay justices. However, the debate has enabled us to share across the chamber and across the political parties the view that change is necessary and that McInnes has made a valuable contribution to the debate. If together we can engage in dialogue with people throughout the country, we can come up with a system that is more robust, more effective and more efficient than the one that is currently in place. All members who spoke acknowledged that the justice system fails people in many cases and for various reasons. The report is part of a bigger package of modernisation on which we have embarked. We are already well advanced with our work on the Bonomy proposals on the reform of the High Court and the report is another vital component in the changes to the system. I hope that today's consensus and enthusiasm will be taken back out into communities so that we have a wide ranging and deep-rooted dialogue that will enable us to make, whether through legislation  or—as Kenny MacAskill suggested—through the powers that are currently at our disposal, changes that will be effective, quick and of lasting benefit.

You need have no worries in that respect, Presiding Officer.

A number of valid points have been made this afternoon. I will deal with one or two specific points and then move on to the general concepts. Phil Gallie asked about reciprocal powers of transfer. Frankly, we do not consider such powers to be necessary. There are only two prisons in Northern Ireland, which are closed prisons. There are considerably more prisons in Scotland and in England and Wales, so if we were ever confronted with a situation in which we needed to move prisoners, we would be far better able to handle it than the Northern Ireland Prison Service would be. The scenario that Phil Gallie envisaged is unlikely, although I understand the principle that he raised. Mike Pringle and Pauline McNeill encapsulated and reinforced the reasons for the Sewel procedure being the appropriate approach to the matter. Pauline McNeill said that a bill of the Scottish Parliament would achieve nothing that could not be achieved by the Sewel motion, other than the taking up of a considerable amount of parliamentary time and the pushing back of other work that we think is appropriate. I wonder whether Stewart Maxwell, Michael Matheson and other members of the Scottish National Party have thought the matter through. They asked specifically about the powers in the bill. In relation to Scottish ministers' powers, the bill and the memorandum of understanding would work in exactly the same way as the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 currently works in relation to the transfer of prisoners between Scotland and England. A memorandum of understanding supports that legislation.  Frankly, the measures in the bill cannot, could not and will not work without the specific consent that is encapsulated in the memorandum of understanding, even though that is not stated in the bill. There is absolutely no chance whatsoever, given the signed memorandum of understanding, that Cathy Jamieson, the Minister for Justice, would be forced to accept prisoners when she had concluded that that was not the right thing to do. The SNP is scaremongering and, as usual, posturing.

I am not quite sure of the technicalities of that, but if anyone is transferred from Northern Ireland to Scotland as a result of the arrangements in the bill and we believe that they should no longer be here, they will be transferred back. If I have missed a point in relation to Phil Gallie's question, he can take it up with me separately. Stewart Maxwell and others have raised issues about the costs of our having the prisoners here in Scotland. I will be frank: the costs of two prisoners at any one time, when considered as part of the wider Scottish prison budget, are minute. Michael Matheson was right when he said that the bulk of the costs would be fixed costs. If there were to be extra costs, Stewart Maxwell says that he believes that the Northern Ireland Prison Service should bear them. Is he suggesting that, for the variable costs of two prisoners, we should sit down and do the calculation? If the prisoners from Northern Ireland come, should we ask them, "How many Weetabix did you have today, and how much milk did you take with the Weetabix?" Should we ask those questions because we are going to send a bill to Northern Ireland, because we are going to have an accountant draw it up, because we have to verify the costs, because we are going to get a cheque sent back, and because we are going to lodge that cheque? That is the SNP's idea of proper accounting and recovery of costs. SNP members have nothing better to do than consider minutiae and trivial matters, as is their wont. The principles are far more important than worrying about the number of Rice Krispies or Weetabix that anyone consumes at a particular time. The SNP misses the whole point. The SNP suggests that the issue could have come to the Scottish Parliament and that we could  have rushed through a bill. Oh yes—we could have rushed through a bill. But would the SNP, in its wisdom, have said that it regarded the bill as emergency legislation and that everything else should be abandoned to rush it through? I do not think so. I think that we would have heard SNP weasel words demanding full scrutiny. Stewart Maxwell let the cat out of the bag. He wants full consultation with every community in Scotland that might have to take a prisoner who is transferred. He does not want to upset the peace process, but he wants to go to all the communities around prisons and have full debates on whether those prisoners should come over here. If he does not think that that would stoke up problems in those communities, who is he kidding? He is certainly kidding no one here. We are dealing with this matter properly. We have given it proper consideration. We have reserved the right to say no, and we, yet again, are the ones who are behaving responsibly while the SNP postures, gestures and avoids difficult decisions.

We are asked to agree that an amendment should be made to the Justice (Northern Ireland) Bill to provide for the compulsory transfer of prisoners from Northern Ireland and that that amendment should be considered by the United Kingdom Parliament. It is right that, in our jurisdiction, we should be able to play a part in the peace process, if required. However, I emphasise to members that the power that is sought would be reserved and would be used only in exceptional circumstances when all other options open to the Northern Ireland Prison Service had been tried. The Minister for Justice, Cathy Jamieson, has made it clear that the power would be considered only in one or two cases. She also has the right to refuse a transfer of prisoners. Further, if it was felt appropriate, after a transfer had been agreed, that the prisoners should be transferred back to the Northern Ireland jurisdiction, that would be done at the minister's request. It is appropriate that we consider the Sewel mechanism for the measure. I do not believe that we need a full parliamentary bill to consider a measure that might never be used and which might be used in only one or two circumstances. We have many important issues to consider in the Parliament and I believe that the Sewel mechanism is appropriate in this case. I hope that all members will show their commitment to the peace process and agree that, if the measure is required in exceptional circumstances and poses no threat to the security and stability of our prison service, we are prepared to consider the transfer of prisoners as stated. I move, That the Parliament agrees that an amendment should be made to the Justice (Northern Ireland) Bill to provide for the compulsory transfer of prisoners from Northern Ireland to Scotland and that this should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The primary focus of the SDEA has been, and will continue to be, to work closely with law enforcement partners to combat the damage that is caused to Scotland's communities by drug trafficking and other forms of serious and organised crime.

There are two distinct aspects to that question. First, the SDEA works closely with partner agencies elsewhere in the United Kingdom and Europe. Co-operation, involving the gathering and sharing of information, intelligence and experience, has been effective in helping the agency to achieve its widely acknowledged success. There will be close co-operation with other parts of the United Kingdom in applying such an approach in Scotland and, specifically, in Aberdeen. On the second part of the question, the First Minister has made it clear that he is keen for the money that is seized from those who are engaged in drug dealing and other illegal activity to be used to benefit the communities that have been most directly affected by that crime. We are considering a range of proposals in that regard and we hope to make an announcement on that in the near future. We are determined to ensure that the communities that have been worst and most directly affected benefit from any assets that are recovered.

We are currently examining treatment and rehabilitation services. Medical services in local communities will be a matter for local health boards, which will need to take into account many aspects of clinical treatment, of dependency and of the needs of the individual. I am not sure that the conclusions that Rosemary Byrne draws are necessarily correct, but I would be confident that those who are responsible for those services in local communities will do  everything in their power to ensure that the best possible service is delivered to those who need it at the earliest possible opportunity.

There are clearly concerns if people are misusing or abusing methadone. Specific examples of such abuse should be reported to the appropriate agencies. It is necessary to consider the environment in which methadone is both prescribed and consumed. Any steps that can be taken to improve confidentiality and privacy, as well as security, will be considered. We are aware that some people continue to abuse and misuse methadone, and whatever steps can be taken will be taken.

Yes. The Executive believes that mediation can be a useful mechanism for resolving disputes effectively and efficiently. We strongly support it and we are keen to encourage its use where that is feasible and appropriate. The Executive provides support and funding for a range of mediation and advice services, and we are actively considering with key stakeholders what further action could be taken to encourage greater use.

Yes. Fife Council has a commendable record in using mediation to resolve disputes; it has been doing so for many years. A number of authorities throughout Scotland are increasingly looking at the effectiveness of mediation services. As Marilyn Livingstone indicated, those services can help to keep claims out of courts and to keep costs down. They can also help to resolve disputes quickly, which is just as significant. It is not only in local authority services that mediation can make an impact. Recently, I had meetings with a number of private sector organisations that appreciate the value of mediation. We are keen to support its use where it can have a beneficial effect.

It is a matter for local authorities to determine how they can best communicate with local organisations and communities. The Executive has certainly invested significantly in improving local authority services. Indeed, the moneys that Margaret Curran recently announced to tackle antisocial behaviour will make a significant difference to local authorities that are engaged in developing a range of services to tackle such behaviour, part of which can involve mediation and counselling. I am sure that the authorities will put that money to good use and hope that, as Jeremy Purvis suggests, they will try to communicate effectively with local inhabitants.

We have listened to the Justice 1 Committee's concerns and we note the committee's opposition to an accused being tried in their absence from the outset. We are aware that amendments may be lodged on that at stage 2 and we will reflect on such amendments.

The deadline for Executive amendments has passed, so we do not have that opportunity. However, I am aware that at least one amendment on that topic has been lodged and there may be more. We take seriously the points that the Justice 1 Committee made. We also note that the committee said that it would at least consider the possibility of trials being held in the absence of the accused where all the evidence has been led. We share the committee's view that far too many trials are abandoned because someone absconds, which affects far too many people, such as witnesses, who can suffer trauma and turmoil. Justice is denied when an accused absconds. We believe that abandoned trials go against everything that we are trying to do to ensure that justice in Scotland is seen to be working effectively for everyone. We are committed to a safer and stronger Scotland. As part of that, we need a court system that works for everyone concerned and which ensures that victims and witnesses have a sense of commitment and achievement from the justice system and that they do not feel that it is balanced the other way.

Yes, we will certainly consider that. We must try to find out why some accused persons fail to appear for trial. The more information we have, the more that can inform current decisions and future ones. I believe that, across the Parliament, we are all committed—from the committee's discussions, I know that it is committed—to seeing the improvements that have been mentioned take effect. It is wrong that one or two people, having made a perverse decision that is often an attempt to deny justice, can have such a devastating and costly effect not only on the court system, but on the wider community.

As well as the Scottish Prison Service, a number of voluntary organisations provide education and recognised training that aim to improve the skills of prisoners. The Scottish Prison Service is also working with employer representatives to enable prisoners who are leaving custody to access employment opportunities.

Very much so. The number of people from some sort of disadvantaged background who end up in prison is a tragedy, although that is not to excuse their criminality. Sometimes, during the time that they are in prison, they are not adequately or properly prepared for their release. If they do not have the proper skills or educational background, they are left at a greater disadvantage when they come out of prison. I recognise the role that the use of libraries, reading and other such educational skills play in the development of the policy. We are equally concerned to ensure that the preparation of prisoners for release during the time that they are in prison is absolutely consistent with the support  that is given to them upon release. One of the things that we are concerned to do is to get the different parts of the system working more effectively. That is why we are consulting on the creation of a single agency.

It has been a privilege to listen to the debate because those parties that espouse independence have allowed us to see something of the parallel universe that they inhabit. It has been incredible to listen to some of the comments about the proposals. In some ways, the lack of understanding has been profoundly depressing.  For example, John Swinburne talked about the powers going to England and Mark Ballard spoke about other issues. The bill involves issues that are the responsibility of the United Kingdom Government. In Scotland, we elect people to go to Westminster to represent us; they do that effectively. [ Laughter. ] SNP members may laugh about the contribution that other SNP members make at Westminster—frankly, their contribution is at times beyond a joke. We have heard suggestions that we should be allowed to lodge amendments to proposed legislation that is being considered at Westminster. I do not know whether the members that suggested that wish Westminster to have the opportunity to suggest amendments to proposed legislation that this Parliament is considering.

It is cabaret time. Yes, Patrick.

How long have I got, Presiding Officer? It is hardly worth getting into. We have a UK Parliament with UK responsibilities and a Scottish Parliament with Scottish responsibilities. The motion before the Parliament relates to emergency provision, which is the responsibility of the UK Parliament. There are different aspects to this matter. Mark Ballard and others have confused the power of Scottish ministers to make regulations under part 1, which relates to preparing for emergencies and is devolved, with part 2, which relates to responding to emergencies and is reserved. Without this Sewel motion, the Parliament would not have been able to discuss the latter issue, which is a UK responsibility.

No, I think that we have heard enough, thank you very much. We are discussing matters that are competent for us to consider and that would be affected by the emergency planning system that is being considered by the UK Parliament. The UK Government is conferring certain powers back to Scottish ministers to allow them to respond in the  event of an emergency. I would have thought that some people in the Parliament would have welcomed that. A member queried the difference in regulations between Scotland and the rest of the UK. In fact, consultation is required between Scottish and UK ministers to ensure commonality. If we had different bills for Scotland and the rest of the country, we would not have common regulations—by definition, we would have different legislation. We are able to look at commonality of regulations purely because we are using the same legislation. Margo MacDonald posed a quite legitimate question to SNP members when she asked why they are not opposing this motion. They are not happy about our pursuing the matter in this way, so they have decided not to vote. However, they realise that important issues need to be voted on and are quite happy for the rest of us to do so. If that is not cowardice, I do not know what it is. They might have been opposed to the bill on a matter of principle, as the Green party members are, although I disagree with them. However, SNP members should not tell us that certain aspects of the bill are so important that they should be agreed to, but that they should be agreed to by the rest of us and not by them because they do not want to dirty their hands. Although this is an important issue and there have been one or two significant speeches, a number of speeches have trivialised the matter before us. Frankly, we can do better than that.

Members will be aware that last week the Justice 1 Committee considered a memorandum on the Sewel motion on the Civil Contingencies Bill, which is on preparing for and dealing with emergencies. The bill's purpose is to provide a single framework for civil protection throughout the United Kingdom that will be able to meet the challenges of the 21 st century. The bill is not to address specifically any terrorist threat, but deals with planning for any disruptive event that might go beyond organisations' day-to-day ability to cope. The bill has two distinct parts. Part 1 will place broad duties on organisations that are involved in responding to emergencies. Category 1 responders are the key emergency response organisations, for example, the police and local authorities. Category 2 responders are organisations that support an emergency response, such as utilities companies. Their duties will be to assess the risk of emergencies' occurring, to plan for such emergencies, to promote business continuity advice and to co-operate and share information on preparing plans. Emergency planning is devolved to Scottish ministers; part 1 of the bill will therefore require Parliament's consent. At last week's meeting of the Justice 1 Committee, I set out the reasons why we believe the measures in the UK bill should be welcomed and implemented in Scotland. We need to ensure that there are consistent standards of civil protection throughout Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom. We need to have clear responsibilities for front-line responders and we need to modernise the legislative tools that are available to Government to deal with the most serious emergencies. Part 2 of the bill will update the powers that central Government has for dealing with the most severe emergencies. It will allow the UK Government to declare an emergency, including on regional emergencies, and to make emergency regulations to deal with the prevailing circumstances. Scottish ministers will be able to request that a state of emergency be declared in Scotland and regulations might confer on Scottish  ministers powers to assist them in co-ordinating the response to an emergency in Scotland. We have considered the results of extensive consultation and concluded that there was widespread support among the emergency planning community for a common framework for civil protection throughout the United Kingdom. Many of the threats that we face are no respecters of national boundaries. We believe, therefore, that it is important for Scotland that we are assured about the standard of civil protection arrangements in other parts of the United Kingdom and vice versa. However, the Justice 1 Committee asked me three questions about matters on which it felt it had insufficient reassurance and information. The first was on monitoring and how we will ensure that responders adhere to the requirements of the bill. For the first time, the bill will allow regulations to ensure that a uniform set of standards will be maintained throughout the emergency planning community. Arrangements for standards and audits have not been finalised, but they will be considered among other regulations under the bill—there might be elements of monitoring by existing inspectorates or by self-audit, and there might be a role for Audit Scotland. I was asked whether the bill would be funding neutral and gave the assurance that it would be; it remains our contention that that will be the case. Many of the requirements in the bill are measures that emergency responders already perform and for which they receive funding through grant-aided expenditure. We will consult on draft regulations that will underpin the bill and we will explore with respondents the impact of any regulations before implementation of the bill. I made a commitment to the committee that any new functions that require funding will be financed by the Scottish Executive. Members of the committee asked why there was—as they thought—no reference to the Scottish Executive in the bill. I gave an explanation of that at the time, but can further clarify the matter today. Clause 21(2)(l) talks about "protecting or restoring activities of Her Majesty's Government" and clause 21(2)(m) talks about "protecting or restoring activities of Parliament, of the Scottish Parliament, of the Northern Ireland Assembly or of the National Assembly for Wales". The committee asked why the Scottish Executive was not specifically referred to at that point. However, clause 21(2)(n) talks about "protecting or restoring the performance of public functions" and paragraph (d) in clause 30(1) of the bill  provides a definition of "public functions", saying that it means "functions of the Scottish Ministers". Scottish ministers are, therefore, specifically included as part of the public functions. We believe that, as well as Parliament's being protected, the functions of ministers in the Scottish Executive will also be protected. I hope that, with that further reassurance, Parliament can agree to the motion. I move, That the Parliament agrees the principle of a single statutory framework for civil protection across the UK, as set out in the Civil Contingencies Bill, and agrees that the relevant provisions in the Bill should be considered by the UK Parliament.

At the end of a good and constructive process of trying to improve the system of justice for witnesses and victims of crime, it is somewhat unfortunate that Bill Aitken could not resist the usual cheap Conservative party jibes. It is almost as if that party's members have received instructions from elsewhere to include certain phrases in every debate, regardless of its subject matter. Bill Aitken suggested that Cathy Jamieson spoke exclusively about keeping people out of prison, but I can only conclude that he was half listening. While she spoke at great length about alternatives to custody and keeping those for whom prison is inappropriate out of prison, she has also said on many occasions that those who deserve imprisonment—those who commit serious crimes—should receive serious and lengthy prison sentences. It is fair to consider that Cathy Jamieson has been asking for a balanced approach. The bill is part of a justice revolution that the Parliament is undertaking, which addresses issues such as the reform of the High Court, the summary justice system and alternatives to custody. As a number of members said, for the first time in many years, serious consideration is being given to those who have been overlooked by the judicial system. Stewart Stevenson said this morning that witnesses and victims are often forgotten by the system and that is true. As Bill Aitken said in his contribution, victims and witnesses often feel the pressures of intimidation in court and before they enter court. It is unfortunate that they also often feel intimidated after the court case has concluded. We want to accelerate the judicial process and we have made some other proposals to that end. We want to examine issues such as bail, and we await with interest the discussion that we will have on that issue in the coming months. The bill offers us a collective opportunity—which, I am delighted to say, parties across the Parliament have taken—to do something for those at the sharp end of the justice system, who are often forgotten. As Margaret Smith said, the bill enables us to show greater humanity in our judicial process. Mike Pringle said earlier that the experience of witnesses in the judicial system has not been good. As Nicola Sturgeon said this morning, we now have the opportunity to enable evidence to be given in a less stressful manner. It is right to say, as she did, that the bill serves the best interests of justice by enabling the best evidence to be given and heard.  A number of members said this morning that they are concerned to ensure that what we are presenting is part of other changes that might not necessarily be included in the bill. Jackie Baillie and Maureen Macmillan said that we should ensure that something is on the record about guidance and other things that are being done by the Executive and the Crown Office. It is right that such pressure should be put on us. Karen Whitefield was right to speak about some of the work that will be done by the victims and witnesses unit. If we are serious about this bill making a difference, we should ensure that the finances are in place and that the necessary commitment exists on the part of the Lord Advocate, the Crown Office and others, as Annabel Goldie and others said. We should not only produce strategies, but ensure that we deliver on the strategies that we produce. We want to deliver on the recommendations of the Lord Advocate's report on support for child witnesses and we want to see proper implementation of victim statement and victim notification systems. We want a full and effective witness service to be delivered and we want to see more effective victim support for people who turn up in court. We are right to consider the piloting of the vulnerable witnesses service and some of the other measures that have been introduced. Essentially, the bill has enabled us to create a partnership in the Parliament, to work together to serve the best interests of people who have often been badly served by the judicial system. We are also working in partnership with a range of organisations that have tried to make a difference for victims and witnesses for many years and which have done a remarkable and effective job. We have enabled them to influence our parliamentary process and to influence legislation. Although I recognise that some of the changes have not gone as far as Jackie Baillie, Patrick Harvie and other members would have liked, we can demonstrate to organisations that we have listened and delivered. We will continue to review, to monitor and to reflect. I argue that this is a good day for the Scottish Parliament; a good day for those whom we represent; a good day for victims and witnesses; and a good day for a judicial system that has long been in need of a shake-up and overhaul. I hope that we see the bill as part of a process that has much further to go.

The issue of training has been raised a number of times during stages 1 and 2. The Executive is in no doubt that training and awareness raising are of vital importance to the successful implementation of the bill. That is why training and awareness raising will be a key priority for the victims and witnesses unit. I am keen to ensure that all the professionals and volunteers who are involved in supporting vulnerable witnesses are given opportunities to improve and enhance their skills at identifying the needs of witnesses. That has to be done by ensuring that they give proper consideration to witnesses and that they provide witnesses with the right help to enable them to give their best evidence. There is a great deal of expertise, knowledge and good will across Scotland and the unit will look to bringing that together so that people can share best practice. The unit will also want to ensure that every organisation is involved in training its staff. We will aim to ensure that there are clear training guidelines and that the relevant organisations are engaged in developing them. I am aware of examples of good practice that are taking place already. For instance, Sheriff Principal Morrison, director of judicial studies, has said that the Judicial Studies Committee is developing training on child and vulnerable witnesses. The committee will use the guidance on questioning children in court, which we published last year, to help with that. The Executive has been in discussion with the Faculty of Advocates, the Crown Office and others to ensure that significant attention is given to the provision of training for people who are engaged in the process. We believe that the collaborative approach is the best one and that it is not necessary to impose duties by statute. In practice, it is not clear that amendment 66 would achieve the desired effect of ensuring that training takes place. I agree entirely with Annabel Goldie that, in the worst-case scenario, the amendment could even hold up the bill's implementation. From discussions with Mike Pringle, I know that that is not his intention. I hope  that I have given him sufficient reassurance on the record to enable him to withdraw amendment 66.

I understand the sentiments behind Patrick Harvie's amendments and I know that a number of organisations have raised concerns that therapy is often discouraged before a child witness gives evidence. I realise that it is sometimes felt that inconsistent advice is given on whether therapy should be put on hold until after the child has given evidence. One of the main aims of the bill is to ensure that child witnesses get the help and support that they need to give their best evidence. It is equally important that they should get any help that they need before the trial. I assure Patrick Harvie that the Executive takes the matter very seriously. As part of producing the child witness consultation document in 2002, we have already consulted on a draft code of practice on the provision of therapy to child witnesses in criminal trials and children's hearings court proceedings. As a result of that consultation, we have established a multi-agency steering group on the provision of therapy to child witnesses. The purpose of the group is to revise and finalise guidance on pre-trial therapy for all those involved with children and the law. It is intended that the guidance will clarify that therapy should not be discouraged and will establish guidelines on how therapy can be provided while avoiding the risk of contaminating evidence. I hope that that addresses some of Bill Aitken's points.

The group has already had its first meeting, so progress is already being made on this important matter. The valuable work of the group should meet the concerns that lie behind amendment 49. It is far preferable that this issue be addressed in that way rather than in legislation. In response to Maureen Macmillan's concerns, I am happy to put on record the commitment that was given to her in my letter of 7 January 2004. With Maureen Macmillan's permission, I am happy for the letter to be made a public document and to be made available to anyone who wishes to scrutinise it. I hope that she will accept that doing that will confirm our commitment on the points that she raised. Based on my assurances, I hope that Patrick Harvie will feel able to withdraw amendment 49.

The Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Bill gives the court a discretionary power to prohibit the accused from conducting his or her own defence in cases involving vulnerable witnesses. Karen Whitefield lodged an amendment at stage 2 to prevent automatically an accused from conducting his or her own defence in violence cases involving child witnesses under 12 years of age. The Executive was happy to support that amendment. However, we have identified that the bill as drafted does not extend either the automatic or the new discretionary ban to any proofs that are required as a result of victim statements. That could mean that, although an alleged victim has been given the extra protection of not being cross-examined by the accused in person at the trial, he or she could still have to face questioning by the accused at a proof relating to his or her making of a victim statement. Amendments 8, 11, 13 and 14 close off that possibility by ensuring that, when an accused is prohibited from conducting his or her own case as a result of the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Bill, he or she may not conduct his or her own case at any proof relating to victim statements either. That is the approach already adopted in sexual offences cases as regards victim statements. Amendments 23 and 24 are consequential amendments to reflect those changes in the long title. I move amendment 8.

Colin Fox is right to highlight the fact that the measures in the amendments are not being taken in isolation. We want to ensure consistency in all matters relating to court proceedings. Too often, we have seen the tragic consequences of inconsistency. It is right to give protection. In a number of cases, as has been highlighted, there have been very traumatic and distressing occurrences in court, which have led to distressing and tragic consequences. I am happy to put on record the fact that Colin Fox is right to highlight some of the other work that we are doing. The amendments are part of a package.  Amendment 8 agreed to.  Amendments 9 to 14 moved—[Hugh Henry]—and agreed to.

Amendment 16 amends sections 71, 71A and 72A of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, as a consequence of new sections 288ZE and 288E of the 1995 act as inserted by the bill. Section 288ZE makes it mandatory that an accused must not conduct his own defence in certain types of offences that involve a child witness under the age of 12 who is to give evidence in the trial. Section 288E gives the court a discretionary power to prohibit an accused from conducting his own defence in a case involving a vulnerable witness, where the court is satisfied that it is in the interests of the witness to do so. Currently, section 71 of the 1995 act provides for the court at a first diet in the sheriff court to establish whether an accused who is prohibited from conducting his own defence has legal representation for the trial. That applies in all sexual offence cases. Section 71A of the 1995 act provides in sexual offence cases for a further pre-trial diet to follow a first diet in the sheriff court where it is established at the first diet that the accused is legally  represented, but his or her solicitor is subsequently dismissed or withdraws. Such a solicitor will be under a duty to notify the court of what has happened. The court will then fix a further pre-trial diet that the accused will be required to attend. The effect of the amendments to sections 71 and 71A of the 1995 act is to extend the existing provisions so that they relate not only to sexual offence cases, but to cases involving vulnerable witnesses under new sections 288ZE and 288E of the 1995 act as inserted by the bill. Currently, section 72A of the 1995 act makes it mandatory for the holding of a pre-trial diet in all sexual offences cases to be tried in the High Court, unless dispensed with by the court following an application by the accused's solicitor. The amendment to section 72A of the 1995 act will extend the existing provision so that pre-trial diets will also be mandatory in other High Court cases in which an accused is prohibited from conducting his own defence. Section 2(4) of the bill, as it is currently drafted, provides that in summary proceedings the court must check at an intermediate diet whether there are any vulnerable witnesses in the case. It does that by inserting the relevant provisions into section 148 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995. Intermediate diets are mandatory in summary proceedings in the sheriff court in most parts of the country, but not in some of the smaller outlying courts. We intend to plug that gap by providing that, if an intermediate diet is not held in summary proceedings, the court must consider those matters at the trial diet before the first witness is sworn. The bill already does something similar with regard to the High Court when there has been no preliminary diet. Amendment 18 creates an equivalent provision for summary proceedings in the sheriff court in which there has been no intermediate diet. Amendment 15 is consequential to amendments 16 and 18. I move amendment 15.  Amendment 15 agreed to.

I do not know how to follow that contribution. I can understand members' concerns about an accused being present when evidence is taken on commission. In particular I thank Mike Pringle for his involvement in highlighting the matter. We share those concerns, which is why we lodged an amendment at stage 2 to ensure that the court rather than the commissioner decides whether the accused should be present. The bill as drafted sets out the general rule that the accused should not be at a commission. It is our view that it would be only in exceptional cases that an accused would be allowed to be present for evidence on commission. There must be a very good reason for the accused to be allowed in before that would happen. For example, the witness could be a defence witness whose vulnerability has nothing to do with any relationship to the accused, and who might even prefer the accused to be there. Amendment 47 would be a useful addition to the bill because it would allow flexibility to have an exception, when needed, to allow the accused to be present during evidence on commission. Mike Pringle's amendment would further strengthen the aim that there needs to be a very good reason for the accused to be present and I am happy to support it.

During the bill's progress, Mike Pringle and others asked whether its provisions should apply in the district court. There are good reasons why we think that that would not be appropriate at this time, not least of which is the fact that Sheriff Principal McInnes is undertaking a review of summary justice. However, the bill gives ministers the power to extend special provisions to the district court, subject to the approval of the Scottish Parliament. It also contains provisions that allow for the prohibition of the accused from conducting his or her own defence, and we believe that we should provide for the possibility that those provisions could be included in the power to extend special provisions to the district court, in case it was appropriate to do so at some point in the future. Amendment 6 will therefore delete the provision to extend special measures to the district court and amendment 19 will replace that power with a more comprehensive power, which will cover both special measures and the prohibition of an accused from conducting his or her own defence. Amendments 7, 9 and 12 are minor, technical amendments which complement the extended power that is created by amendment 19 and are simply designed to clarify that the bill's provisions do not apply to the district court. Amendment 7 will ensure that the provisions in section 2 that relate to consideration before the trial of matters relating to vulnerable witnesses apply only to intermediate diets and to summary proceedings in the sheriff court and not to intermediate diets in the district court. Amendment 9 will ensure that new section 288ZE of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, which prohibits an accused from conducting his or her own defence in certain cases involving child witnesses under 12, does not apply to  proceedings in the district court. Similarly, amendment 12 will ensure that new section 288E, which gives the court the discretion to prohibit an accused from conducting their own defence in a case involving vulnerable witnesses, does not apply to proceedings in the district court. I move amendment 6.

I am happy to give that assurance.

I understand fully the sentiment behind what Patrick Harvie says and a range of organisations in Scotland favour the use of intermediaries. However, if he had continued to read from the report that he quoted, he would have seen a page or two further on comments from the Minister for Justice, Cathy Jamieson, that suggest that she is sympathetic to the principle of what he proposes. I gave an assurance to the committee at stage 2 that the Executive is not opposed in principle to the use of intermediaries. However, given the diversity of opinion on the use of intermediaries and the different ways in which they are used throughout the world, we believe that more work needs to be done before we can come up with a proposal that is suitable to the needs of witnesses in the Scottish context. Colin Fox highlighted some of the concerns that we need to address before we proceed with use of intermediaries. There is a great deal of sympathy for the idea, but we need to ensure that we get it right for the reasons that Annabel Goldie and Karen Whitefield outlined. I said at stage 2 that we would consider the pilot schemes in England and Wales. My officials are in regular contact with the Home Office, and the Executive's new victims and witnesses unit will be informed of the progress of those pilot schemes. If Cathy Jamieson or I have the opportunity to do so, we will visit at least one of those—possibly the one on Merseyside—to see how well they are working and whether they could work here.  It is right that we should await the outcome of those pilot schemes before we decide whether to introduce intermediaries in Scotland. As Annabel Goldie said, it would be a major step to introduce a procedure that prevents the legal representative for a party from directly questioning a witness. Because of that, the subject requires detailed consideration. I can, however, give an explicit assurance to Patrick Harvie and Parliament that the issue will not be forgotten by the Executive. We are not ruling out the possibility of introducing intermediaries as a special measure in the future; however, we want to wait and see how they work. We also need to be clear about the best way in which they could be used within the Scottish justice system, which is very different not just to the English system, but to other legal systems elsewhere in the world in which intermediaries are deployed. The exact role of an intermediary in Scotland would need to be clearly determined before legislation could be drafted. There is a power in the bill to add special measures by way of statutory instrument, so intermediaries or other measures could be added once further work on the matter has been undertaken. That would be done by an instrument that was subject to the affirmative procedure, which would require full parliamentary scrutiny and an opportunity for debate. We think that it would be better to wait and learn from others' experience before rushing into the introduction of intermediaries. We should try to get it right at the start. I hope that Patrick Harvie can take some reassurance from my comments, and I ask him to consider seeking to withdraw amendment 34.

The bill will give to all child witnesses an automatic right to special measures. Furthermore, in cases of sexual or violent crime, it will give extra protection to child witnesses under the age of 12. For those most vulnerable child witnesses, the bill creates a presumption that they should not have to attend court to give evidence. Moreover, as a result of amendments that were lodged by Karen Whitefield at stage 2 and supported by the Executive, there will now be a prohibition on an accused from conducting his or her own defence in cases of violence that would involve child witnesses under 12. Amendments 3 and 10 seek to add to the list of cases where child witnesses under 12 receive extra protection the offences of plagium, which involves the theft of a child, and abduction. The amendments are based on helpful suggestions that were made by the Law Society of Scotland at stage 2 and I am grateful to the society for its input. If agreed to, the amendments will ensure that in such cases a child witness under 12 will not have to undergo face-to-face cross-examination by the accused, or have to attend the court to give his or her evidence. On amendments 17 and 25, I have already said that Karen Whitefield lodged amendments at stage 2 that sought to create an automatic prohibition on the accused's conducting his own defence in cases of violent crime that involve child witnesses under 12. We supported that and said that we would lodge any necessary amendments to ensure that it would work in practice. One area that we have identified is that of precognition by the accused. Our view is that the new automatic ban could be undermined if the accused was allowed in person to precognosce a young child witness in such a case. As a result, amendment 17 seeks to ensure that the court may not grant a warrant for the citation for precognition by the accused in person of any child under 12 in the same cases as apply to the new automatic prohibition. Amendment 25 is a consequential amendment to the bill's long title. I move amendment 3.  Amendment 3 agreed to.

The amendments would mean that hearings would have to be fixed in all applications for special measures unless they had been dispensed with by the court on the application of parties. Similar amendments were lodged by Nicola Sturgeon at stage 2, when I said that I would give the matter further consideration.  We have considered and reconsidered whether the bill strikes the right balance and whether the concerns that Nicola Sturgeon and Annabel Goldie have expressed are sufficient to warrant our changing direction and considering whether the party not calling the witness should be able to object to a vulnerable witness application. However, we still have concerns that the creation of such a right would strike at the very heart of the bill—it is not an incidental issue. The vulnerable witness application provision is about enabling our most vulnerable witnesses to get the help that they need in court, which is what is driving us. Therefore, I wonder whether we should send out the signal that that provision is something to which people can object. I agree with Maureen Macmillan that a right to object could also lead to further delays in cases if more hearings were required and to greater uncertainty for vulnerable witnesses. Maureen Macmillan is right because what we might reasonably expect to be the exception in relation to an appeal would, I suggest, very quickly  become the norm because lawyers would believe that by appealing in cases involving vulnerable witnesses, they would be doing the best for their clients. We have heard during the debate about the need for cases involving vulnerable witnesses to be heard as quickly as possible. Jackie Baillie and other members spoke about the terrible pressures and stresses that are associated with giving evidence. I suggest that amendment 37 could, unfortunately, be a backward step in the drive to achieve our aim, although I accept that that is not Nicola Sturgeon's intention. A right to object would also add another layer of bureaucracy and could have an adverse impact on court programming because assigned hearings would have to be dispensed with at the last minute. Amendment 39 appears to be a stand-alone amendment that would enable the party not calling the vulnerable witness to seek a review against the decision that had been taken by a court to allow the use of special measures. The bill already allows a hearing to be fixed—at which the parties would be heard—when a court is not satisfied about a witness's vulnerability. As I said earlier, the bill's provisions are trying to ensure as far as possible that witnesses who are identified as being vulnerable receive the help that they need to give their evidence. If a culture change is to be brought about, parties should begin to view special measures as simply extra support that certain witnesses need in order to be able to speak up, which will not affect a trial's conduct or fairness. Even when the use of special measures is allowed, it will not affect a party's ability to question adequately or test the evidence of a vulnerable witness. Therefore, all Nicola Sturgeon's amendments are unnecessary. They could unwittingly undermine the support that vulnerable witnesses should receive as a result of the bill. I recognise that Nicola Sturgeon has the best of intentions, but I ask her to consider seeking to withdraw amendment 37. If she does not do so, I hope that members will oppose amendment 37.

No, I am certainly not trying to politicise the argument. The repeated adjournments to which Nicola Sturgeon refers are also to some extent the consequence of the due process of law and we are considering that matter through a range of legislative measures. The question is how to minimise the unnecessary delays that are caused by the due process of law. Just because something is happening because of the due process of law does not necessarily make it right, nor does it mitigate the worst consequences for those who are affected. We accept that there is a great deal of anxiety and uncertainty—Jackie Baillie is right to highlight the impact of delays on vulnerable witnesses. We have tried throughout the bill to minimise potential delays that could arise through the application for, or use of, special measures. For example, the bill as it is currently drafted has a streamlined procedure for child witness notices, which should help to reduce the possibility of delays, and it allows for hearings on child witness notices to take place only when the court is not satisfied with the notice. In addition, as Jackie Baillie indicated, we were happy to support Karen Whitefield's comprehensive amendments at stage 2, which will further streamline the procedure for many child witness notices where standard special measures are requested. In passing, I remind members that the Executive is engaged in a range of work to tackle the issue of delays and constant adjournments. For example, the Criminal Procedure (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill contains proposals to improve the efficiency with which justice is delivered through the High Court. That bill should ensure that High Court cases proceed to trial only when they are ready. It is also intended to remove the culture of  adjournment in those proceedings. The McInnes summary justice review is due to report soon with recommendations for more efficient and effective delivery of summary justice. In principle, we agree that, wherever possible, parties that call child witnesses should have proper regard to the need to progress matters expeditiously. I am aware that the Crown Office already seeks to do so, as far as is consistent with ensuring the fair and effective conduct of proceedings. It is also worth noting existing policy in the sheriff courts, as documented in the Cox Nicholson report on court programming, which states: "There are certain categories of business in which evidence is led which ... should be given priority in assigning a diet. These include criminal and civil cases involving children as witnesses or where children are the subject matter of the case in question ... Similarly ... such cases should be afforded priority on the day of the assigned diet, in the event that a number of cases are proceeding." Again, that must be subject to certain caveats, but it demonstrates that the courts are alive to such issues. However, we cannot support the amendments. We are grateful to Jackie Baillie for raising such an important issue and we understand and are sympathetic to her intentions, but we do not believe that the amendments would be workable in practice or that they would achieve the desired effects. The amendments would place a duty on the court to ensure that child witnesses are dealt with quickly. Of course, we are keen to ensure that cases that involve children proceed with minimum delays—in the reforms that we are proposing for the High Court, the intention is that cases will be more effectively managed to ensure that time limits are met. However, the parties to a case and not the court decide which witnesses to call and when, depending on how they wish to present their cases. Therefore, although the amendments are well intentioned, their focus is misplaced. Thankfully, the Crown and others are becoming increasingly aware of the need to manage cases with a sensitivity to the needs of child witnesses and I encourage all parties that call child witnesses to bear in mind the potential effects that long waits could have on them. That is one of the issues that is specifically covered in the guidance on questioning children in court that we published last year. That guidance, which we developed in partnership with the Crown Office, the Faculty of Advocates, the Law Society of Scotland and the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration, sets out best practice for all practitioners who are involved in calling child witnesses and should act  as a benchmark against which practices are judged. Such quality standard setting, rather than changes to the law of evidence, is the best way forward to achieve improvements in practice. It is also worth bearing in mind the fact that the amendments contain no sanctions for failing. Indeed, it is unclear what could be considered an appropriate sanction if the court fails in its duty to take a child witness's evidence expeditiously. The only effective sanction might be that the party would not be able to call the witness at all, but that would not be in the interests of anyone if it meant that the case had to be brought to an end and the child's evidence was never heard. I hope that Jackie Baillie can be persuaded that changes that we are introducing and the change in culture and procedures that we are pursuing will have the same desired effect and that she will agree not to press the amendments.

I am happy to give Maureen Macmillan the assurances that she seeks. She has raised a valid point. We would be concerned about any unintended consequences and we recognise that a failure to adopt and embrace what we are proposing could leave some people vulnerable. I am willing to place on record the fact that we are prepared to see through what I said in my letter to Maureen Macmillan. If anyone wishes to see a copy of that letter, we are happy, with her permission, to share it.

I share the concerns that Jackie Baillie has raised. She is absolutely right to highlight some of the horrific consequences that can be caused by delays. She refers to the trauma and distress that undue delay can cause and the Executive is entirely sympathetic to what she intends to achieve. However, I do not think that the amendments would necessarily achieve the desired effect.  I do not wish to run ahead to amendments that we will be considering in groups still to come. However, although I sympathise with Nicola Sturgeon's desire to eliminate delays, I should point out that a set of amendments that we will come to later—some of which Nicola Sturgeon lodged—would, I believe, lead to further delays in the system. I hope that she will be able to reflect on the sincere point that she is making about the avoidance of delay.

I fully understand Jackie Baillie's view that some categories of witnesses should automatically be considered to be vulnerable. That view, which has been restated today, was also expressed by Maureen Macmillan at stage 2. I know that the issue was raised in the stage 1 report and during the stage 1 debate. As Jackie Baillie has indicated, we have made some progress and have given certain commitments, which in many respects go in the direction in which Jackie Baillie and others wish to move. At stage 2, I gave an undertaking that the Executive would consider the matter again. Along with our colleagues in the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, we take such matters very seriously. We have thought carefully about whether the bill should be amended or whether the commitments that we have given are the best way to go. Our conclusion is that the bill as it stands probably represents the right way forward. We have given certain commitments. As Jackie Baillie indicated, I wrote her a letter in which I raised a number of issues. I want to put on record the fact that we fully stand by the commitments that we made in that letter. If the letter would be helpful to members, it will, with Jackie Baillie's  permission, be available for public consideration. The Executive considers that the letter probably does as much as is required. During the discussions, the Executive identified some significant practical measures that we consider will help to ensure that witnesses are given proper consideration for special measures and that vulnerable witnesses do not slip through the net. Jackie Baillie and Maureen Macmillan have been right to say that we need to sensitise the system so that it is better at identifying people who need additional help to give evidence, whether because of a mental disorder or for any other reason. Organisations throughout the justice service are already aware of the Executive's commitment to making the bill work and to ensuring that genuinely vulnerable witnesses do not fall through the net. We want to ensure that agencies and organisations work together to raise awareness so that such people are identified and their needs are recognised. However, we do not believe that it is right to do that by legal definitions in the bill or simply by labelling people as vulnerable. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service plays a pivotal role and I wish to put on record two commitments that it has made, which the Executive believes will go a long way towards ensuring that vulnerable witnesses are identified. First, the Lord Advocate has given a commitment to issuing instructions to the police on the identification and reporting of vulnerable witnesses. That will have the effect of building issues of vulnerability into the work of the police and will require the police to consider issues of vulnerability for each witness. Jackie Baillie mentioned the field in the standard police report. That will make a significant contribution, but it will be backed up by training and guidance, so that police officers are aware of what to look out for when considering issues of vulnerability. Users should be able to influence the shape of training, not only of police but of other staff involved in the delivery of justice. We should consider the skills, experience and expertise in the voluntary sector that can be brought to bear. A number of organisations—Jackie Baillie has mentioned some, including Enable—have a valuable contribution to make in helping to shape and potentially to deliver training where that is appropriate, although that would be a decision for those directly involved. I would welcome their full participation in the training process. Secondly, and complementary to the commitment on training, there is the Crown Office's guidance to procurators fiscal and other staff. The Crown Office will be updating its guidance to staff as a result of the bill and it has made a firm commitment to involving the  interested organisations in the process of developing that guidance. It will consult a range of appropriate interest groups, such as Enable, the Scottish Association for Mental Health, the Scottish Rape Crisis Network, Scottish Women's Aid and others, so that their concerns are fully considered, their knowledge and expertise are utilised and they have the opportunity to influence the shape and the content of the guidance. The Crown Office is anxious to enlist the invaluable experience of those groups in preparing the instructions and in equipping prosecutors with the skills and information that are required to identify or recognise different types of vulnerability, including latent non-visible disabilities. The Crown Office also intends to make publicly available as much of its internal guidance as it can, consistent with its public interest duties and the exemptions afforded under freedom of information legislation. That is likely to mean that the majority, if not all, of the guidance relating to vulnerable witnesses will come into the public domain in one form or another and will be open to scrutiny. The Executive hopes that that will be an additional way of increasing public confidence about the way in which the prosecution service deals with vulnerable people. The Executive expects that, if support groups are aware of the contents of the guidance, having contributed to its drafting, they will be able to advise and refer the witnesses whom they support and will be in a position to draw the attention of the authorities to relevant information. I echo Jackie Baillie's point about the role of vulnerable witness officers in supporting those who need support, in helping with identification and in providing counselling support and advice. The Executive wants to work at raising awareness on the civil side, so that parties and solicitors acting in those cases are aware of the need to make applications for special measures for vulnerable witnesses. In the sheriff court, any necessary changes to the rules of court will be a matter to be considered by the Sheriff Court Rules Council. The Executive expects that the council will be keen to consult relevant interest groups when it is preparing the information and guidance necessary to raise awareness and to ensure that the new procedures and rules operate effectively.  I hope that members can agree that those commitments demonstrate the Executive's determination to make a real difference. On the basis of the reassurance given, both today and in the letter that Jackie Baillie referred to, I hope that Jackie Baillie will consider not pressing her amendments.  Amendments 1, 2, 4, 5, 20, 21 and 22 deal with definitions of disability. Proposed section 271(2), which the bill will insert into the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, lists the factors that the court can take into account in determining vulnerability in criminal proceedings and section 7(2) of the bill does the same for civil proceedings. One of those factors is any physical disability that the person giving evidence has. The Disability Rights Commission requested that the reference to physical disability in the bill be amended to refer to disabilities and impairments. Executive and non-Executive amendments on the issue were lodged at stage 2, but were all withdrawn or not moved on the basis that the Executive would continue its dialogue with the DRC and lodge an amendment at stage 3. We have done that and propose to change the reference so that, rather than referring only to a physical disability, the bill also refers to any other physical impairment that a witness may have. It should be noted that the Executive lodged an amendment at stage 2 that will ensure that any other factors that could be relevant to an individual witness's vulnerability can be taken into account. Although we have ensured that any such factors can be considered, we agree that it is useful for the bill to refer to both disability and impairment. I am grateful to the DRC for its help on that issue and to Jackie Baillie for raising the matter at stage 2.

We gave our support to the Virgin Mobile personal and phone safety campaign that ran over the Christmas period in 2003. We also provide Scottish police forces with "Protect your PHONE" information leaflets, which are also available to the public from the major mobile phone retailers in Scotland.

I encourage the mobile phone operators to do everything in their power to minimise the amount of mobile phone theft. However, equally, I would not hold the mobile phone operators responsible for those who are intent on theft. A partnership is required. The police have a job to do and we need to create better awareness. Rhona Brankin is absolutely right to say that we need to do more with the mobile phone operators. An initiative exists between the Home Office and the mobile phone operators. The central equipment identity register is a mobile phone database that can prevent stolen mobile phones from being used on any United Kingdom mobile network, thereby reducing the attractiveness of mobile phones to thieves. There is a facility to report the international mobile equipment identity number of the stolen phone to either the network operator or a general number to enable it to be cancelled. Those are things that the  mobile phone operators are doing; nevertheless, we should all remain vigilant.

This has been a good, albeit unfortunately short, debate on a bill that represents significant progress and will make the most fundamental changes in 20 years to our solemn criminal procedure. People have used the term "foundation stone" in relation to certain aspects of the justice system. The bill is important because it lays the foundation stones for building a safer and stronger Scotland. It is critical that we restore public confidence in our judicial system and ensure that the needs of victims and witnesses are given due weight and proper consideration. Unfortunately, those needs are sometimes overlooked and neglected. I have been heartened by many of the constructive comments made by members of the Justice 1 Committee, who did a power of work in considering a complex proposal, as well as by other members who have come relatively fresh to  the debate. There is a shared will in the Parliament that justice should be improved and delivered. Everyone wants us to have a system that can work well in practice. I am also heartened by the fact that the emphasis of the debate has shifted since first we made our proposals. People have started to acknowledge some of what is being suggested and to recognise that Lord Bonomy has proposed sensible measures that can make a practical difference to dealing with some of the delays and other problems that plague our High Court. Public confidence is eroded when cases are repeatedly put off, when people give up their valuable time to turn up and are then sent away, when people have to wait an inordinate length of time for justice to be considered, never mind delivered, and when people have to psych themselves up to come to court—a difficult experience for many—only to have to go through that traumatic experience not once or twice, but perhaps three, four or five times. That is a disgrace, because it puts people off the justice system and diminishes their ability to contribute to it. Those are issues that we have to address. We are also trying to deal with issues such as witnesses not turning up. People who fail to turn up are trying to avoid playing their part in the justice system, sometimes because of fear and intimidation, but sometimes in a deliberate attempt to thwart justice. I will return to that issue later, but I remind members that there are people who, at a very late stage in the process, abscond in order to prevent justice from being delivered. We want to tackle all those matters. We also want to change the adjournment culture in the High Court, to which several members referred. We want to make that culture a thing of the past by creating a degree of certainty that trials will proceed. We will strive for that as a key objective. A number of measures will be part of that process—I have not time to go into the details of those today, although we will return to some of the issues at stage 2—but judicial management of cases is an important one. Several members referred to the significance of the preliminary hearing and of having fixed trial dates that are set by the judge. We also want to give the accused the opportunity to plead at a point before trial, as a number of members suggested. Perhaps it is for those reasons that many people have now generally been persuaded of the merits of our proposed changes to the time limits. However, I recognise that the formidable combination of Colin Fox, Bill Aitken, Annabel Goldie and Margaret Mitchell—it would be a brave person who would take on such a combination—may be the reason why Nicola Sturgeon was having second thoughts even at this late stage.  Even though we are faced by such formidable opposition, I think that we are doing the right thing, as many members have recognised. The provision for trials in absence of the accused has probably been the most contentious issue. As members have indicated, we do not expect many such trials, but we recognise that trials are sometimes postponed because the accused does not turn up at all or because, in some cases, the accused flees justice either at an early stage during the trial or, occasionally, at a very late stage. Mike Pringle graphically described one case in which the accused absconded during the last weekend of the trial. Not only did that have a huge impact on a large number of witnesses, but it left two young people exposed to the possibility that they might be required to go through the whole traumatic process again. The accused absconded after all the evidence had been led.

I welcome that agreement. I think that there is still a case to be made for the broader measure, although we will give consideration to several of the points that have been raised. In the interests of justice not only for the accused but for witnesses and victims, these issues need to be given proper consideration. We cannot allow one individual to undermine the whole justice process at a very late stage in the trial. The tagging of witnesses was also mentioned. Marlyn Glen and others highlighted the need to distinguish between reluctant and recalcitrant witnesses and we will reflect on that. However, the aim of the bill is to allow the tagging not of victims who are just reluctant to give evidence but of people who potentially face jail if they refuse to turn up and give evidence. I think that there has been some misunderstanding of the disclosure issue. A number of members claimed that the Executive has departed from Lord Bonomy's proposal. Paragraph 7.7 on page 36 of Lord Bonomy's report states: "The normal rule should be that intimation of all material to be used by the Crown at the trial should be given to the defence with the indictment." However, he made no recommendation about disclosure. He said only in recommendation 2(c) that "The Crown should also provide to the defence information about material developments in the investigation of the case as they occur, and let them have access to all relevant evidence as it becomes available." In fact, the Crown is going further—it is proposing to disclose witness statements, to which the  defence would not be entitled under our current procedure. We are not departing from the Bonomy report, but are proposing to go further. I will deal quickly with Stewart Maxwell's point about the need to establish a working party. Discussions between the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland are on-going and we should wait to see what those deliver. However, we are doing what a working party would expect to be done. I am not sure that a working party is needed when that is happening. I have run out of time and must conclude. This has been a good debate and some valid and forceful points have been made. I appreciate the wide support and welcome that have been given to the proposals. Before stage 2, we will reflect on the specific points that members have made. However, like Cathy Jamieson, I am heartened by the support that exists and the chamber's intention and desire to modernise our justice system and to advance a set of proposals that we think will make a considerable difference.

The information requested is not held centrally. However, a national information framework for monitoring drug treatment waiting times is being introduced on 1 April 2004. Drug action teams will be required to collect waiting times from treatment providers in their areas for a number of treatment types and to report quarterly to the Executive.

I recognise that problems remain in some parts of Scotland. That is why we are examining closely treatment and rehabilitation services. Although I acknowledge that more needs to and can be done, we must also ask ourselves whether the money that we are using at the moment is being used to best effect. We need to build on good practice and to eliminate practice that is not delivering consistent quality. I can inform Mr Lochhead that NHS Grampian, for example, has achieved a significant reduction in waiting times for its prescribing service over the past couple of years. Since 1999-2000, there has been a 30 per cent increase in residential services  throughout Scotland and, since 1998-1999, the resources allocated to Grampian for drug treatment services have almost doubled. Although we can always do more, we can demonstrate some significant progress.

As I have indicated, since 1999-2000, there has been a 30 per cent increase in residential services in Scotland. We recognise that residential services have a part to play in treatment services, but the assessment of an individual's needs must be made by the clinician. Although we accept implicitly that residential treatment can make a difference, there could well be circumstances in which community-based treatment would be far better for an individual. There needs to be a balance, and the clinician needs to make a decision based on the individual's circumstances. Where residential treatment is required, we would say that we need to ensure that the facility is available quickly, so that the person is treated when they need to be treated and when they are prepared to seek help, without a delay that could perhaps compound their problem.

We are considering who provides services and where the services are provided. Without the support of voluntary and charitable organisations, we would not be able to deliver a quality service in Scotland. Those organisations are indispensable to how we want services to be developed. I guarantee that we see such organisations as legitimate and valuable partners. Where we believe that voluntary or charitable organisations can make a contribution to residential services, we encourage local providers to work with them. The key point is to ensure that what is on offer is the most appropriate service for the individual involved. In some cases, the most appropriate service may be residential; in other cases, it may well be community based; while in  others, abstinence may be the best way forward. The matter depends on specific cases and individuals.

I wondered whether I had come in for the wrong debate at the wrong time, because so many of the speakers have failed to address the issue. It is quite sad that some of the contributions clearly indicate that the speakers do not understand the process in which we are involved. I have to ask Frances Curran, Patrick Harvie and others whether, if we were to take at face value the power and strength of their arguments, and if we were then to agree to what they suggest and vote down the Sewel motion, we would be able to open up the whole of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Bill for discussion? No, we would not, because it is a UK bill. Whether we should or should not is in fact totally irrelevant as far as today's debate is concerned. We do not have the power. What Frances Curran and Patrick Harvie are asking us to do is to become a revising chamber of the House of Commons, and that is not our function.

No, I will not, because I have only a couple of minutes. Those members are asking us to do something that is not competent and is irrelevant. If we listened to Frances Curran or Patrick Harvie, we would not reopen the debate on asylum and immigration. In fact, there would be nothing whatever before this Parliament. We could just walk away from the whole issue.

Whether members think it a shame or not, the fact is that that is the procedure. The motion is before us today only because we have attempted to address one specific issue. In fact, what we have heard this morning is ignorance compounded by prejudice. Frances Curran and Patrick Harvie clearly do not understand. I find it incredible that the Greens, the Scottish Socialists and the Scottish National Party, which have all at different times professed concern for organised labour and defending the rights of ordinary people, now find themselves asking us to vote down a motion that will extend protection to exploited workers. We find ourselves in a situation in which they want to deny protection to exploited workers, while the Conservatives are prepared to give some protection to exploited workers. How absurd.

No. Nicola Sturgeon should sit down. If she and other members cannot support the motion, I can only conclude that what she, the Scottish Socialists and the Greens are doing is posturing. They are posturing in the confidence that we will take the decision to give protection to exploited workers. They want to posture and they do not want to take the decision, but they want us to give that protection to organised workers. It is cowardice dressed as principle. I really cannot imagine a situation in which this Parliament would walk away from those who are being trafficked by criminals in order to satisfy an irrelevant, abstract point raised by other members on issues over which we have no power. Members must make a decision. Are they going to vote to give protection to exploited workers or are they going to turn their backs on those exploited workers? That is the question before members today.

Members will be aware that, last week, the Justice 2 Committee considered a Sewel memorandum on the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Bill in respect of trafficking for non-sexual exploitation. Human trafficking is an abuse. It is a repugnant business that not only abuses the human rights of the victim but reflects on society as a whole. It is modern-day slavery. It is hard to imagine that a situation that we thought had ended in the 19 th century with the abolition of the slave trade still flourishes today. Slavery was an overt and profitable trade, but I am sorry to say that slavery in the form of trafficking for exploitation still exists in today's so-called progressive and modern society. Trafficking is a hidden and profitable operation, but it undermines the values we place on human lives and freedom. It is organised crime of the most abhorrent kind. At the meeting of the Justice 2 Committee, I set out the reasons why we believe that the measures on trafficking in the UK bill should be welcomed and should be implemented in Scotland. I also explained why, as that is the only area of the bill that relates to devolved matters, only those provisions form part of the Sewel process. The recent tragedy at Morecambe bay, which resulted in the deaths of 19 cockle pickers, has again highlighted the need for tough legislation on this matter to deter organised crime from targeting vulnerable people. Therefore, I have no hesitation in moving the motion. I move, That the Parliament endorses the principle of creating a new offence to combat trafficking in human beings for non-sexual exploitation as set out in the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Bill and agrees that the provisions to achieve this end in Scotland which relate to devolved matters should be considered by the UK Parliament.

As members have indicated during the debate, this is a sensitive and complex issue. I will attempt, in the limited time that I have available, to answer one or two of the questions that members have asked. I give Pauline McNeill an assurance that we certainly do not want to change Scots law fundamentally by accident. A number of protections have been built in, but I also give the assurance to Marlyn Glen and Margaret Smith that if anything significant happens during the course of the bill's progress at Westminster, we will bring the bill back. Pauline McNeill is right that we must ensure that we do not change anything by accident or by not considering the matter properly. Pauline McNeill is also right about Nicola Sturgeon's comments and about any other member who claims to support the change but who votes against the Sewel motion. That would be a cop out because such a vote would leave people significantly disadvantaged.

No. I have limited time. I can understand members who are fundamentally opposed to the principles of the bill voting against the Sewel motion, but not those who say that they want to see the change. Nicola Sturgeon asks why we do not introduce an Executive bill. We set out a very clear legislative programme at the start of the parliamentary session and any changes to that programme to accommodate a full bill would mean that something that we had previously indicated was a priority would have to be dropped. Difficult choices have to be made. In the circumstances, the opportunity to legislate through the Sewel motion enables us to address the issue, to address our  legal obligations and to maintain an important legislative programme for this session. In passing, I want to mention Patrick Harvie's request that the age limit for applying for a gender recognition certificate be reduced to 16. Given that people will have to live in their acquired gender for two years before they can apply for a certificate under the bill, Patrick Harvie and the Green party are saying that they want 14-year-olds to make the decision to change their gender.

I think that that would be a very unfortunate step, which would not be appropriate for someone of that age and would have all sorts of legal implications. Finally, I address the point that Patrick Harvie and, I think, Bill Aitken, made about church ministers. Patrick Harvie is absolutely right to say that there has been a campaign of disinformation. Some people might be trying to mislead deliberately and some might be doing so inadvertently. There is no requirement on a minister of religion to perform a church ceremony if they do not want to do so and no penalties will be imposed on them. The issue of the £5,000 fine has also been raised. That fine relates purely to anyone in a position of authority who divulges information that they were given as a result of their being in that position. Someone who acquires and passes on information in a casual way would not be liable to any fine. I think that it does a disservice to ministers of religion to suggest that any of them would divulge information that they had been given in a privileged and protected way. To pass on such information would be an abuse of their vocation and their integrity and I cannot imagine a minister of religion doing anything of that nature. I do not think that the question of the fine applies in such situations because I cannot imagine that someone in a position of authority, such as a minister, would pass on information. The issues are being addressed. Scottish representatives—who represent Scottish interests every bit as much as we do—will have the opportunity to debate the matter at Westminster. I think that the Sewel procedure is the best mechanism to use to bring the matter forward speedily and draw it to a conclusion.

I welcome Bill Aitken back to the fray. His presence has been sorely missed on several occasions, certainly in committee. I hope that he will put a bit of resolve and backbone into his troops now that he is back. The issue that is before us is important. It flows from the United Kingdom Government's obligation to comply with the judgments of the European Court of Human Rights on the rights of transsexual people under the European convention of human rights. The purpose of the Gender Recognition Bill is to provide for the legal recognition of the acquired gender of transsexual people. The bill provides for the establishment of gender recognition panels with legal and medical members, who will make decisions on applications for gender recognition certificates from transgender people. We believe that the inclusion of Scottish provisions in the UK bill offers the swiftest and most cost-effective means to remedy the human rights breaches and to deliver the comprehensive legal recognition that is required by the court's decisions. We also believe that a UK-wide approach will ensure consistency in the process of determining legal recognition and in the legal consequences that flow from recognition of a transsexual person's acquired gender, thereby avoiding difficult and complex cross-border issues. The relevant Scottish provisions have been included in the bill to ensure that the legislation takes account of Scots law. We believe that that is  the best and most consistent way to deal with the difficulties. It avoids the problems that could be caused in relation to reserved matters such as pensions and benefit rights and the problems that would arise if people in England and Wales had legal recognition and people in Scotland did not.

I am just about to finish. The UK Government has introduced the bill because it must meet its legal obligations. The purpose of the Sewel motion is to enable us to do the same. I move, That the Parliament endorses the principle of giving transsexual people legal recognition of their acquired gender and agrees that the provisions in the Gender Recognition Bill that relate to devolved matters should be considered by the UK Parliament thereby ensuring a consistent UK approach and early compliance with the rulings of the European Court of Human Rights with respect to the Convention rights of transsexual people under Article 8 (right to respect for private life) and Article 12 (right to marry).

I agree with much of what Michael Matheson said in his concluding remarks—much of what the Conservatives have proposed is political rhetoric. However, it ill behoves the Scottish National Party to complain about the gap between political rhetoric and reality, given the gap between reality and what the SNP proposes, not only on police numbers, but on health, on education and on roads and all other aspects of transport. The SNP promises everything, knowing that it will never be in a position to deliver, and has no conception of where money comes from or of living within budgets. By all means let us criticise the Tories' ill-thought-out and ill-judged proposals, but let us also have a reality check on political rhetoric, because the SNP is good at promising everything and not giving definitive answers about where resources would come from. The debate has demonstrated that no one apart from the Conservatives is persuaded by their gimmick, as it has rightly been described. Annabel Goldie asked in an intervention what power someone who lives in Greenock would have to do something about the Strathclyde joint police board, but I ask her what power they would have to influence a directly elected convener of the police board who was failing to deliver for people who live in Greenock but was satisfying people who live in Glasgow, Lanarkshire and elsewhere in Strathclyde. What could they do about that directly elected convener? I suggest that they could do very little. The Conservatives have come up with no answers—I wait to hear what Annabel Goldie says in her closing speech—on the relative roles of the convener and the rest of the board or of the  convener and the chief constable. There are huge gaps in the logic of what the Conservatives propose. Paul Martin was right to say that, although the boards play a good role, there is always room for improvement. We should always strive for greater accountability. The way in which the police and others are responding to community planning gives some hope that local organisations in local communities can start to work together far more effectively. I was not clear about how the democratically elected and accountable police boards that Colin Fox mentioned would operate or be structured, but he also raised issues about a police complaints body. I re-emphasise that it is right that, when things go wrong, there should be a proper mechanism for dealing with complaints. We will strengthen the arrangements for that—during this parliamentary session, we will legislate to set up a new police complaints body to deal swiftly and impartially with complaints that are made about the police, because we realise that there is an element of concern about independence and impartiality. The Conservatives might have prompted a useful debate on accountability, but they have added nothing to it with their ill-thought-out, ill-judged and irrelevant proposal, which would be ineffective. I have no hesitation in commending the Executive's amendment and asking Parliament to reject the Conservative motion.

I appreciate David McLetchie offering the motion as a contribution to the debate on police accountability. We need to have such a debate to ensure that our police service and, indeed, our other services not only deliver effectively, but are accountable to local communities and are seen to reflect their needs and interests. However, I suggest that the Conservatives' particular proposal would not take us much further forward. I pay tribute to the Conservatives. On a number of occasions it has been said that they have run out of ideas, but today's debate shows that they are as capable as ever of putting forward pointless and ineffective ideas that have no relevance whatever to the people of Scotland. The Conservatives are nothing if not consistent. David McLetchie probably answered much of his own argument. He said that the rhetoric in Parliament sometimes fails to match the reality on the streets. I believe that the rhetoric of what his proposal seeks to deliver would fail to match the reality on the streets. It is fair to say that we have a specific interest in law and order in Scotland, because undoubtedly some communities are under pressure. However, we are considering ways of tackling that that go beyond simply introducing legislation. We have record numbers of police officers and record investment, and other measures are being put in place to improve matters. I believe that we have seen a significant achievement by our police. Clear-up rates are at higher levels than at any time since the second world war; prosecutions for the supply of drugs are up by 22 per cent; housebreaking is down by 28 per cent; serious road accident casualties are down by 29 per cent; assets are being seized from criminals; internet paedophile offenders are being caught and dealt with; and the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency is doing sterling work.

I believe that a number of factors are involved in that, one of which is that people are more ready to report crimes because they know that it is more likely that the crimes will be detected and the criminals will be caught. It is  clear that there are problems in some communities, where drugs and poverty blight the community and cause people to turn to crime, but those are being dealt with. I turn to the Conservatives' specific proposal for a directly elected convener for police boards. I believe that the argument is bizarre in its construction. The Conservatives laid great store by local accountability and bringing local services back to local communities when they wanted to abolish the administrative regions. They said that some regional authorities were too large and remote for the local communities that they served. However, if the Conservatives' proposal was implemented for an area such as Strathclyde, we would have a directly elected police convener for an area that has a population of 2,204,000 and which stretches from Oban down to Girvan. The Conservatives talk about a local community being able to influence the police convener. In Strathclyde, about 2 million people would directly elect the police convener. That could mean that the people of Oban or Girvan would be unable to prevent a police convener from moving resources to areas such as Glasgow or Lanarkshire, to the detriment of Oban and Girvan. How would those local communities outvote other communities that might well be satisfied with their police convener?

I do not know whether David McLetchie has noticed, but we have a different legal structure from the rest of the UK and we have set up a different political structure. We have set up a Scottish Parliament precisely to do things differently and to take account of Scotland's specific needs. The proposal that an area with the geographic diversity of Strathclyde or the area that the Northern constabulary covers, which has small communities such as Inverness and Fort William, should have directly elected police conveners is bizarre. It is bizarre to suggest that Oban and Fort William should compete with Lerwick to influence a police convener.

No, I must press on. The other aspect that Mr McLetchie has not articulated is what powers the conveners would have. Would they be able to influence the budget? Would they be able to set a budget for the constituent local authorities in areas in which a  police board covers more than one authority? What tensions would there be if local police conveners attempted to set budgets beyond a level that had been agreed by the other members on police boards? What tensions would there be with chief constables? Who exactly would be responsible for the delivery of services? If a chief constable was not delivering, would the chief constable or the police convener be held to account? Would the police convener be able to do something about the chief constable if the convener felt that the chief constable was not delivering? Would the convener be able to take measures against the chief constable irrespective of the wishes of the directly elected board? Mr McLetchie has not answered any of those questions. Issues that would arise from the implementation of his proposal would compromise the police's operational independence and would cause compounding problems. Mr McLetchie's proposal has been inadequately considered, is ill judged, would lead to tensions with other police board members and chief constables and would make a complete and utter mess of police services in Scotland. I move amendment S2M-849.3, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "endorses the Scottish Executive's commitment to work for a safer Scotland by reducing crime and re-offending; welcomes its commitment to enhance community accountability for policing through local police boards; endorses its promotion of responsiveness to local communities through police boards' duty to secure Best Value and to report to the public on performance, and welcomes its policy of Community Planning which is enabling police forces to improve the delivery of services to local communities through more effective collaboration with other public bodies."

David McLetchie talks about local areas, on which the Conservatives have put a great deal of emphasis. Perhaps he is developing what he is saying about powers, but I am still unclear about what he means. Does he believe that the current structures are those best suited to deliver the local accountability that the proposal to have a directly elected convener seeks? If he believes that a directly elected convener is best, why not for other services?

I can confirm what ministers have already said in the Parliament about the Executive's plans for new prisons, but, as I am sure members appreciate, I cannot comment in detail on the outline planning proposals. That would be completely inappropriate, as those proposals are the subject of public consultation and others will have to make decisions about them through the normal planning process. Our current position is the one that Jim Wallace announced on 5 September 2002, following the prison estates review: two new 700-place prisons will be built. One will be privately built and operated, as members have indicated; the other is our challenge to the management and unions within the Scottish Prison Service to bridge the gap with the private sector on costs and delivery. If they prove that they can do that—if they can compete fairly—they will get the contract, but the competition must be fair. We are giving them a fair chance; the outcome is not a given and the Prison Service must prove the case. Regardless of who builds and runs the new prisons, they will be designed to the highest standard of specification. We will build on some of the lessons that have been learned from building and operating the most modern accommodation in the Scottish prison estate

No. I am saying that the position is as Jim Wallace announced and that we will develop and unveil plans on the basis of what has been agreed. A number of considerations will be taken into account. We have modern accommodation in the Scottish prison estate—we have Kilmarnock, as a number of members have said, but we also have new halls  at Edinburgh and Polmont—and it is important to develop such new facilities throughout the Scottish prison estate. The specification that we are considering is driven by the need to ensure secure custody, good order and appropriate levels of care; it is also driven by the need to provide the opportunities to challenge offending behaviour in an estate that is fit for purpose in the 21 st century. I will address some of the illogical fears that have been articulated that a privately operated prison is somehow riskier than a public prison. Before any potential private sector operator has any chance of being awarded the contract, it has to satisfy the Scottish Prison Service that it can meet the requirements of the specification. That common specification will also mean that the decision about private or public operation is fair and based on a level playing field for the public and private sectors. The public sector team will need to show that it can do best in terms of timing, cost, quality and delivery. The bridging-the-gap team, which is made up of representatives of SPS management and trade unions, has already established a strong working partnership and, building on its extensive prison experience, has been preparing itself for the competition for one of the two new prisons. Much has been said about the performance record of private prisons in general and about Kilmarnock in particular. To keep the issue in perspective, we should remember that the first few years of any new prison tend to be a settling-in time, as staff gain experience of working together and as they develop systems that best suit the local situation and the mix of prisoner population and staff. The most recent inspection report on Kilmarnock showed continuing improvement in those areas that had been indicated as requiring attention. At the behest of ministers, the SPS is moving towards a system of contracts for managing all its prisons. Those contracts will specify the services and standards that the SPS expects from each prison, broadly reflecting the relationship that Kilmarnock prison has with the SPS. That will allow more realistic comparisons between the performances of different establishments in the public and private sectors. The decision that two new prisons were needed was made in full awareness of plans for alternatives to custody. Everything that Cathy Jamieson has said on the matter indicates that she is fully committed not only to keeping people out of prison where possible and to preparing adequately those who are in prison for full re-engagement in society, but to taking the decisive measures that are needed to incarcerate people who deserve to be incarcerated for the sake of the  public and because of the crimes that they have committed. We believe that the alternatives to custody could, and will, be successful in curbing the currently rising prison population. However, even if there was no debate on that, we would still need to replace old and outdated prison accommodation. Some of the accommodation in prisons in Scotland today is utterly unacceptable, as many members will know, having visited prisons. We must also at the earliest possible date end the undesirable practice of slopping out. In a debate about prisoner management, I remind Parliament that all prisoners in Scotland remain the responsibility of the Scottish Prison Service, irrespective of whether they are located in public or private prisons. Members will appreciate that the process involved in determining the planning application means that I cannot comment in detail on either of the two applications.

Nothing has changed from anything that we have said previously. Two planning applications are going through at roughly the same time. A decision will be made in due course about which one of the prisons will be private and—if the bridging-the-gap team is successful—which one will not. However, if that team is unsuccessful for any reason, that other prison might also be private. I make it clear that the outline planning application and notices of proposed development are for two new prisons and have nothing to do with how those prisons are funded. The issues to be considered during the planning process are the same, irrespective of the funding mechanism. If and when any applications are given the go-ahead, detailed planning applications will follow. Those will be submitted to the relevant local authority. At that time, it will be clear who will be carrying out the development concerned. I firmly believe that the actions that we are taking will help us to create a prison service that is fit for purpose and that provides decent living conditions for prisoners and decent working conditions for staff. The facilities that we will provide will give the maximum opportunity to challenge offending behaviour and will ensure that  the prison service plays its full part in helping to create a safer Scotland. What we do and the quality of what we do is more important to us than who does it. However, I will reflect back to the Minister for Justice a number of the points that have been made. Fiona Hyslop said that this is not a nimby debate; I accept that she is not opposed to the idea of there being a prison in Addiewell or elsewhere and that her principled objection is to private finance and not to the prison itself. I will communicate those points to the minister.   Meeting closed at 18:00.

The Scottish Executive will continue, in association with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, to address drink driving through a combination of education and enforcement.

That is a matter for the United Kingdom Parliament. In March 2002, the UK Government announced that it did not propose to reduce the drink-driving limit.

That is clearly a matter of concern. Those people are and have been proven to be a danger to the wider public—hence their disqualification. On ensuring that they abide by the terms of the sentence that has been imposed on them, enforcement is a matter for the police. It is something that police forces take seriously and it will be addressed as part of the routine and extensive work that the police do on road traffic affairs.

I hesitate to say that the information and statistics are completely satisfactory and could never be improved on. I am sure that we could always do better, and more information is always welcome, but I am satisfied that the level of analysis is proving useful and resulting in an influence on strategy and policy. I would never be complacent, however, and we will do everything that we can to improve on the existing work.

I hesitate to think whether I could usefully answer that question. There are different aspects involved. I hope that I stated clearly that the drink-driving limit was a matter for the UK Government; I also stated, in my answer to Michael Matheson, that enforcement is a matter for the police. Any information that we can get that helps to influence our strategy and policy on enforcement is to be welcomed. I am quite clear that the problem has two different aspects; one of them is a matter for the UK Government and the other is a legitimate concern for this Parliament.

This has been an exceptionally good debate, with several thoughtful and measured speeches. In general, there has been wide support for what is happening, albeit with some differences in emphasis, pace and investment. I will come back to those differences. Colin Fox made a good speech; he had clearly put a lot of thought into it and I will come back to some of the points that he raised. However, I will get this point out of the way: he said that he could not take any interventions because he had only six minutes. That is the same length of time that Karen Whitefield had, and she was expected to take an intervention from Colin Fox's colleague. If the Scottish Socialist Party wants debate and wants others to take interventions from them, the same courtesy should be extended in return. In the debate, everyone recognised that there is a problem in the country, but that it comes from a very small number of people. By and large, our young people are a credit to themselves, to their families, to their communities and to the country. We recognise that it is only a minority that cause the problems. In welcoming the minister's speech, Colin Fox said that we now recognise that it is only a minority and that it is good that the ministers now have a sense of proportion in the debate. However, if Colin Fox and others had listened to what has been said about young people, not only  by Cathy Jamieson but consistently by other ministers, they would know that we take every opportunity to pay tribute to the vast majority who are decent, well-behaved and responsible young people. We have been consistent in what we have said. We recognise that the majority of young people are a credit to the country, but we have to consider what needs to be done about the minority. Colin Fox and others are right to say that it is not just a question of responding to young people when they behave badly. We must try to change their behaviour and prevent problems, but we must also articulate our determination to act when bad behaviour manifests itself. The Executive has taken a joined-up approach because we want to change attitudes and prevent bad behaviour. That is why we are investing so heavily in early-years education and in programmes such as sure start. That is why we are spending so much more to put support into primary and secondary schools. We believe that if we give young people a chance, they can respond and we recognise that sometimes families can be under pressure and need support. It is not just about reacting to problems; it is about preventing them, while saying clearly that we will take action when people's behaviour demands it. A number of specific points were raised in the debate. Nicola Sturgeon again mentioned secure places. We are providing more secure places, but we cannot simply say, "This number of extra places will appear overnight." Planning is required, which takes time. However, the extra places will be provided—we can argue about the numbers, but we believe that our approach is sensible and balanced. Of course, Nicola Sturgeon may continue to think that the solution is more investment and more places—I suppose that that would be consistent with the rest of Scottish National Party policy, which is to allocate more money to every problem in Scotland, irrespective of the available budget. Margaret Smith asked about secure places that are provided specifically for girls. For the first time, we are now providing a secure facility for girls at the Good Shepherd Centre. That work is being developed and other places will be provided for girls. A number of members mentioned the need for more social workers. The Executive has recognised that need and is investing more money in social work through local authorities as well as helping to recruit and retain social workers and consider their training. Stewart Stevenson made the valid point that that additional investment represents part of the reason why there have been so many vacancies. We published data in June 2003 that showed that, nationally, there were 144  more social workers in children and families services than there were in 2002. We are fast-tracking social work trainees and anticipate that 469 new social workers will enter the work force this year. I think that Mike Pringle made the valid point that, as we try to address problems in recruitment and retention of social workers, it is not helpful to have bidding wars between areas, in which one area simply steals social workers from another. A balance must be struck. That is a matter for the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and we have raised it there. I said that consensus has largely been reached in the debate, but the only fundamental area of difference relates to the Conservatives' bizarre notion about the extension of youth courts to deal with 14 and 15-year-olds—indeed, at one point in the debate I wondered whether they would suggest that we send 12-year-olds to the youth courts. I do not think that Nicola Sturgeon's question to the Conservative members received a proper answer. However, leaving that aside, members have broadly welcomed the work of the youth courts and their extension to Airdrie. Karen Whitefield graphically outlined the benefits that that extension will bring to communities in her constituency. Annabel Goldie asked about time intervals. We should acknowledge that the report that she mentioned contained a description of a new regime to secure improved performance by all agencies. We will be looking to have a regime that has a higher level of reporting because we are determined to ensure that there is proper continued and adequate scrutiny. In the course of her speech, Miss Goldie mentioned community mediation in Ayrshire. The Executive has said in a number of debates that mediation performs a valuable role and has a significant contribution to make. We will consider the matter carefully.

Unfortunately, the Presiding Officer has indicated that I should move towards summing up. On information to communities, which Margaret Smith mentioned, our initiative in the Forth valley is about ensuring that victims and communities are informed of what is happening so that they feel that the justice system is not ignoring them completely. On sharing information, the minister answered Christine May's question, but we will continue to consider the matter. We will also consider the question that she asked about prisons. In conclusion, I will dwell on the points that Rhona Brankin made. She is absolutely right that it is not just a matter of putting more and more  investment into the system; we must ask what we are getting for that investment. As she said, we need sustained monitoring and evaluation and, as she suggested, we will consider what the inspection units are doing throughout the Executive. We will consider the role of the social work services inspectorate, because Rhona Brankin is absolutely right that we need consistency, but we also need evidence that what we are investing is having an effect. It is not just a matter of there being more money. This has been a good debate and one that gives us great encouragement in making progress on youth justice. I look forward to the consensus that has been shown continuing throughout the year.

Margaret Mitchell spoke about a zero-tolerance approach. Does she believe that the existing powers that are available to all agencies are sufficient for us to pursue such an approach, or does she believe that there are weaknesses in the system and that, in some cases, additional powers will be required to ensure a more effective approach to justice?

Nicola Sturgeon exhorts us to listen to people at the sharp end. Does she accept that the number of visits made by ministers during the summer to constituencies throughout Scotland—including the constituencies of some of her colleagues—was a good example of our listening to people at the sharp end? What people at the sharp end are telling us is that something needs to be done, that the status quo is unacceptable and that we must take decisive action.

The Executive has today, in partnership with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, launched a "know the score" campaign that highlights the dangers of spiked drinks and drug-assisted sexual assaults. The campaign, which is entitled "Who's keeping an eye on your drink?" has the support of the Scottish Licensed Trade Association. The first  phase of the campaign will target pubs and clubs in key cities and towns across Scotland during the next three weeks.

Janis Hughes makes a valid point. At this time of year, many people relax, go on office nights out and go to parties, and they can be in greater danger if they do not take care. However, drug-assisted sexual assault is a problem throughout the year and while, in the main, it affects women, it can also leave men in danger. We know that there are people who are intent on causing severe damage to others, and who will use drugs and indiscriminately leave people with severe problems that sometimes take a considerable time to get over. Janis Hughes is right that while we urge people to be careful at this time of year—and we welcome the effort that has been made by pubs, clubs and staff—that effort should not stop immediately after the new year.

I hesitate ever to say that no improvements could be made; I am sure that we will continue to refine and build on what we put out. However, I welcome the work that is being undertaken. The campaign is focused, and is targeted at a specific problem. It is a growing problem, but I do not want to overestimate the numbers involved because the problem is still relatively small—although one incident is one too many. We will continue to improve where we can, but I thank everyone concerned—the police and the licensed trade—for their efforts, and I commend the information that is available.

The early signs are encouraging. Those on drugs court orders who were interviewed for the first six-month evaluation of the Glasgow drugs court reported significant reductions in drug use and offending. That is supported by evidence from the drugs court team. In Fife, too, the perception of the six-month evaluation was that the drugs court is an important and innovative response to drug-misusing offenders. However, the full impact of the drugs courts will be known only when the evaluation—including the reconvictions study—is complete in 2005.

Richard Baker has spoken to me on a number of occasions about drug problems in Aberdeen and the surrounding area. Those problems are clearly a matter of concern. I share his view on the success of DTTOs in Aberdeen. I visited the DTTO project there during the summer and found it to be well organised, disciplined and professional. The project has shown very good results and, clearly, we would like to see such projects replicated throughout Scotland. The DTTOs were a prerequisite for the drugs courts, which will eventually be the subject of an evaluation. If the courts prove successful—as I have said, the early signs are encouraging—we will consider carefully whether they can be set up in other areas. I will bear in mind in any subsequent discussions the representations that Richard Baker has made.

The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 considerably strengthened the previously available powers of confiscation and seizure. The First Minister recently announced that £1.5 million has already been recovered—not just from drug dealers but from other criminals—during the first few months since the implementation of the act in March this year. We expect increasing returns over the coming months as more cases come through the courts. Obviously, we will keep the effectiveness of the provisions under review to ensure that they meet our policy of confiscating the assets of drug dealers and others who are involved in exploitative crime. Doing so will help to deplete their working capital and limit their ability to further their criminal activities.

On 21 November, the First Minister announced that any future funds that are seized as a result of the measures would go directly to communities that are most affected. Many communities throughout Scotland are blighted by the effects of drugs. As a result of conversations that Dr Murray has had with me, I know that Dumfries and Galloway is not immune to such problems. We are working on the policy and on how we might best distribute the moneys in question. We want the moneys to be effective and targeted, and one of our problems is that if we spread them too thinly, they can cease to be effective. We shall  bear in mind the arguments that the member has made about her constituency. Once the policy has been determined, we will announce the results as soon as we can.

That the glass should always be thought to be half empty rather than half full is typical. I welcome the fact that we have been able to use the money. Matters have developed in a quite unprecedented way. In the past, such money would not have been available to us, but it is now having an effect. We are in discussions with our colleagues in the Treasury and we hope that we will be able to announce the results of those discussions in the future. We are certainly making a case for Scotland about how the money should best be used, but we should recognise the progress that has been made and the benefits that have accrued. We should also start to look on the positive side rather than always be negative.

Annabel Goldie spoke to her amendment in yesterday's debate, but has had to wait 24 hours to bring that matter to the chamber. We have discussed the matter previously. We are making changes, there are improvements and more resources are being invested. However, in the questions of Annabel Goldie and Nicola Sturgeon, we hear the same old worn groove from the same old record as they refuse to recognise any improvements that have been made. We will not be deflected from what we are doing and the improvements will flow through.

I recognise the benefits of treatment and rehabilitation. Indeed, we announced a thorough review of treatment and rehabilitation services in Scotland, which will be completed by the end of this year. I accept whole-heartedly that money spent on rehabilitation can be effective. However, unlike the Scottish Socialist Party, we do not believe in making respectable business people out of drug dealers. We will continue to resist that policy.

The situation that is described by Des McNulty is complex. We know that criminals are becoming increasingly sophisticated. They launder their money through a number of business activities, such as taxi firms and suntan parlours, as has been reported over the years. Indeed, examples from the rest of the UK and Europe have suggested that some money-changing facilities are being used by criminals to launder money. The sophistication of criminals needs to be matched by the sophistication of our law enforcement agencies. That is why we have invested significantly in the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency, which has had a remarkable record so far. However, we cannot be complacent. Every time we make a major advance, the criminals—often multinational businesses—also invest more in trying to stay ahead of those engaged in law enforcement. If legislation needs  to be passed, we will do so. If investment needs to be made, we will certainly consider that. We are meeting with some success. In that regard, I pay tribute to those in the SDEA, and I recognise the work that has been done by Jim Orr, who leads the SDEA and who will be retiring shortly. The SDEA has been remarkably successful and I am sure that it will continue to be so.

The debate has been a very good debate in which most speeches have concentrated on the positive things that are happening while identifying certain problems that no doubt need to be addressed. Even the Conservatives managed to abandon their own amendment to talk about what we could do with the system—that is, of course, all the Conservatives except the irrepressible Phil Gallie, who reverted to the old certainties. Some things do not change. I did not quite understand Phil Gallie's comments, but at one point I understood him to be advocating legal aid for firms. That is a peculiar concept, because we would expect firms to have insurance cover to cover themselves against most legal problems. We may have budgetary difficulties in trying to cope with the demands on us now, but God knows how we would cope if we were to extend legal aid to firms throughout the country. Most members concentrated on the need to create a modern justice system that delivers for the people that we represent. The justice system has to be effective and efficient and it has to be fair where it needs to be fair. The cases that Margaret Jamieson highlighted were, unlike Murdo Fraser's cases, not fictional; they were real cases that were harrowing and traumatic for the individuals concerned. Such cases are clear examples of the system's not being fair to all. I will come back to mediation and dispute resolution, which I think Margaret Jamieson's speech led us to conclude—

Far be it from me to stray into such complex territory; anything that can help would be welcome.  The system of justice must be accessible and it must be usable by the people who need it most. It must be relevant to the modern society in which we live and it must inspire a sense of public confidence and a sense of ownership. Michael Matheson touched on some of the concerns that many members of the public have about our legal system—not just about the legal profession. It would be wrong to level all the criticism at the legal profession because some things in the system need to be modernised and improved. We are intent on doing that, whether for civil or for criminal proceedings. When it comes to legal aid, we have much to be proud of in Scotland. Our system, in part, provided the original model for some of the most developed legal aid systems throughout the world. Indeed, in its scope, coverage and level of expenditure it still deserves to be the envy of many. However, in that, as elsewhere in the justice system, we need to move with the times and we need to review, reflect and improve. We must acknowledge that, although many other legal aid systems have developed and evolved over the years, legal aid in Scotland has not changed at all, although perhaps it should and could have done. Whereas other jurisdictions have examined the pressures and problems in their legal aid systems, assessed their priorities and tried to find—sometimes radical—solutions over the past two decades, our system has remained unchanged. We must address that. Many helpful speeches were made this afternoon. I endorse the many comments on mediation and dispute resolution that were made by Christine Grahame, Donald Gorrie, Margaret Jamieson, Murdo Fraser, Patrick Harvie and others. I think—I know that Cathy Jamieson shares my views—that mediation and dispute resolution have a substantial role to play and can be developed much further beyond what we currently provide.

I was just about to come to that. I spoke at the Family Mediation Scotland conference in September, and we have committed £700,000 to that organisation. We are also funding Safeguarding Communities-Reducing Offending to the tune of £246,000 over three years. However, there is much more that we can do. At the conference, I was impressed when I listened to Judge Bell from Baltimore, who is a very charismatic and committed individual whom I do not think could have left anyone in any doubt about the value of such a system. It was  interesting to talk to people who had witnessed what was going on in Maryland, who went out as sceptics but came back fully converted. There are lessons that we can learn from Maryland while developing some of the many excellent examples of measures that, as Margaret Mitchell and other members said, are starting to happen here. It is important that we give due recognition to the role that is played by community legal services, which were mentioned by Tommy Sheridan, Nicola Sturgeon, Jackie Baillie and others. Nicola Sturgeon spoke about working in Drumchapel. I am very familiar with the organisation to which she referred; I worked for many years in welfare rights in north-west Glasgow and I saw the work that was being done by Jim Gray and his colleagues in welfare rights, supported by the community legal centre. They did a first-class job. Jackie Baillie also spoke about the West Dunbartonshire Community Law Service. We need to consider how we can develop such projects, provide a framework and have a strategic service. We are committed to thinking carefully about how we can develop that. Annabel Goldie talked about an interesting issue in relation to protection for the public and I think that she is right. She touched on the concern about the number of companies that are jumping in to give legal advice purely to make quick profits and which are sometimes not properly regulated through our legal system. It is a worry that people are sometimes being ripped off by companies that promise all sorts of services, especially in relation to compensation, but which do not always deliver to the requisite standard. Annabel Goldie made a good point that is worth considering. I reassure her that we will not be copying the English model of having a legal services commissioner. Several members also spoke about quality assurance. They are absolutely right: whether in legal services, money advice services, welfare rights services or mediation, the public need to know that the quality of the advice that is being provided is of the highest standard, is properly scrutinised and is regulated. We are investing time and money in ensuring that by extending first-class money advice services throughout Scotland. I also accept the points that Margaret Smith, Karen Whitefield and others made about the need for independence in advice giving. We are not investing in such work simply to try to control the advice that is given out. Advice needs to be independent, but it also needs to be of high quality. Karen Whitefield was also right to highlight the need to tackle exclusion. The review is about ensuring that the many thousands of citizens in our country who do not have access to legal advice are included.  Pauline McNeill made a point about small claims actions, which I thought she developed very well. I agree that we need to consider how more people can be given access to small claims actions rather than be cut out from the system. However, Pauline McNeill was absolutely right to say that the way in which to deal with that is not to extend legal aid to smaller and smaller claims, but to ensure that small claims are dealt with in a more flexible, friendly and informal environment so that there is not necessarily a requirement for legal aid. I was a bit confused by Murdo Fraser's comment about the compensation culture. Although I agree with what he said about the way that things seem to be going sometimes, I am not sure about the logic of a compensation culture that would allow firms access to the best lawyers and compensation for pursuing their rights, but which would not allow individuals—employees or members of the public who are badly treated by those firms—any support in pursuing legitimate claims. We should strike a balance rather than rule out one thing completely. I agree with Patrick Harvie that we need to change the culture and reduce barriers. The review that we have been talking about today gives us some hope for the future. It will provide a framework for establishing that we have a legal aid system of which we can be proud, but which can also be improved substantially. I hope that the review and the work that we are doing will allow Scotland's legal aid system to evolve into a system that is fit for the 21 st century. It must be fit for the people whom we serve and it must make a substantial difference.

The expert group on prostitution, under Sandra Hood's chairmanship, is examining the issues that relate to prostitution in Scotland, starting with street prostitution. We will give its report careful consideration.

I am sure that the expert group will give that report due consideration and will examine tolerance zones closely. We have asked for work to be undertaken early on street prostitution issues and that is one of the first subjects on which the group will report. I am sure that the group will consider the evidence and experience of Edinburgh.

That is a dangerous offer to make; I do not think that my minister would allow me that indulgence. The debate has been excellent and some highly thoughtful and pertinent comments have been made. I thank and congratulate not just the members of the Justice 2 Committee for their excellent work in producing a thorough and detailed report, which gives significant consideration to the matter and makes some useful suggestions, but the many voluntary organisations that have taken the opportunity to contribute to the committee's deliberations and to contact individual MSPs. I know from conversations that I have had that members have found that information and evidence useful in helping them to understand what some of the issues are about. As with the passage of any legislation, it is inevitable that, in spite of the best efforts of many of those organisations, there will be issues on which we cannot agree. However, although there might be areas in which there are still differences between us, we should not diminish the significant contribution that such organisations have made. We should also appreciate the effort that they have put in to bringing the vulnerability of witnesses to the forefront of political and public attention. Alasdair Morgan, in responding to Annabel Goldie's point about the structure and the drafting of the bill, referred to the previous legislation. It is worth putting on record the fact that, although we are seeking to improve existing law and believe that the bill will make a marked improvement to it, we do diminish what went before. It is right to put on record, as James Douglas-Hamilton has done,  the efforts that have been made in another place by colleagues such as Norman Godman, who made such a significant contribution over a long period. It would also be wrong to diminish the role that James Douglas-Hamilton played in ensuring that the earlier legislation was passed; in his usual modest way, he downplayed his role in that process. We are talking about addressing some of the fears and legitimate anxieties that people who, as Michael Matheson said, are fundamental to the judicial system often have when they are asked to make their contribution. It is a bit unfortunate that questions that might better have been considered during the committee process have been posed during the stage 1 debate, but we may well come back to some of those at stage 2. Our fundamental concern is to ensure that the best interests of justice are served by ensuring that those who have the information and who have been witness to the events in question can give their version without intimidation, fear or prejudice. That is something that will benefit the interests of justice. We will return to some of the specific points that have been raised today at stage 2. Nicola Sturgeon, Stewart Maxwell, Jackie Baillie and others talked about definitions and Mike Pringle mentioned visibility. We are sympathetic to the calls for a better definition of what constitutes a vulnerable witness. Indeed, we have been in discussions with our colleagues in the Disability Rights Commission on that. However, we still have anxieties about what some members have asked for. We will reconsider the issue, but whether the definitions are to do with mental health and mental disorder or whether they relate to matters that affect the victims of sexual crimes, our concern is to ensure that the widest range of people are practically and fairly included. In whatever we do, we want to ensure that that happens.

We considered that issue in committee. We were persuaded that, in Scots law, 16 is the age of responsibility for many matters. Some people argued that the age should have been 18 rather than just 17, but other issues had to be taken into account relating to the fact that our legal system considers 16 to be the critical age. We were persuaded by that. However, we will return to the debate about definitions at stage 2. Whatever we do, it will not be sufficient for us to  do something just for the sake of saying that we have done it; what we do has to be of practical benefit. Issues have been raised about evidence on commission. The point was well made about people not being able to challenge such evidence. Mike Pringle, I think, asked whether the final decision in that respect should be made by the judge or the commissioner. The committee addressed that issue previously and we will consider it before we come to stage 2. The Minister for Justice has already dealt with the issue about supporters. Several members highlighted the need for early identification. It is in everyone's interest to ensure early identification, but simply passing legislation to oblige people to make early identification would not necessarily deliver the desired effect. Those who seek to put such a legal obligation on police and other agencies need to ask what penalty they would impose if there was a failure to make early identification. It is not enough to legislate for such a requirement without identifying the sanction that would go with the failure. So far, we have not been persuaded that that can be easily done. I will not have the opportunity to address in detail all the questions that were raised, but I will in passing deal with Stewart Maxwell's concern about the removal of the automatic right to protection. The bill requires that whatever we do must be done with the best interests of the child at heart. Any conclusion that we reach will be arrived at from that perspective. Marilyn Livingstone and others mentioned delays—Jackie Baillie dealt with that issue well in her speech. We are determined to tackle delays wherever they occur in the judicial system because it is not in the interests of justice to allow them to happen. Marilyn Livingstone also asked about training. We have been in discussion with the Faculty of Advocates, the Crown Office and others to ensure that significant attention is given to the provision of training for those people who are engaged in the process. I will not dwell on the matter, but I thought that it was unfortunate that, in a debate on a bill that has been welcomed not only by everyone in the chamber but by many outside it, the Conservatives took the time to try to score cheap and inaccurate party-political points. That diminishes the debate and the issue and, frankly, it diminishes the Conservative party. I am sorry that Conservative members chose to act in that way. Elaine Murray talked about the court estate, which is a telling issue. Too many cases are still heard in courtrooms where people are not being given sufficient protection when they turn up to  give evidence and to play their part. We have been investing to tackle that problem. The questions that James Douglas-Hamilton asked have been and are being properly addressed. CCTV and video evidence, as well as screens, are working well. However, I will come back to James Douglas-Hamilton on that issue in more detail at a later stage. The debate has been a good one and it has made a useful contribution. I look forward to taking up some of the points that have been raised at stage 2. I hope that we can accommodate some of the useful suggestions that have been made. For example, Karen Whitefield made good suggestions about the need to simplify the child witness notice procedures and about the accused conducting their own defence. We will come back to and consider those and other useful contributions. We can have a successful stage 2 debate and I hope that, by the end of the process, we will have legislation that will make a difference to the operation of justice in our country.

There are two aspects to putting the land register online. The first is to make it possible to search the register and to extract information from it online. That has already been achieved through the registers direct service. The other side is online registration. At present, registration is made by paper deeds because the law requires physical signatures. Registers of Scotland has, under its automated registration of title to land initiative, carried out a detailed study, pilot exercise and consultation on introducing electronic registration for routine transactions. The agency is considering the legislative changes that are needed to permit paperless registration.

For the land register, that process has been introduced gradually across Scotland, county by county. On automated registration of title to land, the time scale for that project is not yet certain. As Scott Barrie knows from conversations that we have had, the process is complex. Paper title deeds have a long history and an entrenched position in the conveyancing process. Significant legal, cultural and business changes are required in order to move to the electronic medium. However, once that is established, it should lead to a reduction in registration costs for customers.

Donald Gorrie has identified a real need. We must examine good practice and eliminate bad practice. Before building on the good practice, however, we clearly need first to know what is going on. I hope that Donald Gorrie and others will take the opportunity of the debate that we have started on creating a single agency to contribute such views, which would be influential in forming any conclusions that are arrived at in the debate.

I thank the former Justice 1 Committee for producing the report and I congratulate it on its work. The report is an excellent example of a committee of the Parliament not just scrutinising and holding the Executive to account, but trying to contribute to shaping policy and influencing practice throughout Scotland. The subject is important and the debate is timely. As Pauline McNeill said, there have been a number of developments since the committee did its work, but it is obvious that much more needs to be done. The report provides a sound analysis and it is broadly consistent with what the Executive is pursuing. We recognise that some individuals need to be imprisoned to protect the public, but we also have a responsibility to provide effective alternatives. That is in line with the report's first recommendation, which is that "community disposals should be actively promoted ... as an alternative to short term prison sentences". The committee concluded—I agree with this—that short-term prison sentences offer limited opportunity for rehabilitation. They help to fuel the increase in the prison population and they put a burden on local services when prisoners are released back into the community, sometimes without having had any support work done with them. We have to ask whether that is the best that we can do. We have already made progress by extending the range of community sentences that are available to the courts. We have introduced restriction of liberty orders and electronic tagging throughout Scotland, as Pauline McNeill said. Drug testing and treatment orders will be available nationally by the middle of 2005. We have built on the success of DTTOs in the pilot drug courts in Glasgow and Fife. As the partnership agreement says, we will use that model for drug courts, as appropriate, where they are needed. The findings of the independent evaluation of the pilots will inform our decisions on future policy on this matter. Over the past four years, we have succeeded in creating a wide range of community sentences that target specific offences and the circumstances of specific offenders. It is encouraging that the committee's report concluded that, although there may be scope for new community disposals, it might be more effective to focus on the more efficient use of existing sanctions. That is very much in line with what we mean to do in the next four years; we want to develop and provide effective programmes that have been shown to work in reducing reoffending.  Just as the committee wants us to do, we want to focus our efforts on the needs of certain problem groups in society. We are introducing measures to deal with fine defaulters, who are a special group of short-term prisoners. We will pilot schemes that make mandatory use of supervised attendance orders for certain fine defaulters. We will withdraw the option of custody and we expect to see a significant impact on the number of fine defaulter who go into custody. The time-out centre in Glasgow will be fully open within the next few weeks. That centre will offer an alternative to prison for women from Glasgow and the surrounding area. It combines a detox facility, a residential unit and day programmes, as well as providing health services and outreach to other community facilities. When it is fully operational, the centre will have capacity to cater for 75 women a day and the residential unit will have 14 beds. Similarly, in June, we set up a youth court in Hamilton to deal with persistent 16 and 17-year-old offenders. Early indications are that the process is working well. Young people are being fast-tracked into the court and on to programmes that are designed specifically to address their offending behaviour. Our aim is to get those young people off the conveyor belt of crime and to give much-needed respite to communities that suffer at their hands. I was pleased last month to announce new funding for arrest referral schemes. Arrest referral allows individuals who have drug-misuse problems to gain access to treatment at the earliest stage in the criminal justice process. The scheme will operate within police cells or court premises and will involve close co-operation with police and court services. We now have a full range of interventions for offenders whose crimes are linked to drug addiction—for people who have their first contact with the law, through to people who have long histories of drug addiction and acquisitive crime to feed their habits.

I am generally concerned about the number of people with drug addiction who appear before all our courts. At the moment, we are considering the district courts as part of a wider review. However, the Executive has made it clear that we are determined to punish and imprison those who need to be punished and imprisoned and to help those who need help and can be turned away from their criminality, irrespective of which court they come before.

That is not my understanding. I will try to get some more information for Christine Grahame on social work, but we are certainly investing more. During the past few years, we have encouraged more people to take social work courses and we are looking to see what we can do to increase the number of social workers that are available. We know that they are important to the process. The point that I was making is that we now have a full range of interventions for offenders whose crimes are linked to drug addiction, from the point when they first come into contact with the law right through to those who have a long history of drug addiction and acquisitive crime to feed their habits. That has been supported by an increase in resources; by 2005-06, funding for those services will have more than doubled over the previous five years and will stand at £88 million. We want to see results. Despite record investment and an increasing number of community services, we have not achieved the reduction in the prison population that we want, which is why the Executive has concluded that a more radical approach is needed. We are setting up the sentencing commission under Lord MacLean and, on the single-agency debate, we are considering how to bring together some of the criminal justice social work issues, such as what happens in prisons and how to reduce reoffending. We believe that there should be better synergy between those who work in the different processes. We need to find appropriate structures to support people. We will also be informed by the work that the former Justice 1 Committee commissioned on public attitudes to sentencing. In the context of this debate, it is interesting that that study found that the more information participants were given, the more open they became to the use of alternatives to custody. In conclusion, I thank the former Justice 1 Committee for its excellent report, which gives us much to ponder and points the way forward. It  coincides with much of what the Executive wants to achieve and it will be a catalyst for further action.

There were 382 drug-related deaths in Scotland in 2002.

Mary Scanlon will be aware that, at the end of August, I announced a review of drug treatment and rehabilitation services, which was a commitment in the partnership for government agreement. Mary Scanlon highlights an area that is of general concern. Too many prisoners are still addicted to drugs, too many people are inadequately prepared for release from prison and too many people do not get speedy and appropriate access to drugs services. We want to find out what can be done better. One issue that is driving us in considering the need for a single agency is ensuring that different parts of services that support prisoners come together to work better and much more efficiently. Mary Scanlon can be assured that we take the matter seriously and that we are determined to improve things.

We will undertake a comprehensive examination of the reasons for drug deaths in Scotland. Every drug death in 2003 will be closely examined in the review. Even before we get the details of that review, it is evident that many drug users do not use only one  drug—at the time of death, a number of drugs have been taken—and that drug activity can also be associated with heavy alcohol consumption. We also know that some of the people who die of drug-related causes, although not all of them, have taken drugs for many years and their general health has deteriorated as a result. There are concerns that people whose health has been affected over a number of years and who continue to use a mixture of drugs and alcohol can leave themselves more exposed to death than others. Complex issues are involved. We need to find out more about those issues so that we can more appropriately target services and try to end this appalling waste of life.

We do not accept that the changes that have been made to the bill are substantial. There are already a range of circumstances in which it would be an offence to report on trials in England and Wales. There are also occasions when the reverse is true, when it would be an offence to report on Scottish cases from elsewhere. In the first version of the bill, which the Parliament approved on 5 December, the reporting restrictions would have applied automatically, so that any breach would have been an offence in Scotland in the same way as I have described. It is now proposed that the restrictions  will apply where the English Court of Appeal makes an order in that respect. Under provisions to be included in the bill, it will be an offence to publish a report in Scotland contrary to any such order that is made. The proposal is not substantially different from that which was approved by the Parliament on 5 December.

The Westminster Criminal Justice Bill, which was initially considered in the Scottish Parliament on 5 December last year, will reform the criminal justice system in England and Wales. Since last year, there have been further developments, which the Executive believes should be considered by the Parliament. When I appeared at the Justice 2 Committee on 30 September, the committee expressed concern that there was a possibility that, under the bill, prisoners from England and Wales could transfer to Scotland in the hope of serving a shorter period in prison before being considered for parole. I have since written to the committee convener and I hope that my letter has addressed those concerns. I hope that the Parliament will agree with me that the few provisions in the bill that apply to Scotland are sensible and worthy of inclusion as part of an overall package of measures. In the main, the provisions can be characterised as being designed to allow current reciprocal cross-border arrangements to be maintained and updated to take account of the reforms that are included in the bill. I move, That the Parliament agrees that, in addition to the provisions referred to in motion S1M-3671, those further matters which have been brought forward in the Criminal Justice Bill and that relate to devolved matters should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The Registrar General has made it clear to local authorities that they will be allowed to retain paper records locally after electronic images of the registers become available. An authority that wished to hold those records in local archives would meet the cost of such storage, as for other records held in such a way. The Registrar General will continue to meet the cost of storage of the principal paper copy of the registers and the cost of providing the electronic version.

I am surprised that people in Brian Adam's area are not aware that the Registrar General has made that information clear. They  might well wish to take up that issue with the local authority. If Brian Adam thinks that his local authority is still in the dark about the matter, he should by all means let me know about it and I will take up the issue with the Registrar General. That said, I have no reason to believe that that information did not go out. As for meeting local family history societies, I am sure that if they wish to make a case to the local authorities and then both parties decide to raise the matter with the Registrar General, he will arrange whatever meeting is required to examine the most sensible way of providing a service throughout Scotland.

First, I put on record the value that the Scottish Executive places on the contribution that is made by retained auxiliary and volunteer firefighters in protecting their communities. We made that clear in our document "The Scottish Fire Service of The Future". At the same time, we acknowledged that the issue of fire cover in sparsely populated areas had not been fully addressed. We will examine that as part of our proposals for the Scottish fire and rescue service. Those proposals will shape the future of the service, and I will return to them in a minute, but I draw members' attention to the existing support that the Executive provides to the Highlands and Islands fire board. The Executive has been supportive of the brigade's efforts to upgrade its estate. Since 2000-01, Highlands and Islands fire brigade has received £8 million in capital consent, of which 40 per cent was to assist its upgrade programme. In grant-aided expenditure terms, Highlands and Islands has seen its share increase from £9.9 million in 2000-01 to £12.2 million in 2003-04, which is an increase of 22.4 per cent.

Of course, the whole question of GAE distribution is not simply a question for firefighting; it is one that the Executive discusses regularly with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. I know from my time as the leader of a council that there have been many debates within local government about the fairest way to distribute GAE throughout Scotland. We will continue to recognise the arguments that are made by local government as a whole. I am sure that Mary Scanlon understands that any redistribution of GAE in one direction will cause problems in another. One factor in the distribution of GAE is recognition of problems of sparsity and rurality—that will continue. In addition, on funding, ministers have agreed a further £1 million in 2003-04 to assist the Highlands and Islands upgrade programme. Mary Scanlon asked about the public-private partnership. It is still being considered by the fire branch—there is still a meeting to be had between the local brigade representatives and the fire branch, but I cannot give any commitment or any guarantee on the outcome of that consideration.  I turn to points that were raised by Fergus Ewing and others. The Executive's view on the report of Her Majesty's fire service inspectorate for Scotland—which was published in October 2002 and which Fergus Ewing said recommends the closure of 32 auxiliary units in the area—is, I stress, that the report is a reflection of the inspector's view. The provision of emergency cover is rightly a matter for determination by the fire authority, not the inspector. Ultimately, local brigades will make decisions about what is best in their communities. Members will be aware that we had some debate this afternoon about section 19 of the Fire Services Act 1947. Without prejudicing or prejudging what might happen as a result of any consultation, ministers must be guided by that act, which obtains at the moment. The Executive has received no application from Highlands and Islands fire brigade about the closure of any station.

Any determination by the Health and Safety Executive would be for that agency and not for ministers. However, I understand that the Health and Safety Executive recently clarified the requirements so that they apply only to firefighters who deal with fires in buildings. I am sure that members agree that an inspector must give a considered view on what he or she thinks is best for a service, whether it be a fire, police or education service. We must take note of that. Nevertheless, the final decision lies with the local board, which will have to reflect on what the Health and Safety Executive said and on what it believes to be the best use of resources in its area. Notwithstanding any health and safety considerations, if and when any application is made, we will consider it in accordance with present law in due course. As the law gives ministers the decision over any application that is made, it would not be appropriate or right for me to comment on a particular case. We will wait to see whether the local brigade or board makes any such application. This afternoon, we debated section 19 of the 1947 act and integrated risk management. I am sure that, like other brigades and boards, Highlands and Islands fire brigade will examine  closely what is necessary for its area. I acknowledge some of the difficulties in the Highlands and Islands. In the earlier debate and in this debate, several members described the specific problems of communities with which I am unfamiliar but which clearly need a fire service every bit as much as the communities with which I am more familiar. The democratically accountable members of the relevant local fire authority will consider those issues.

Sure.

Deciding on the best way to proceed is entirely a matter for local decision makers. It would be wrong for a minister to try to tell local decision makers how best to use their budgets and run their services. We value the retained auxiliary service. We value the role of the volunteers and we know that they make a significant contribution. Without their sterling efforts, nothing would be possible in many communities throughout Scotland. Some would argue that there might be an element of scaremongering in the debate, but, nevertheless, it has highlighted a part of the fire service in Scotland that is often overlooked and undervalued by those of us who are not familiar with that area. As such, the debate has been a useful opportunity for us all to put on record our appreciation for everything that the people involved do in their local communities.  Meeting closed at 17:55.

Carolyn Leckie indicated that she had a copy of the Executive's summing-up speech. It might have helped to steady the nerves of the Minister for Justice if Carolyn Leckie had shared it with her, so that Cathy Jamieson knew that my speech contained no hidden surprises. There have been a number of good contributions to the debate this afternoon. In essence, although all parties in the chamber have welcomed the discussion, questions obviously remain to be answered. Of course, the nature of a consultation paper is such that it does not give a final answer or a conclusion but is simply the start of a process. David Davidson's suggestions were useful, although perhaps not the one about producing another paper. We need to reflect on a number of the arguments that have been made this afternoon, we need to clarify points of emphasis and we need to develop some fine points of detail. That is an inevitable part of the process of consultation. We are asking people what they think; we do not have closed minds and we will reflect on the arguments that we hear. That approach is best summed up by the discussion about board structures and the number of brigades. Some people argue that they are utterly opposed to the centralisation of decision making and services, but their analysis implies that they are content with a situation such as the one that Karen Gillon described. The situation for her community is not satisfactory. One centralised brigade covers half the population of Scotland and a vast area of Scotland's landmass. It is hardly local decision making if decisions that are made in Glasgow are not properly reflected in Oban. There are conflicts in the analysis of those people who are opposed to centralisation and support local decision making—and vice versa.

Not at this stage. I thought that Brian Monteith raised an interesting point. When we consider the number of boards—

Great timing, Brian. One thing that we should consider is whether there should be more boards. The Executive has an open mind and has asked whether we currently have the right number of boards. Indeed, I have heard from colleagues in local government that many would prefer to have much more influence over decisions at local authority level, rather than leave decision making to boards, which some people think are not always very accountable to  local communities. That applies not just to the fire service, but to the police and other services.

Cathy Jamieson clearly outlined our approach to that. We have said that we want to hear what people think. We have no prescription. If people can come up with an idea and show that there is a better way of doing things, so be it. If the arguments indicate that the current structure is the best approach, we will clearly stick with it. It is right that we ask the question. Similarly, we do not have a prescriptive approach that is aimed at forcing people together across services to work in control rooms, but we want to ask whether the current way of working is the correct one. There has already been a reduction in the number of fire control rooms in Strathclyde and that seems to be working effectively. The question can be asked whether that can also be done elsewhere in the country. If we cannot ask the contentious and difficult questions in a consultation, that raises the question why we should bother asking anything at all. We certainly look forward to the responses that we will get back from the consultation. Several members raised questions about the advisory group. It is worth reflecting on the contribution that the group has made. What we do not want to do in respect of any advisory structure is to continue with a body that is not showing itself to be particularly effective, but equally we do not want to replace it with groups that are not representative and have not shown that they are functional. We will investigate whether what is proposed in the document is necessarily the best way forward. We have said clearly that we want to ensure that everyone who has a stake in the fire service and the delivery of the fire service in this country has an opportunity to contribute. The way in which the current proposals are structured in the document represents an attempt to achieve that aim but, if we can refine the proposals, we will do so. Attacks on emergency workers have been mentioned, but I cannot understand what the debate is about. The partnership agreement clearly states that the Executive will come forward with legislative proposals to deal with attacks on emergency workers. I believe that those proposals  will be brought forward in the near future and I hope that they will be given a warm welcome. On the debate about national frameworks and risk management, I do not think that anyone could argue against having a national framework that sets out a specific idea of what a fire service should look like and what it should deliver. The question of risk management comes down to some of the fundamental issues about local decision making. I will use that as the opportunity to refer to what I think have been some fairly bizarre contributions in relation to the provisions in section 19 of the Fire Services Act 1947. Comments have been made about rogue fire-masters making decisions that were not in tune with what was happening at a local level. It was suggested that, to introduce an element of local accountability in relation to a local decision, an intervention by a minister in Edinburgh was required. The so-called rogue fire-master that Stewart Maxwell described is responsible to a democratically elected board of democratically elected councillors, who are responsible to democratically elected councils. If local communities cannot hold their councillors and councils to account for local decisions, what chance do they have of holding a minister in Edinburgh to account for local decisions?

A number of valid arguments have been made, but some bizarre arguments have been put forward. This afternoon, we have started what I hope will be a challenging, productive and open debate. Some local issues clearly need to be addressed. Maureen Macmillan made a passionate speech about the problems in the Highlands and Islands and identified specific issues. Clearly, we will look at that situation. Again, the issue comes down to local communities influencing local decisions that are made by those who are responsible for the delivery of services locally. All in all, the debate has been good and we will reflect on the interesting and useful points that were made. From what we have heard, I believe that the core of the consultation document represents the right way to go forward. Some fine definitions remain to be made, but the document has broad support and reflects the fact that we are all committed to a service from our firefighters that is capable of responding to the needs of the 21 st century. Our proposals will reflect the excellent work that firefighters have done in many communities throughout Scotland over many years and will enhance and reaffirm their critical  role in our local communities. Cathy Jamieson and I pledge that we will listen to the FBU, the employers and local communities and to what members across the chamber have said in the debate.

Will the member give way?

rose—

There seems to be some confusion in the debate about whether we should move to complete centralisation and dictation of how funds are used or whether we should have local decision making. It is not ministers' responsibility to dictate to local fire boards, conveners or fire-masters how they should spend the funds that are allocated to them. In Fergus Ewing's members' business debate later, I will talk about the significant additional moneys that we are giving to the fire service in the area that he mentions, but it is not currently, nor is it intended to be, ministers' responsibility to tell those who are responsible in a local area how they should spend their money.

I do not know whether Frances Curran suggests that, following the logic of her argument, we should do away with chief fire officers and fire boards and have one decision-making body that covers the whole of Scotland, to avoid the scenario that she paints.

Will the member take an intervention?

In addition to congratulating Margaret Mitchell on securing the debate, we should pay tribute to her powers of persuasion because she managed to get eight Conservative members—apart from you, Presiding Officer—into the chamber for a members' business debate. That must be something of a record. As Kenny MacAskill said, the issue that Margaret Mitchell has raised is, on the face of it, not a huge or obvious one. However, it has significant consequences for the haulage industry in Scotland and significant implications for our economy. It also has huge implications for police services. A vast amount of resources are tied up to ensure safe and efficient transportation. We clearly need to take the issue seriously and we are aware of the arguments that have been made in the debate. Earlier this year, Scottish Executive officials set up a joint working group with ACPOS to consider the functions that are undertaken by the police and the Executive in dealing with the operation and management of trunk roads in Scotland. The management of the movement of abnormal indivisible loads is one of the issues that the group has been considering. Officials have also been following closely the changes that have taken place south of the border, where some forces have, as Margaret Mitchell indicated, already withdrawn from providing escorting services and some private escorting has taken place on a limited basis. Officials have also been in contact with their opposite numbers in the Highways Agency, who have been developing a draft code of practice to govern private escorting. I recognise that the introduction of private escorting could have significant benefits for the police, as it would allow resources to be concentrated on tackling crime, which should be the police's priority. In 2002, in the Strathclyde police area alone, there were almost 25,000 movements, of which almost 2,500 required a police escort. That is a staggering number of journeys and staggering numbers of police and police hours are involved. When those figures are projected across the whole country, it is obvious that huge amounts of staff and finance are tied up. We recognise the benefits for the police and for the haulage industry of providing the industry with a more responsive, flexible and reliable service. David Mundell very ably made a point about loads having to sit in one spot waiting for a changeover. That clearly makes no sense. In fact, it is probably more of a hazard for loads to come off the road to stop and wait. It is in everyone's  interest that the journey is unhindered and unimpeded. In order to develop our thinking on how best to deal with the issue, ACPOS and the Executive have set up a working group specifically to consider it. The group, which will also include interests from the haulage industry, proposes to report its findings before the end of November. However, if there is to be a move in the direction of private escorting, road safety has to be paramount. Although there may be financial benefits, the reason for doing anything would not be financially driven. Working group members will have road safety at the forefront of their thoughts. A number of other significant issues have to be considered, such as the training and accreditation of private sector staff who undertake such work, and the rules governing the management of traffic, because there are huge implications for other road traffic users and for the communities through which wide loads move. It is possible that changes to legislation will be required, which will be considered if and when any changes occur. The group will also try to work closely with the Highways Agency to develop a code of practice. It would be advantageous to the industry if one set of rules covered the whole of the United Kingdom, so that some of the problems that exist at Beattock summit would not exist at the crossover from England into Scotland. Finally, I make it clear that we have an open mind on the matter. If a robust case can be made for private escorting, which guarantees no diminution in road safety and which fulfils all the other criteria that have been mentioned, we will welcome its introduction because, as I said, we foresee benefits for the industry and the police. However, it is not a change that we can leap into in a haphazard fashion. Any such change would need to be well organised and properly managed, and must, I repeat, have at its heart road safety and safe transportation. The topic is worth considering. Margaret Mitchell has done us a service in highlighting it. I hope that we will be able to have another discussion—probably with my colleague Nicol Stephen—once the working group has produced its report and we can see what conclusions can be drawn.  Meeting closed at 17:23.

Ministers have taken pains to point out, during the debate and outside the chamber, that we are not blaming young people completely for antisocial behaviour. We are identifying specific groups in the community who are causing mayhem and havoc. Certain groups of young people are plaguing their communities. I use the word "plaguing" advisedly. If such young  people are not to blame, who does Sandra White think is to blame?

Will the member give way?

rose—

Colin Fox has spoken about living in a community and reflecting the aspirations and views of that community. Is it not his experience, and that of other members of the Scottish Socialist Party, that people are crying out for action on the issue? In my own constituency, more than 500 people gave an almost overwhelming amount of support for the Executive's proposals. Is Colin Fox saying that, in the SSP's experience of representing constituents in various parts of Scotland, people do not raise the issue of antisocial behaviour?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it the function of this debate to resolve a procedural issue about how the Parliament's time should be spent? I believe that it was agreed to hold debates such as this at the instigation of the Procedures Committee. If there is an issue, should that not be discussed and resolved elsewhere, rather than taking up time for debating antisocial behaviour?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

The member is out of tune with her SNP colleagues.

Like Christine May, I thank Ken Macintosh for giving Parliament the opportunity to debate a serious problem that is all too evident in far too many communities throughout Scotland. As Maureen Macmillan has indicated, violence against shop workers is a problem not only in urban settings but in rural settings. Too many shop workers, who are vital to our economy and to the fabric of many of our communities, have to suffer unacceptable behaviour, abuse and sometimes violence. I also want to thank the members of the Scottish Labour party, the Co-operative Party, the Scottish National Party, the Conservative party and the Liberal Democrats who have stayed behind to participate in the debate to show their concern for, and solidarity with, shop workers. It is right that we put on record that we are not prepared to accept that type of behaviour from anyone anywhere in our society. We know that retail is vital and it is right that we take steps to protect those who work in retail. Retail and wholesale account for 10 per cent of Scotland's gross domestic product. A quarter of all large firms and 15 per cent of employee jobs are associated with retail and wholesale, so it is not an insignificant sector. Retail also plays a vital role in our communities. Sometimes, the post office, the chemist and the local corner shop or supermarket  are what bind different sections of a community together. People use shops to purchase goods or services, but they also use them to socialise, to meet friends and to exchange banter and gossip with the people who work there. Shops can be very much part of a community's identity. It cannot be right that people who work in shops—who do so not only to earn a living but to provide a service to the community—should be left exposed and vulnerable to intimidation or threats. Not only can such intimidation drive shop workers from their jobs, at significant economic cost to themselves and their families, but they can put shops under threat. In too many communities, we have seen what happens when stores go to the wall and nothing is left behind. That can have a debilitating effect.

I agree entirely with Mary Mulligan. All shop workers should expect that level of support and protection, but it is right that we look at how we cherish young workers who are starting out on their economic life. We need to ensure that they are not put off, intimidated or frightened; we need to grow their talents for the future. Mary Mulligan is right to highlight how the problem particularly affects young workers. In addition to thanking Ken Macintosh, I need to thank a number of organisations for the work that they are doing. First and foremost, the shop workers union USDAW is to be commended for the significant amount of work that it has invested in highlighting an issue that is clearly of concern to many of its members. As Ken Macintosh mentioned, Frank Whitelaw in Scotland, with the support of others such as Ruth Stoney, has worked tirelessly to bring the campaign to the attention of shop workers throughout Scotland. It would have been wrong, however, to limit the campaign to shop workers. Rightly, USDAW has taken the campaign out of the shop and into the community to show how we are all part and parcel of the solution. The response from communities throughout Scotland has been overwhelming. USDAW is to be congratulated and thanked for campaigning on behalf of its members and for bringing the issue to our attention.  As Alex Neil said, the Scottish Retail Consortium has been supportive, as has the British Retail Consortium. A number of individual companies and stores are associated with that activity, but I specifically want to put on record some of the work that has been done by the Co-op stores throughout Scotland. Although many stores have supported the USDAW campaign, some have been a bit reluctant to allow the publicity to be displayed in their stores because they do not want the public to think that their stores are unsafe or threatening, despite the fact that the brunt of the problems are borne by the staff. To its credit, the Co-op, an organisation that has a fine record of campaigning and activity on issues such as fair trade and justice in this country and beyond, has allowed USDAW to go into its stores, set up stalls and take signatures. The Co-op has demonstrated that it has a responsibility to its staff and to the wider community, and it is to be commended for that. I have seen at first hand the work that has been done in Co-op stores. Last week I visited a Co-op store in Paisley with the local USDAW shop steward, Audrey Hendrie. People were queuing up to sign the petition because they wanted to manifest their determination to do what little they can to support shop workers. I thank everyone who was involved. Several things have been done. The First Minister has already pledged his support for the campaign and Cathy Jamieson has also been associated with it. The Executive is getting right behind what the campaign is trying to achieve through a number of specific measures on antisocial behaviour and other proposals for legislation. Important though legislation is, it is not just about that. It is about all of us helping to change the culture and behaviour of the communities in which we live. I thank everyone who has been involved and assure them that the Executive is fully committed to doing what it can in partnership with those who are involved in the campaign. I am sure that some good will come out of that campaign in the coming months.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

It took a long time, Alex.

As always.

I am not surprised that Bill Aitken can hardly keep his face straight, because I do not think that even he believed that. Does he not accept that the consequence of what he proposed in the debate on the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill would have been that those who had been sentenced to three years would have spent longer in prison than those sentenced to four years?

The debate has been exceptionally good for a short one. All parties have made a number of well-considered and appropriate suggestions. I pledge that Cathy Jamieson and I will examine carefully suggestions that are worth considering in more detail. In fact, many of the suggestions were in tune with what we are already considering. Several speakers brought out the fact that, although we are doing a number of things and doing them well, many other aspects of our criminal justice system need to be improved. That is why the Executive is putting so much emphasis  on challenging the way in which we operate and on challenging ourselves and others to do much better. Pauline McNeill spoke about some of the problems in the court system, such as the length of time that it takes for cases to go through court and some of the problems that are associated with witnesses not turning up. A number of organisational aspects will have to be given clear consideration. I will build on some of the comments that Annabel Goldie and others made on the way in which the police operate. The police will continue to have a debate on how they use their resources, on visibility and on intelligence-led policing. What we have been saying about rehabilitation is fundamental. I was encouraged by the number of speakers in the debate who said that prison should not only be about imprisoning violent people and taking them off the street. Karen Whitefield is absolutely right that those who commit serious crimes need to be imprisoned and taken off our street, but she and others also spoke about the need for change. Alex Neil spoke about the need to reform prisoners. Colin Fox spoke graphically about the Finnish experience, which is not unique. I say to Alex Neil, Colin Fox and others that some of the issues with rehabilitation—the fact that prisoners are not being prepared for release and the fact that we have such high reoffending rates—are precisely the reasons why we are so intent on having a debate about a single corrections agency. The social work services are not working as effectively as they could with prisons. The agencies in general are not working well together.

The debate is not about trying to apportion blame; it is about trying to identify problems and come up with solutions. Annabel Goldie talked about the sentencing commission. I say to her that Cathy Jamieson has made it clear that we will not rule out anything on the sentencing commission. We want a full investigation into all aspects of sentencing. We will give priorities and guidelines on that. Many of the comments that have been made will be given careful consideration.  When we debate imprisonment, it is clear that the Tories are still being deceitful and dishonest. They promise that more people will go to prison for longer, but they do not identify the resource issues. Just as in 1993 and 1997, they are not answering the question. Perhaps the Tories are about to surprise us with their own alternative to custody. Perhaps they are going to draw on Rosie Kane's experience and come up with an offer of community imprisonment in which they agree to take in prisoners. The sentencing commission might want to think about whether an offender would want three months with Annabel Goldie or three years in Barlinnie. That would certainly be a difficult choice.

The hypocrisy and deceit that the Conservatives display in any discussion of early release is quite breathtaking, as are some of their references to the sentencing commission. It is clear that the Conservatives have not listened to what the Executive is saying. Last week, the First Minister made it clear—yet again—that automatic early release of prisoners will be considered by the judicially led sentencing commission and that it will be a priority for the commission. Indeed, Cathy Jamieson made it very clear that the commission will not kick things into the long grass. She said that the commission would report on a rolling basis on the clear priorities that have been established by the Executive. Annabel Goldie said "The road to hell is indeed paved with good intentions", when she spoke about the change to the law that was introduced by the Conservatives. Although she is right about that, what she did not do was to put the matter in context. The Conservatives introduced the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993 on the basis of many years of deliberation, including by the Kincraig committee, which was established by the Conservatives. The Conservative Government then took four or five years to introduce legislation. It was not the case that in 1997 the Conservatives discovered that the road to hell was paved with good intentions and that there was a problem. What we had was a very clear act of political expediency ahead of the 1997 election. There is provision in the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993 that allows the Secretary for State for Scotland to make by subordinate legislation changes to early release. The Conservatives chose not to do that, but instead introduced hasty legislation ahead of the 1997 election. They did so for reasons that were purely political and which had nothing to do with tackling crime or with law and order. They simply wanted to try, as they desperately saw it, to enhance their election prospects in Scotland.

Before Annabel Goldie speaks, she might want to reflect on what her party said at the time in its white paper "Crime and Punishment". It said that the changes that it was to introduce in the 1997 legislation would be "dependent on a number of factors", one of which was obviously the "sentencing practice by the courts." The white paper also said: "If there was no change in sentences imposed, the effect on prison population would be an increase of ... 1,000 in the first year" and "2,200 in the fifth year." Notwithstanding the huge change in prison numbers that was anticipated, paragraph 16.9 of the white paper went on to say: "All increases in expenditure arising from the proposals ... will be accommodated within planned resources." There was not a single extra penny for the huge increases in prisoner numbers that were anticipated by the Conservatives. I say to Annabel Goldie that that was why there had to be a change in legislation in 1998. What the Conservatives did was irresponsible and uncosted and the prison places were not prepared. The measure would have led to mayhem and disaster.

While we are on the subject of three-year and four-year sentences, I point out that proposals that Bill Aitken brought forward the previous parliamentary session on behalf of the Conservatives during consideration of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill in would have meant that people serving a three-year sentence would have had to serve longer in prison than those who had been sentenced to four years, simply because of the foolhardy and cackhanded way that the Tories had treated the matter. We certainly intend that  the sentencing commission will examine the broader range of issues and ensure that some of the problems that have been identified are tackled. [ Interruption. ] I am not sure about the time, Presiding Officer.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Obviously, we must get issues such as short sentencing, long sentencing and parole right; the sentencing commission will consider those matters. However, we accept that short sentences sometimes do little to deter and nothing to rehabilitate offenders. We cannot afford to have prison populations increasing without examining the underlying causes for that, which is why we want to have a debate on the need for a single agency. Although we want to consider credible alternatives to imprisonment that the judiciary can trust, we will also examine how to make sentences effective for people who have to serve them. On policing, police officer numbers are at record levels. At the end of June, there were 15,560 police officers in the Scottish police service, which is an increase of 335 since June 2002 and an increase of 848 since June 2000. Over the past three years, support staff numbers have also increased by 891 to 6,066 in whole-time equivalent terms. Staffing increases have been made possible by record levels of funding. This year, the total revenue and capital funding for and in connection with the police will top £1 billion. We have made our commitment. Indeed, in the partnership agreement, we also made commitments to increase the number of police officers on operational duty, to assist chief constables to meet their target of an increase by 500 in the number of special constables and to expand the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency. We are acting on our pledges. On top of all of that, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland has already pledged to increase the number of officers on operational duty by 250 by 2005-06 and we will also consider releasing 300 experienced police officers from escorting and other duties for operational tasks. We are providing resources and the framework for the police to operate within, we are examining sentencing and we are taking a responsible approach to all law and order issues. We are putting our money where our mouth is, which is something that the Conservatives failed to do in the past. People will see that this Administration in this Parliament makes effective arguments while the Conservatives simply express hot air.  I move amendment S2M-380.3, to leave out from "believes" to end and insert: "welcomes the Scottish Executive's decision to establish a judicially-led Sentencing Commission and the commitment to introduce legislation to modernise the operation of the High Court; recognises that the Scottish Executive will act on the McInnes Review and will bring forward further proposals for court reform; notes the measures being introduced that will give more support to victims and witnesses in the criminal justice system, and believes that the record number of police officers in Scotland, the substantial increase in civilian staff and the moves to release police officers for front-line duties will enhance delivery of police services in local communities."

I am afraid that Colin Fox not only identified the relevant minister wrongly, but he got the principle wrong. The SSP is fully committed to immediate independence and not to the half-hearted approach of saying, "Maybe we will, maybe we won't," that John Swinney would take after a referendum and which Alex Neil opposes. If the Parliament accepted Colin Fox's suggestion, it would not prevent the introduction of the powers, but would leave them with United Kingdom ministers at Westminster. It is bizarre that a party of independence wants to prevent Scottish ministers from being given more powers and to leave more powers with Westminster, which would prevent the Scottish Parliament from scrutinising Scottish ministers. The order had full cross-party support when it was considered in committee and it deserves the Parliament's full support. The order will devolve from Westminster to Scotland powers to tackle serious crime. It is in the interests of everyone in the Parliament to ensure that the war against crime is waged effectively. It is strange for any member to want to give powers back to Westminster, but the fact that a party of full independence wants to do that turns all its policies on their head. I ask members to reject Colin Fox's proposal.

I will follow that if I can, Presiding Officer. The matter that Mark Ruskell has raised is clearly of concern to several members and it has been the subject of questions that Cathy Jamieson and I, as well as other ministers, have answered  this session. One of the calls that Mark Ruskell made towards the end of his speech was for a committee of the Parliament to look into the matter. That is not for me to address; that is a matter for the Parliament and its committees to determine themselves. The reasons for the current arrangements have been outlined both in correspondence to members and in answers to parliamentary questions, and we know why the Airwave police radio system is the subject of change. The new system is due to be rolled out to Scottish forces in 2004-05. Because of that time scale, we are now in the midst of preparation for the changes to the transmission network in Scotland, and local authorities are dealing with planning applications in that context. I will return later to the role of local authorities. The new radio system will have a number of advantages over the existing one. It will be digital, and will provide better voice recognition. It will provide for encryption, so that criminals cannot use scanners to listen into police transmissions. It will allow officers on the beat to get direct access to data. It will therefore assist the police in fighting crime effectively and efficiently. However, as has already been made clear, we know of the concerns that have been raised about the TETRA standard that Airwave uses. As a mobile radio system, Airwave requires a network of masts and handsets. Members will be aware of the general concerns that have been expressed over recent years about the possible health risks from such systems, the most familiar of which is the mobile phone. As a result of those concerns, a number of independent reviews have been commissioned, as Iain Smith and others have mentioned, and research has been undertaken or is in progress. I shall attempt to summarise that but, essentially, my conclusion will be the same as the one that I gave in reply to Mark Ruskell's oral question on 4 September: that the work undertaken so far indicates that emissions from the system are not harmful to health. A key report is that by the independent expert group on mobile phones under the chairmanship of Sir William Stewart, which was published in May 2000. Its recommendations dealt mainly with mobile masts but included a reference to TETRA systems. The expert group considered the totality of relevant research published up to the time at which its report was published. It included reference to some studies relevant to radio-frequency emissions from TETRA. That research focused on the effects of radio-frequency emissions on calcium loss from brain tissue.  The expert group noted contradictory results from the research, with specific reference to the frequency of 16 cycles per second that was mentioned earlier. However, the report stressed that the observation of such biological effects did not necessarily mean that health was affected adversely. The potential significance of those findings in the current context is that the TETRA system is known to involve pulsing at 17.6 cycles per second. The Home Office asked the National Radiological Protection Board to provide advice on the implications of the findings for the health of TETRA users and others who may be exposed to TETRA signals. Iain Smith has already addressed some of the concerns that Mark Ruskell raised about the effects of TETRA signals on health and about the survey that was carried out in Lancashire. The problems that accompanied the roll-out of TETRA in Lancashire were associated with a phenomenon called spiking—a loud burst of sound into the ear. That technical problem was resolved. From the information that Iain Smith and I have provided, it is clear that we must see such problems in context. Research was also commissioned from the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory. The NRPB's advisory group on non-ionising radiation, chaired by Sir Richard Doll, carried out that research. The advisory group's report, entitled "Possible Health Effects from Terrestrial Trunked Radio (TETRA)", was published on its website on 31 July 2001 and has also been published in the documents of the NRPB. The advisory group's report noted that the radio-frequency signals transmitted by TETRA base stations are not pulsed but continuous. The signals that are pulsed are those from mobile terminals and repeaters. The advisory group stated that there was no reason to believe that signals from TETRA base stations should be treated differently from those from other mobile phone base stations. The group went on to conclude that the exposure of the public to signals from TETRA base stations was taking place at a small fraction of international guidelines and that "current evidence suggests that it is unlikely that the special features of the signals from TETRA mobile terminals and repeaters pose a hazard to health." The advisory group made a number of recommendations for further research that are being progressed by the link mobile telecommunications and health research programme to which the Scottish Executive is contributing—as has been mentioned—and by the Home Office. The expert group also recommended the adoption of exposure guidelines by the International Commission on Non-Ionizing  Radiation Protection on public exposure to radio- frequency radiation. That recommendation was accepted, as was the recommendation that an audit of base stations should be carried out. The international commission's guidelines refer to exposure of people and not to emissions from specific items of equipment. It has been suggested that the guidelines do not take account of non-thermal effects on body tissues and that they are inappropriately applied to signals from TETRA. That is not true. The commission considered pulsed and amplitude-modulated waveforms when it drew up its guidance. Its view was consistent with that of the NRPB and is similar to conclusions reached by the expert group. There is a great deal more information that I will not have time to discuss. However, I will touch on the planning issues that have been raised. National planning policy guideline 19, on radio telecommunications, contains the Executive's planning guidance on the roll-out of such infrastructure, including the issue of health concerns. The guideline encourages the use of existing infrastructure. Members should note that O 2 has indicated that, where possible, it will place TETRA aerials on existing masts, to minimise the number of new masts. Planning of masts is a matter for local authorities. It is the responsibility of local authorities to consider relevant information. As Iain Smith has indicated, Fife Council has deferred a decision on the applications in north-east Fife. Clear guidelines are given to planning authorities, indicating what they can and cannot consider. Planning authorities can consider a number of aspects, including health aspects. In drawing together our conclusions, we had regard to the findings of the Stewart report and the NRPB, regarding health effects. Our guidelines require a declaration of compliance with ICNIRP exposure guidelines. Local authorities have the responsibility and the authority to consider issues if they think that that is justified. A number of competing claims have been made.

No, unfortunately I am just finishing. Problems have been caused by a combination of myth and lack of scientific evidence. One of the difficulties that we have with many such issues, including health issues, is that sometimes people latch on to one or two aspects and extrapolate from there, causing wider concern that is not always based on evidence. If evidence and facts exist to justify delays or decisions, it should be presented. However, to date, no evidence has  been produced and in the absence of such evidence, it would be difficult for those concerned to take any decision other than those that they are taking.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

This afternoon's debate has been exceptionally good. It was well-informed, thoughtful and challenging and I hope that it was conducted without prejudice as to final conclusions. I detected from members of all parties a willingness to consider and reflect on what the Nicholson report said and to listen to the arguments that are being made, which I think is the right way to approach the issue. The speeches this afternoon reflect just how important it is for us to get this right. We know the pleasure that alcohol can give, to which a number of members attested. However, we also know the damage that alcohol does to individuals, families and communities. It is therefore incumbent on us to reflect carefully and cautiously on how we will proceed. We all know that there is a need for change, but we need to get it right. A point that came out of the debate is that it is important to proceed on the basis of proposals that command the respect and support of those who work in the industry, law enforcers and the wider community. We need to establish a partnership that ensures that we have public houses and hotels that are safe, welcoming places  to drink in and which encourage people to behave responsibly. Several members mentioned the need to change our culture. Michael Matheson certainly touched on that in his excellent summing-up speech. The Nicholson report makes specific proposals on regulation and administration. It does not necessarily take us into issues of cultural change, although it alludes to some of those issues and refers to some recognisable behavioural problems. Michael Matheson, Christine Grahame and others mentioned the unwelcome, casual attitudes that we have towards drink and our tolerance of unacceptable behaviour. Sandra White spoke about comatose youngsters not only being served in nightclubs but being allowed to lie about in the streets. We are all part of the problem, individually and collectively, through the way in which we joke about drink and refer to it casually, and through the fact that we think that it is sometimes acceptable to behave in the ways that have been mentioned. Those attitudes would not be acceptable if we were talking about other areas of life, such as drug abuse. As Christine Grahame said, we see unwelcome references to drink on television and in the newspapers. Recently, I listened to a couple of afternoon radio show presenters talking jokingly about how they could not remember what they had done the night before, as if that was somehow good fun and the right thing to do. I worry about the message that that gives young people and the way they respond to it. As a society, we think that such behaviour is the norm and that people should aspire to it.

Johann Lamont is absolutely correct. Sometimes people use alcohol as their excuse for other forms of unacceptable behaviour. The point that I am trying to make is that we encourage a casualness in relation to alcohol. That casualness regards drunkenness and people's being incapable through drink as somehow socially acceptable and to be welcomed. There are people in responsible positions who encourage and promote such attitudes. We should  be concerned about that. Johann Lamont referred graphically to the links between alcohol availability, alcohol consumption and antisocial behaviour. We have to take account of the research done for Nicholson that showed that purchasing alcohol illegally while under-age was strongly related to delinquent behaviour—the research found that those who purchased the alcohol were more likely to drink frequently. If one of our key principles is the protection of children, we need to take that finding to heart. A number of speakers—including Nicola Sturgeon, Sarah Boyack, Kenny MacAskill and Pauline McNeill—raised the question of access to pubs for children. We need to re-emphasise that the conditions under which children might be admitted to pubs would be tightly controlled. Applicants would have to say that they did not wish to admit children to, for example, a night club. They would also have to demonstrate the circumstances in which children would be allowed access. Access would not be granted willy-nilly.

That is exactly the kind of thing that we want to hear about during the consultation process. Like many speakers this afternoon, we have an open mind on many of the proposals. The minister made specific references to 24-hour drinking but beyond that, we genuinely want to hear from all interested parties about the best way to proceed. Whatever recommendations we come up with in relation to children, we must provide environments where children are safe, protected and encouraged to take a responsible attitude towards alcohol. Some of the traditional drinking dens and shebeens, with smoky atmospheres and uncontrolled consumption of alcohol, would not be good environments into which to allow children. However, I can think of other circumstances in which it would be very beneficial for children to be with their parents and not stuck away elsewhere. Such balances need to be struck. I will not have time to deal with a number of points, but—

Certainly.

I was just coming to that extremely important issue. Margaret Jamieson raised the issues of training, personal licences and the responsibility of licensees in trying to curb overindulgence. We will have to reflect carefully on the question of training and licensing. Following consultation, I hope that we can come up with recommendations that are widely accepted. I want to deal with the consumption of alcohol at sports grounds, to which the minister referred. There is a strong lobby for change—a lobby that includes Kenny MacAskill and, especially, the Conservatives. Like most people in the chamber, we understand that alcohol controls were introduced for reasons of public order and safety. Before we reach any decision in that area, it will be fundamental for us to have regard to the views of the police and stakeholders and to the wider questions of public order and public safety. I was puzzled, and somewhat worried, by the fact that some Conservative members seemed to want to move not just towards liberalisation, but towards a free-for-all in which people could drink as much as they wanted anywhere and at any time. Their argument was that it was all down to personal responsibility. In Scotland, all too often we have seen the consequences of irresponsible behaviour by people who have been allowed to drink too much. The fact that the debate has been a good one reflects the importance of the issue for the people of Scotland and for the Parliament. I hope that it will lead to thorough consultation in communities. We should all encourage local organisations in those communities to participate. At the end of that consultation, I hope that we can introduce legislation that will not only liberalise and modernise, but make an important contribution to social improvement, health improvement and safety in the many communities that are ravaged by the consequences of alcohol misuse.

Will the member give way?

In line with our partnership agreement, we have announced a wide-ranging review of drug treatment and rehabilitation services. That will look at the availability and accessibility of services throughout Scotland. The Executive is already acting to improve the effectiveness of drug treatment and rehabilitation in Scotland. That includes providing an additional £13 million to national health service boards for treatment services and £21 million to local authorities for rehabilitation over the three years from 2001-02. The partnership agreement commits us to providing additional resources and we will determine the level of that investment once the review is completed. In June, the Executive requested specific action from drug action teams and service providers to address issues of accessibility to and the capacity of drug treatment services. The DATs and service providers are due to report back to the Executive by the end of the month.

We are aware of the prevalence of drug misuse in the north-east of Scotland. It is estimated that the Grampian region has the third highest number of problematic drug misusers. Resources allocated to drug treatment services in the Grampian area have almost doubled since 1998-99, from £0.75 million to £1.3 million. An additional £2 million has been allocated to rehabilitation and more than £1.2 million has been allocated for work with children and young people. It is for the local DATs to identify priorities and need. We know that there is an identified problem with  cocaine and crack cocaine in the Aberdeen area. We have agreed to fund a specific service for cocaine and crack cocaine users and we are working with the local DAT to make the appropriate arrangements. We believe that the service will get under way in November and we have committed up to £300,000 for a three-year pilot project.

Our officials are regularly in contact with agencies throughout Scotland to consider service provision and funding. The question of specific funding for particular areas is always under review and we try to reflect local needs and concerns. A review of drug treatment and rehabilitation services is under way and we have asked for it to be done urgently—I expect it to be completed within the next few months. We will then use it to determine our future strategy and investment in relation to drug treatment and rehabilitation services.

We rule nothing in or out in relation to what is the most effective course of treatment. For some individuals, one method of treatment might be more appropriate than another. We know that some people quickly fall back into a drug misusing habit when they come back into the community after having been in residential rehabilitation. We also know that some community rehabilitation services are effective. However, our review will focus on what has been done, what has been done well, where the money is being used, how effective that use has been and how we ensure consistency across Scotland. Although we  are investing record amounts of money, we want to ensure that that money achieves a desirable and consistent effect across the country and covers all aspects of residential and community-based service.

Clearly, I would be concerned about any improper access of the kind that Margaret Jamieson describes. I would need more details about the matter. If the member writes to me with the information that she has, I will certainly have the allegations investigated.

I have met representatives of the Fire Brigades Union twice since my appointment as Deputy Minister for Justice. The Minister for Justice is scheduled to meet FBU representatives on Monday 15 September to discuss our  proposals to consult on new fire service legislation. We plan to publish our consultation paper shortly; the consultation process will give trade unions a further opportunity to make their views known.

The consultation process is absolutely vital. The initial response to our previous publication on the fire service was very positive. We know that to have an effective fire service there must be full engagement of all those who are involved. We will ensure that all stakeholders have the opportunity to be consulted. At my previous meeting with the FBU, I made it clear that we would give the union every opportunity to participate and that we would assist it with advice and support in whatever way is necessary in order to allow it to play a full part. I have since reminded my officials of the commitment that I gave to the union.

It would be premature for me to comment on any individual fire stations. In any case, it is our clear view that local decisions are best made by those who are directly responsible to local communities. The consultation paper will reflect that principle. We believe that the way in which we are progressing will lead to an enhanced, improved and more consistent fire service throughout Scotland.

I join Jamie Stone in that welcome. The proposed closure is a matter for the local fire board and firemaster. I know that Jamie Stone  and the community council in Lybster have been active in pursuing the issue and I am aware that the firemaster has given a commitment to the community council that he will consult it further. He has indicated to the community council his intention to have the plans for Lybster in place before March 2005.

Scottish ministers have a common interest with the UK Government in the new police communications system, which uses the TETRA standard and which is being supplied to police forces in Scotland, England and Wales by Airwave O2. In the light of independent expert advice, an extensive research programme has been established. It includes a health monitoring study of police users, a study by the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory on possible biological effects, and independent monitoring of emissions.  All the results so far confirm that the equipment is safe.

The report from the Advisory Group on Non-Ionising Radiation noted that the signals from TETRA base stations are continuous and not pulsed.

Public health in Fife is a matter for those who are responsible in the Fife area. There is no evidence to suggest that any illnesses or clusters are associated with TETRA masts. We will keep an eye on any reports that show evidence of illness associated with such activity, but to date there is no such evidence.

The debate has been excellent and it has shown that the Executive was right to put the theme of modernising justice forward for debate early in the new session. Some of the speeches that have been made have shown that many  members' constituents are affected by the workings of the judicial system. Although we have heard about many positive cases, there are also far too many cases in which matters have not gone right and which have had an adverse impact on people. Therefore, we must take a close look at how justice is delivered in Scotland. Today's debate has revealed that we have much to be proud of in our Scottish legal system. We should be proud of our independent judiciary and of some of our traditions, which have evolved in the best interests of the citizens of this country, but we should not allow that pride to make us complacent. It would be wrong to assume that, because things have sometimes gone well, things will never go wrong. We should be big enough to reflect on experience and on changes in society, and to consider whether our judicial system is able to cope with some of the demands of the 21 st century. As one speaker said—I think that it was Pauline McNeill—to some extent our judicial system let the 20 th century pass it by. Some of the ways of working are still rooted in the past and need to be brought into the present. That is not per se a criticism of those involved but a reflection of the reality that exists today. For too many of the ordinary people who rely on it, the justice system is remote, unclear and incapable of being easily understood. We are committed to a modern justice system, which will be strongly rooted in the priorities of the partnership agreement that was reached to form this Administration. We want to work for a safer and stronger Scotland and to improve public services. It is important to restate the four guiding principles that the minister articulated for modernising justice. We want a system that is fair where it needs to be fair. It must be fair to vulnerable people and ordinary people as well as to the accused. We want a system—this is especially relevant for the criminal justice system—that is effective and efficient. We want a system that is accessible and user-friendly, both for criminal justice and for civil justice. In that regard, I welcome Stewart Stevenson's comments. The Executive will address those problems, but there are many changes that need to be considered. The fourth principle is that we want a system that is relevant to 21 st century public attitudes and aspirations. We will consider many of the points that have been made in the debate. We want to focus on making the courts and the court processes more efficient. We want a system that is designed around the needs of ordinary people and that is more open to them. We want modern laws that are based on common sense and current public attitudes. The minister's opening speech was a  general statement of the principles that we want to be examined. The debate was deliberately not about the details of the 110-day rule or of the sentencing powers of sheriffs. There will be further opportunities for consultation and more detailed discussion on those issues. It would be wrong to try to resolve all those issues in one short debate. However, I will pick up on some of the points that were raised. Nicola Sturgeon highlighted the need for a balance between the rights of the accused and those of the witnesses and victims. That is absolutely right, but we need to make a link to the need for perpetrators to be brought quickly to trial. In different ways, Nicola Sturgeon, Annabel Goldie, Colin Fox, Stewart Maxwell and others raised the issue of the 110-day rule. Without going into a huge amount of detail, I want to put on record the fact that Lord Bonomy's report makes it clear that at present accused can, and often do, spend more than 110 days on remand. The reason is not a delay on the part of the Crown. Almost invariably, the Crown meets the 80-day time limit for issuing indictments. In 2001, extensions to the 110 days were sought in 24 per cent of cases, but the most frequent reason was that the defence was not ready.

Clearly, there are issues to be examined about the way in which the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service works from start to end, but that is part of our commitment to modernisation of the justice system. It is also the case that the defence asked for more time in many of the individual cases that were looked at. We believe that our proposals for preliminary hearings and fixed diets will spare many of the uncertainties that arise from adjournments. Annabel Goldie said that judicial discretion in sentencing is important. We accept that judicial discretion is fundamental to the way that the legal system in Scotland works, but we must reflect on the fact that, as many members said, many people feel that sentences are inappropriate and do not properly reflect the seriousness of the crimes that have been committed. There is an opportunity for a sentencing commission to consider many of the wider issues surrounding sentences. Margaret Smith was right to say that we need a change of culture. Colin Fox referred to the same matter in a slightly different way. We need a change of culture among all who  are involved in the judicial system. Margaret Smith and others were also right to talk about supporting victims. Kate Maclean movingly described the difficulties that many people face when they are confronted with the court system: it fails the victims and witnesses and it does not give protection. Ken Macintosh talked about the harrowing lessons to be learned from the Cawley case and what that family experienced in being exposed to the accused and the families of the accused. The Cawleys were given no privacy or protection. When someone is in great distress, they suffer trauma and feel intimidated, and they will perhaps feel unable to contribute fully to the judicial process. That issue needs to be addressed. Colin Fox mentioned some of the archaic traditions of the judicial system and, in referring to the attitude of the Solicitor General, Karen Whitefield answered that very well. Pauline McNeill raised the question of the disgraceful situation in which many women offenders find themselves, whereby sheriffs and the courts sentence them to prison simply to get treatment for them. That issue also arises in many drug-related cases, and Pauline McNeill is right to raise it. It is an issue that the minister wants to address, and she will give a commitment to consider such issues carefully. Bill Aitken asked why many of his proposals for the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill had not been accepted. The reason was not that the proposals were unacceptable in principle, but that the amendments that he lodged were unworkable. We took them away and considered them very carefully. Kate Maclean said that there is a perception that the balance has swung too far away from victims, their families and witnesses. In any consideration of the judicial system, there is a need to ensure that the balance is right. We must defend the rights of the accused but also defend the victims and witnesses. Patrick Harvie is right to say that we should not have a debate on the judicial system without considering restorative justice and crime prevention. I agree with Stewart Stevenson that there is a need for more transparency in relation to early pleas. I give him an assurance that we are fundamentally committed to delivering that and that we will ensure that that happens. Two significant points were raised in great detail by Margo MacDonald and Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, concerning important issues that deserve careful consideration. The Lord Advocate will meet Lord Falconer, the Secretary of State for  Constitutional Affairs, tomorrow to discuss what has been announced. Many important points of detail need to be considered. Ministers will have to be consulted and they will have to reflect on the proposals. Anything that impinges on the powers of the Scottish Parliament will also need to be considered in great detail and come before the parliamentary committees and Parliament itself. In consideration of the judicial system, we are all duty bound to keep our eye firmly on what our system should be about. The system should give protection to individuals and punish wrongdoing. Fundamentally, it should be about the way in which people relate to one another. Most of the time, conflicts in our society are resolved without any great problem, but there are, unfortunately, times when the judicial system has to step in. We want a judicial system that provides a positive framework for dealing with people; a system that is able to act when things go wrong; and, above all, a system that is effective and fair and in which the general public has confidence.

The debate has been excellent. It has provided a good opportunity for many to contribute and for a wide range of views to be expressed. The striking thing has been the generally positive tone of the speeches—although there were one or two unfortunate exceptions. It would have been wrong to drag the debate into a party-political squabble, because the interests of young people and of Scotland's future are far more important than scoring party-political points. The attendance of a number of young people who have come to listen to our debate has been welcome. Along with Peter Peacock and his deputy, Euan Robson, I had lunch with some representatives from the Scottish Youth Parliament, Who Cares? Scotland, the Scottish Throughcare and Aftercare Forum, Young Scot and the dialogue youth project. Those young people are anxious to make a contribution. They want their voice to be heard and they have a strong opinion that deserves to be heard in the Parliament. I cannot remember whether it was Sandra White, but someone suggested that there should be more dialogue and engagement with young people. At lunch time, the minister gave a commitment to the young people that we would explore ways in which the Scottish Youth Parliament and youth organisations could engage jointly with the Parliament in a debate about the future of young people. I know that Peter Peacock will explore ways in which that might be done constructively. Today has been an opportunity to celebrate the contribution that is made by young people. As several members have indicated in the course of the debate, although young people need to be supported, nourished and cherished, they nevertheless have much to contribute to society in  general and perhaps to politicians in particular. Young people have an honesty of approach that is sometimes lacking in many other quarters. Their tolerance not only of other young people, but of many others in society could sometimes serve us well. They are open and non-judgmental. They are also caring and, as Eleanor Scott mentioned, they have an awareness of the environment and of their surroundings. Young people have a passion about living in a better society both locally and, just as significant, internationally. They are at the heart of many of the Scottish charities that make a significant contribution beyond our shores. Young people are often the driving force behind organisations such as Concern, which is currently raising money for good causes in parts of the world that face disaster. Young people have also been a huge influence in the fundraising activities of the Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund. In organisations such as Christian Aid and Oxfam, young people are the backbone of much of the valuable work that is done. It is right that in today's debate we have paid tribute to that work. Another significant point is that, as well as talking in general terms about what young people contribute, members have been able to mention many specific and glowing personal examples of the difference that young people are making in schools, communities and projects throughout Scotland. It is right that we individually and collectively recognise that contribution. It is also right that, as the minister did this morning, we recognise the need for the Executive and the Parliament to support young people by putting in place the systems that they need to allow them to continue to make that contribution. We have heard much about some of those actions today. Let me emphasise the point that I made at the beginning about the commitment and willingness of the minister—this should extend to all of us—to listen to, and engage with, young people in the decision-making process. The theme that is emerging is that, yes, we want to listen to and take account of young people, but we also want to feed back to them what is being done and how we have reflected on what we have listened to. I hope that we can all commit to that. I will comment on some specific remarks that were made during the debate. Fiona Hyslop asked about the children's commissioner. I am advised that that should happen by the end of this year and the Parliament will make the appointment rather than the Executive. I will not try to follow Fiona Hyslop's argument about procreation, creating babies and whether independence would create more babies.

Yes, the sun would shine and it would never set. Fiona Hyslop's comment was interesting.

Not following my comments about procreation. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton made the pertinent comment that education opens minds and opens up opportunities. That is why we want to do so much for young people: to ensure that every young person in this country has the ability and the opportunity to live their life to its full potential. We need to acknowledge some of the diversity that has been talked about. As Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, there are particular problems and difficulties with discipline and threats in schools. Those problems are not insurmountable: some of them are resource based and that should be tackled; some of them are policy based, but we should not allow that to get in the way of developing a better environment in which young people can learn. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton—echoed by Margaret Mitchell—made a comment about head teachers and their responsibilities. I do not understand the descriptions of head teachers that have been given. Margaret Mitchell said that schools should have their own discipline policies. They have. As far as we are concerned, head teachers are free to make their own decisions. The minister has said that we will not try to second-guess head teachers. I do not know where Margaret Mitchell's line is coming from. Head teachers are critical to the delivery of good discipline in schools. Eleanor Scott talked about young people's environmental responsibility and their sense of justice. However, she misunderstands the debate that we are trying to have about making parents responsible. We are not talking about jailing parents for the actions of their children. We are talking about parents taking responsibility for giving care and attention, and for nurturing their children. We are talking about taking action against those parents who neglect and fail their children. Any action against a parent will be taken because of their failure to recognise what a court has asked them to do to be a good and caring parent. We are not talking about holding parents responsible for their children's actions. Robert Brown and other members talked about the very small number of young people—0.1 per cent—who are engaged in persistent offending. However, as Duncan McNeil, Johann Lamont and  others indicated, it is that small number of people that is causing disproportionate mayhem in communities throughout Scotland. We would be negligent if we turned our backs on those communities and said that we are doing nothing to support them. We have good, decent communities made up of hard-working and responsible families who are being terrorised by a handful of people. Although we understand the causes of some of the social problems in our country, and we understand how poverty can leave people dispirited and undermined by not allowing them to participate fully in society, it is in no way right to use that to justify and excuse people behaving badly, carrying out acts of violence and causing mayhem. The biggest insult in that analysis and language is to the decent people and decent families on low wages who are struggling to bring up their children and give them some leadership and guidance, and who would not tolerate their children behaving like that. Simply to excuse the bad behaviour of others because of poverty demeans the good parents who are trying their damnedest to bring up their children. Many examples have been given of what young people have contributed. Pauline McNeill talked about the talents of school pupils at secondary and primary levels; others echoed her comments. She also raised the important issue of the need to protect open spaces and playing fields to allow young people to enjoy life, participate and develop. Pauline McNeill, at the end of her speech, touched on two issues that are important to the Executive and, I hope, to the Parliament. It is absolutely right that looked-after children will continue to be a priority. Scott Barrie has made many speeches on that issue, as have other members. As a society, we are failing many of those children, and we need to continue to do more. Pauline McNeill also mentioned something that may not be a headline issue or a day-to-day issue, and that is the horrendous trafficking of young people for sexual exploitation and profit. Commendably, in this Parliament we have already passed legislation to protect young children in those circumstances, but she is right that we need to do more. I do not have time to follow the line that Jim Mather developed. He suggested that those who are claiming benefits are playing the game. That was an insulting and gratuitous remark. We should not engage in such remarks in a debate on young people. David Davidson raised issues that are worthy of further exploration, possibly by committees of this Parliament as well as the Executive. He mentioned examining the relationship between parents and children. He also mentioned  significant health issues, to which the partnership will give priority. When Donald Gorrie talked about local government being starved of money, he was being inaccurate. More money has gone into local government in recent years than ever before. How that money is used is a question for local government, but we are investing in an unprecedented way to allow local councils to provide services. Fergus Ewing asked a specific question about a local project. The evaluation is being done. We will reflect on it, then make a decision depending on what comes out of it. Fergus Ewing made a number of interesting points. Patrick Harvie said that the media described young people as dangerous, reckless and feckless—I say to him that the media may have been talking about the Green party rather than young people. Perhaps he read the wrong report. Duncan McNeil put in the proper context the need to challenge and castigate unacceptable behaviour wherever it takes place. So many other issues and questions were raised in the debate that I do not have sufficient time to cover them. However, on Irene Oldfather's question on test purchasing, the pilot projects started in February. They will run for the rest of this year, and a further report will be produced. The debate has afforded a welcome opportunity for the Parliament to engage positively across party boundaries in expressing our support for a section of society that is often unfairly castigated and condemned. We have been able to say clearly and specifically that a lot of good is going on involving young people. In my area, the flexicare project involves young people in volunteering work on Saturdays with kids who are disabled and handicapped. Moreover, PACE Youth Theatre, which is Scotland's largest youth theatre, involves between 1,500 and 2,000 young people in drama and arts and helps to engage other young people by producing plays about bullying and drugs. I also want to recognise the achievements of schools in Renfrewshire, such as Johnstone High School in my constituency. Those individual examples can be repeated the length and breadth of Scotland. We have much to celebrate and to be proud of. It is right for the Parliament to record that it appreciates and values our young people's contribution.

Jim Mather speaks about people being shunted on to incapacity benefits and about families struggling to get by on low wages—indeed, SNP members have voiced their strong views in the Parliament about the eligibility of young people to claim benefits. However, earlier, he also spoke about a state-sponsored dependency culture. What exactly does he mean by that?

Eleanor Scott speaks about lowering the voting age to 16. I think that one of her party's representatives suggested at a hustings in Glasgow during the election campaign that young people should be allowed to vote at an age when they feel responsible and capable of voting. Is that, in fact, the Greens' policy?

I am pleased to confirm the Executive's continuing support for the bill, which will enable the council of the Law Society to discharge its business more efficiently by means of appropriate delegation. It will also increase the speed at which the society can handle its business, which will allow faster processing of complaints. It is to the Law Society's credit that it has taken account of several key recommendations from the Justice 1 Committee's report on the regulation of the legal profession in the scheme of delegation for client relations matters, which the society has  helpfully provided. The scheme provides for 50 per cent lay representation on client relations committees, which will help to boost public confidence in the transparency and fairness of committee processes. As David McLetchie said, the scheme proposes to pay lay members an honorarium, which recognises the value of the time and effort that those members commit to the task. I also commend the society's undertaking in the scheme that responsibility for resolving all complaints will be delegated to its client relations committees. I am pleased that the scheme of delegation provides for an oversight committee to help ensure consistency in the work of the society's client relations committees. It will be important for committees to take account of precedents in exercising their judgment. The scheme also mentions that adequate safeguards will be in place to ensure that complaints are properly considered in the first instance. I commend the society for that undertaking. The Executive will be interested to hear in due course what those safeguards will be. The bill is a welcome measure and marks the beginning of a period of change for the Law Society in the way in which it handles complaints. I take the opportunity to congratulate the Law Society on the work that it has done on the bill and the scheme of delegation. I am pleased that the bill has made speedy progress and I confirm that the Executive fully supports it.

Bill Aitken might misunderstand the situation. The issue of a breach of the peace of a serious sexual nature will be dealt with by the bill; it will be a matter for judges. The points that Michael Matheson raised are part of a broader debate, which has been addressed. The Executive sent a note to the Procedures Committee to point out a useful way of moving forward. We received a reply, dated 18 March, from Murray Tosh, the convener of the Procedures Committee, which said that the committee would have no objections to the proposals in paragraph 5 of the Executive's memorandum being implemented at once. What has been suggested reflects many of the concerns that have been expressed in Parliament over time. Although I note Michael Matheson's opposition in principle to Sewel motions, I think that we have acted reasonably in this case.

indicated disagreement.

Following the Justice 2 Committee's consideration of the Sewel memorandum on 18 March, I wrote to the convener on the same day to explain in more detail the reasons behind our proposals to amend the schedule in the Sexual Offences Bill that lists offences that can trigger sex offender registration. In that letter, I sought to clear up any misunderstanding and I am happy to be able to do so again. The Sexual Offences Bill was first introduced at the House of Lords, but it will need to pass to the House of Commons for its consideration. For the avoidance of doubt, the list of offences for Scotland in schedule 2 of the bill as introduced in the House of Lords is simply a re-statement of the list that currently appears in paragraph 2 of schedule 1 to the Sex Offenders Act 1997. Those offences are a mixture of common law sexual offences, such as rape, and statutory sexual offences, such as incest. All the offences that are listed trigger registration automatically. The key word is "automatically". We believe that the approach of having specified sexual offences for which conviction in itself triggers registration is right. That view was endorsed by the expert panel on sex offending, which Lady Cosgrove chaired. We will seek to instruct a Government amendment to close a gap in the bill that the expert panel identified. At present, an offender might be convicted of a non-sexual offence, such as breach of the peace, but there might be evidence of a significant sexual element in the offender's behaviour. There is currently no way to ensure that he or she is subject to the requirements of the sex offender register.

As Richard Lochhead knows, the process could work in the other direction. We are in contact with authorities in Grampian about that case and we continue to be in contact with our colleagues in the Home Office on it and other issues. It would be inappropriate for me to go into any detail other than to say that we will keep the matter under review. We propose to close the gap that I described by introducing amendments to extend the list in schedule 2 to the bill to include any offence. However, the difference is that registration will not be automatic, unlike with listed sexual offences. Instead, the judge will examine the circumstances of the offence and decide whether the offender ought to be subject to registration because there has been a significant sexual element in the offence. We want to ensure that if the sentencing judge considers that an offender's behaviour displayed a sexual element that is significant enough to warrant additional measures to protect the public, the legislation is in place to enable the offender's being subject to registration. We consider balance to be essential, which is why we want to retain and re-enact the existing list of sexual offences that—because of their nature—trigger automatic registration. As I explained to the Justice 2 Committee, a good example of that approach is the new human trafficking offence in the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill. It would be inappropriate for that offence to trigger automatic registration in every case, but our amendment will enable the judge to examine the circumstances of the offence and to order registration as appropriate. The committee was also concerned that we might miss out important offences by retaining a list. I assure members that we will not be complacent about the need to keep an up-to-date list of offences that trigger automatic registration, as opposed to those that the judge should consider case by case in accordance with the Cosgrove recommendations. The bill contains a clause that will by order confer a power on Scottish ministers to add to the list of offences in schedule 2 at any time. In recent years, we and our Westminster colleagues have acted swiftly to introduce safeguards and to strengthen the sex offenders register. The measures in the bill represent a further significant step in addressing the risk that  sex offenders pose to our communities. I urge members to support the motion. I move, That the Parliament endorses the principle of protecting society from persons who pose a risk of causing sexual harm and agrees that the provisions within the Sexual Offences Bill that relate to devolved matters and which re-enact the Sex Offenders Act 1997, extend the categories of offenders required to register, increase restrictions on sex offenders and strengthen the notification requirements and operation of the Sex Offenders' Register should be considered by the UK Parliament.

Jackie Baillie has done us a favour in giving us an opportunity to focus yet again on the critical role that charities and voluntary organisations play in the life of the country, as many members have testified is the case. It would go against my grain if I were not to rise to some of the political comments that have been made. I do not want the debate to deteriorate into petty party-political point scoring, but I say in passing that there are some who joined this Parliament four years ago whining, moaning and groaning and who are clearly determined to end the session doing the same thing. I did not recognise the description that I heard tonight of the Parliament's and the Executive's view of the voluntary and charitable sector. I have noted some points and I will reflect and report back on them. Donald Gorrie regretted the  lack of progress made by the Executive and I will certainly feed his comments back to Jim Wallace, who has taken a close interest in the matter during the past four years. I do not think that the criticisms and some of the concerns that were raised are entirely accurate. That said, there are some things to which we need to give due consideration. It is important to put on record our appreciation of the work that charities do throughout Scotland. As members have testified, charities deliver a wide range of services. Their work with disadvantaged and marginalised groups plays a key part in achieving greater social justice in Scotland. I know that Jackie Baillie feels very strongly about that. Charities also provide a range of expertise that is not available in any other organisation in Scotland. Without charities' knowledge, skill and expertise, Scotland and many of its inhabitants would be much the poorer. The changes in charity regulation that we are putting in place are designed to support and encourage that work, while reassuring the public that their money is being well used and that support is being properly provided. Our response to the McFadden report contains responses to all 114 of the commission's recommendations and sets out plans for the way forward. I hope that members have had the opportunity to reflect on our response to the report, as we responded at length. We are grateful to the McFadden commission for the important work that it carried out. The McFadden report was a diligent and worthwhile piece of work, which deserved a careful and thorough response. I believe that that is what it received—indeed, one commissioner described our response as well worth the wait. The commissioners do not accept the suggestions that have been made that the Executive responded negatively to their report. We accept the thrust of the report, which is that there should be better regulation and support of charities in Scotland. Our plans will provide, for the first time, an up-to-date register of Scottish charities and a central source of support and advice for charities, their trustees and the public. Our plans will also provide a regulator—the office of the Scottish charity regulator—whose functions will include the routine monitoring of charities, including scrutiny of their annual reports. I believe that those plans address the gap in regulation, which has clearly been a cause of concern for some time. We are working on many of the tasks that need to be undertaken to bring the OSCR into operation early next year. As Robin Harper and one or two other members remarked, the definition of a charity is key to the question of which bodies receive the benefit of charitable status and so fall to be regulated. We  agree with McFadden that the current definition of a charity is outdated. Jackie Baillie and other members mentioned the long history of the legislation in that respect. We believe that a new UK-wide definition is desirable. Although none was in prospect at the time that the McFadden commission was carrying out its work, I believe that there is the prospect of such a definition. The Cabinet Office strategy unit produced a report on charities and the wider not-for-profit sector. Johann Lamont made a valuable contribution about that sector. We need to consider some of the issues in relation to co-operative organisations that she raised, including how money and resources are owned and distributed. The Cabinet Office strategy unit report gives us an opportunity to consider a modernised definition of charities that is based on the principle of public benefit and a wider range of purposes. Such a definition could encompass issues such as the promotion of human rights, which is all too often ignored, and the advancement of amateur sport, in which many organisations in this country play a valuable part. I believe that the strategy unit definition reflects the spirit of the McFadden recommendations. Indeed, the SCVO has described the continuing role of the Inland Revenue in determining charitable status as unnecessary and problematic. It would probably be possible to legislate for charitable status to be conferred in Scotland by the regulator, using either the UK or a different definition.

I was about to say that, as far as using the same definition or a different one is concerned, we have ruled nothing out. However, we should bear it in mind that the Inland Revenue would still be an important part of the process. For example, eligibility for tax relief is a reserved issue, but is central to the viability of many charities and represents a key attraction of charitable status.  On Fiona Hyslop's first question, I absolutely assure her that the social justice department plays a critical part not just in relation to legislation but in considering the role of charities in the voluntary sector. I would not dare to contemplate any discussion on the matter without allowing the Minister for Social Justice to have her say.

I agree entirely with that comment. I want to return to points that members made about the need for legislation and about putting the regulator on to a statutory footing. Following the McFadden report, we made it clear that there would be no opportunity to introduce a charities bill in the current parliamentary session. Unfortunately, I cannot commit the Parliament or Administration in the next session to introducing such a bill within the parliamentary timetable. Instead, we have been trying to concentrate on setting up the new regulator. I completely respect the right of interested individuals to make the case for legislation that they believe is necessary; indeed, Jackie Baillie has articulated many of those views. However, I do not believe some members' claims that it is all or nothing. Although no legislation has been introduced, we should not ignore the many good things that are happening in the sector. I do not think that what we are doing is a waste of time, and the new arrangements will provide a good basis for developing proposals for regulation.

That is entirely a matter for the new committees of the next Parliament. Over the first four years of the Parliament, the committees have demonstrated their vigour and the wide-ranging nature of their interests. I am sure that some of them will consider the work of the broader range of charities that Cathy Peattie described. On the regulator, we believe that the agency model is an established and effective way of delivering regulatory functions. It means that we do not have to wait for a legislative opportunity to set up the regulator—its work can begin immediately. In response to Brian Fitzpatrick and other members, I make it clear that we have not ruled out putting the regulator on a statutory footing in time, if experience shows that that is necessary.  In due course, there will be a need to introduce a new legal form for charities such as the charitable incorporated organisation. We also need to extend trustees' investment power and improve the procedures and powers of the Scottish charities nominee. Moreover, there might be a further review of proposals to put the register of charities on a statutory footing in order to extend the regulator's powers, which might include the power to grant charitable status. This important debate has come towards the end of the parliamentary session. As a result, it is only right that we yet again give due recognition to the work of thousands of organisations and tens of thousands of people throughout Scotland in improving and sustaining the quality of life for individuals who are sometimes vulnerable and isolated. We pay tribute yet again to the expertise and dedication of those involved and we recognise the absolutely critical role that charities play in the fabric of life in Scotland, whatever shape or form they take. As Johann Lamont said, we are offering tremendous support to the charitable sector. We should celebrate and recognise not only its work, but the work that Parliament has done. Tonight's debate should be about a positive recognition of what has been achieved, although we recognise that more is still to be done. As Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, in the next session, we hope to work in partnership to make the work of charities in delivering for communities easier, and thereby to improve directly the quality of life throughout Scotland.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

While we could always argue for more resources, in recent years substantial extra investment has been made in North Ayrshire to combat crime.

I will quote from a recent article in the Largs and Millport Weekly News . The headline reads "crime rates are falling", and the article says: "Falling rates of crime in North Ayrshire have been applauded by the local MSP, Allan Wilson ... Daily crime rates have apparently fallen from an average of thirty per day in 2001-02 down to twenty-four at the end of January this year." Kay Ullrich asks about the Executive's response, so I will indicate what we are doing. There are record numbers of police and support staff throughout Scotland. In North Ayrshire, we have invested £143,000 in closed-circuit television; £238,000 in a community safety partnership award; a total of £490,000 in youth justice in 2002-03; £6.75 million over three years from the better neighbourhood services fund to tackle such issues as community safety and crime; £1.9 million for  additional drug treatment—

And, Presiding Officer—

Last but not least—

—the sum of £4.85 million over the next three years for quality-of-life funding.

I would like to commend the local groups that have been actively involved. I am sure that the introduction of CCTV in those areas will be welcomed. Those cameras will join the six that are already in Irvine town centre, the eight that are in Whitletts, the eight in Saltcoats, Ardrossan and Stevenston, and the three that are in Kilwinning.

I believe that a new police station will be opened in the next couple of months. However, operational matters are the responsibility of the chief constable. Phil Gallie raised the bigger issue of violent crime, which affects not just North Ayrshire but the whole of Scotland. The First Minister has made it clear that that is unacceptable. There are cultural issues that we need to address, and there are resource and legislative issues that we are addressing and will continue to address. Violent behaviour is unacceptable and will be dealt with.

It is for the police and the prosecuting authorities to respond to reports of licensees selling alcohol to young people under 18. The Executive's plan for action on alcohol problems acknowledges that several approaches are required, including proof-of-age schemes and training for bar and off-licence staff.

I share Johann Lamont's concerns. A test purchasing scheme involving tobacco sales is under way and will be examined to see how successful and effective it is. Johann Lamont also referred to the scheme that was started in Fife, which arose from a debate sponsored by Marilyn Livingstone to which Fife Council responded. Fife Council is considering some of the issues surrounding shopkeepers who sell to under-age children. That will be different from the tobacco scheme, the evidence from which could be used for prosecution purposes. The local authority is running a solvent-abuse scheme to identify the extent of the problem. There would be nothing to prevent authorities such as Glasgow City Council from reacting as Fife Council has done and testing the extent of illegal sales. From any evidence gathered, we could reflect on what has to be done. The Crown Office and the Executive have made it clear that we will act on the information gathered from the tobacco scheme. Anything that Fife  Council, or any other authority that has responded to Johann Lamont's point, can do will be of benefit and use to us.

There are complex issues surrounding what Bill Aitken has suggested. If the tobacco purchasing and solvent abuse scheme identifies issues of concern, we will reflect on what has to be done. The clear message has to go out from the Parliament that, as Johann Lamont says, irresponsible shopkeepers who are prepared to damage the health of young people will face harsh penalties and we will not tolerate them.

Procurators fiscal are responsible for the prosecution of crime in Scotland. The police have a clear duty to uphold the law in relation to illegal drugs, but the deployment of police resources to tackle drugs is entirely an operational matter for individual chief constables.

Press reports yesterday indicated the serious concerns about the medical problems that are caused by cannabis. The report said that, in cannabis users, "the air sacs in the lung which permit the transfer of oxygen into the blood ... have been displaced by big cysts ... cutting the lung's function by up to a third and crowding the chest cavity. Sometimes the effect is a collapsed lung." It is surprising that Mr Sheridan wants to make it easier for more young people in Scotland to be exposed to such conditions. He wants to make it easier for more of our young people to suffer the psychiatric effects of marijuana or the increased danger of lung cancer, schizophrenia and impotence. In his drug strategy, he also seems to want to legitimise the criminals who cause so much havoc in our communities. As far as drugs are concerned, Mr Sheridan seems to have more in common with the libertarian right.

I agree entirely.

This is a welcome opportunity to discuss a complex, often controversial, but socially very important issue, which affects many individuals and, as we have heard today, many communities. It is a problem that, all too often, we try to forget about despite the length of time that it has been with us.  In introducing the bill, Margo MacDonald has enabled us—through the excellent work of the Local Government Committee and her own excellent work—to give wider and more detailed consideration to the way in which we should tackle the problem. We have heard legitimate concerns about the women who are involved in prostitution and about the need to offer them routes out of it. We have heard legitimate concerns about the violence that they may face and their drug habits. We have also heard concerns about residents in certain communities. All those concerns are worthy of careful consideration. We have also heard, in the work of the committee and again today, that there are clear differences of opinion within the Parliament and outwith it, not just among different groups, but concerning the different experiences in Edinburgh and Glasgow. The committee heard that those who were involved with the tolerance zone that existed in Edinburgh would welcome the measures in the bill and see them as the way forward. However, a number of contributors to the committee's work and several members today, including Pauline McNeill, mentioned the need for support services to help the women who are involved. Those services must be at the heart of anything that we do. We know that Glasgow has a different opinion and does not favour a tolerance zone. However, Glasgow has a long record of well-structured support to help people out of prostitution. Pauline McNeill mentioned one of the organisations that does that, which is funded by the Executive. We must give careful consideration to all the different opinions. As I said to the committee, we should not make hasty decisions. Although the committee has done a commendable job and has spent a lot of time on the bill, there are still many questions to be answered and issues to be addressed. The committee recognises that, and that fact has been acknowledged again in the debate. As members have said, we do not want women to be forced into prostitution to earn a living or, in some cases, to feed a drug habit. That point has been made consistently in what members have said. The Executive's view was that it would wait to see the committee's report. We have done that. We welcome the general thrust of that report and agree with the committee's recommendation to reject the call for immediate legislation to enable the setting up of tolerance zones. We think that that is the right conclusion in the present circumstances. The issues are not clear, and it would be premature to rush to legislation on the subject. We understand the arguments that have been presented by Margo MacDonald and others who  are in favour of tolerance zones. However, it is clear that there is, as yet, no consensus as to whether tolerance zones would improve or worsen the overall safety of the women who are involved in prostitution or of the communities in which they operate. Another key goal for public policy should be the provision of more effective support to help women out of prostitution. At the moment, however, there is no evidence to suggest that tolerance zones would assist in that.

There is evidence of good work in both Edinburgh and Glasgow in helping women out of prostitution. However, there is no evidence yet that tolerance zones would assist that process. The Local Government Committee recommended that an expert group should be set up. Members will recall that in recent years several high-profile groups, including the ministerial working group on women offending, examined prostitution but were unable to agree on a way forward. Nevertheless, we agree with the committee that an expert group would be a sensible way forward. We think that such a group, which would be taken out of the political framework, would be able to do objective, expert analysis and investigation, and could help to inform views. I think that it could present a productive set of proposals to the Parliament and to the Administration.

The Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services in his reply to the Local Government Committee articulated some of the concerns about how the power of well-being would and could be used. The power of well-being cannot be used for illegal activities, but it can be used to promote the well-being of different groups in different areas within local communities. The power of well-being is flexible, but there must be constraints on how it operates. I return to the question of the proposed expert group. I propose that, given the expertise that Margo MacDonald assembled through her work and brought to the debate, she should be invited to participate in the work of the expert group, to consider issues such as health, social justice, poverty and re-offending. However, I make it clear  that, given the time constraints, it would be difficult for this Parliament to move forward on the expert group proposal. The next Parliament and the next Administration would have to take that forward. However, an expert group that was supported by and involved Margo MacDonald would be of considerable benefit. I will quickly address the issue of the drugs courts. As I said to the Local Government Committee, there is nothing to prevent women from being referred to drugs courts. It is obvious that there are concerns in some quarters about the fact that that is not happening. We will consider that further. Margo MacDonald has done an excellent job in helping to bring the issue of prostitution tolerance zones to the attention both of the public and of the Parliament. She and the Local Government Committee must be commended for their work. I hope that the rejection of the Prostitution Tolerance Zones (Scotland) Bill as premature and the creation of an expert group will help to ensure that in the coming period we will be able to have a reasoned, sensible and sensitive discussion on a difficult problem. I thank Margo MacDonald for enabling us to look forward to doing that.

My understanding is that to accept a taxi ride without an intention to pay could constitute the common-law offence of fraud and would be a matter for the police to investigate. The fare could also be treated as a civil debt.

I confirm that the ability to make a citizen's arrest is available and that the crime that Margo MacDonald outlined exists. I understand that the City of Edinburgh Council intended to put a notice in the back of taxis stating that non-payment of fares would result in the passenger being locked in the cab and taken to the nearest police station. The police objected to that measure, but both the Crown Office and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland share the view that the practice that is generally employed by taxi drivers—of taking the passenger to a police station, where the passenger either pays up or is reported—is satisfactory. The matter is for the local authority. I hope that, if need be, the authority will consult the Crown Office and ACPOS and provide guidance and reassurance to taxi drivers, who often face a difficult job.

Like the minister, I thank all those who worked so hard on the bill and the organisations  and individuals who provided written submissions and gave oral evidence to the committee. Jim Wallace was accurate in his thanks to the Justice 2 Committee, which worked so hard on scrutinising the bill. Its members raised fundamental and important issues in addition to making a number of suggestions that helped to improve the final outcome. This debate is the culmination of a process of policy development. As the minister said, it included wide consultation, the publication of two white papers setting out our proposals and debates in the Parliament. We are not talking about hurried or hasty legislation. There has been an interesting and lively debate, which has reflected the diverse nature and importance of the provisions of the bill as well as concerns, doubts and anxieties that are to be recognised. The debate has also reflected the determination of the Parliament to have an improved system of criminal justice in Scotland. It has shown that, despite some caveats, there is wide agreement on the overall aims of the legislation, which are to deliver better public protection, to promote more effective sentencing and to keep the law up to date. Johann Lamont rightly said that the willingness of people to engage in the process is a testament to the Parliament. In echoing her comments, I believe that the willingness of the Executive to listen and to respond is a strength of the parliamentary process and not a weakness. I want to address a couple of comments that were made by members of the Conservative party. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton talked about the Conservatives' medicine being too strong. He is not correct, as the problem was that the Conservatives' medicine was wrongly prescribed and incorrectly mixed. The Conservatives made a number of proposals, some of which we accepted and others of which contributed to changes that were made. However, some of their proposals contained errors including on reserved issues—Lord James Douglas-Hamilton referred to that. There were also some weaknesses in the Conservative proposals. The Conservatives' medicine was wrongly composed and would have been completely ineffective. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's comment was inaccurate. The bill should not be seen as an opportunity lost and we should not look to diminish or demean the bill on the basis of the remarks that Bill Aitken made. It is not an opportunity lost to tighten up the law on child pornography and on the trafficking of people for prostitution. It is not an opportunity lost to extend rights to victims or to crack down on wildlife crime. It is certainly not an opportunity lost to toughen up measures to deal with the anti-social behaviour that is scarring many of our communities in Scotland.  All in all, the bill represents progress for the Scottish Parliament and for the people of Scotland. Many measures in the bill will have a great impact on the wider community. Many good things have come out of the bill, but it is right to say that although it marks our progress, the Parliament and its Administration are not complacent. There is much more to do to tackle crime and anti-social behaviour in Scotland, and the bill is the first of a number of measures that we intend to introduce to make Scotland a safer and more secure place.

Amendment 48 is a minor drafting amendment. The correct term is "substituted" rather than "inserted". I move amendment 48.  Amendment 48 agreed to.

At stage 2, the Executive agreed to withdraw amendment 16, which was the same as this amendment, to allow the committee to consider the matter further. We provided some additional information that we hope assisted the committee in that respect. The Executive wanted to look at ways of improving the efficiency of the criminal justice system by more effective use of electronic communication. In particular, we wanted to examine how the technology could be used with regard to documents such as indictments, complaints and warrants. We concluded that there was provision for the electronic transmission and storage of most of those documents if and when that was needed, under the Electronic Communications Act 2000. However, the act does not allow provision to be made for the electronic transmission and storage of warrants obtained at common law. Amendment 8 is therefore required so that ministers can make an order to regulate the electronic transmission and storage of such warrants. The committee raised several points, including the security of the system. Many people are naturally cautious about sending items electronically, and it is worth observing in this context that the encryption security of electronic systems that require it is not new—it has developed over 25 years into a sophisticated science. Many different layers of security are now available and can be designed specifically for the situation that they need to serve. Nevertheless, the Executive would not make that move unless we were satisfied about those technical matters. Therefore, if the Parliament were to give its approval today, we would not make any order permitted by the amendment until we were entirely content that all the appropriate technical provisions were in place and fully tested. It would not be in the interests of justice to do anything that would compromise the integrity of search warrant procedures, and ministers would not contemplate anything of that kind. The committee also asked how the proposed new arrangements would interface with current search warrant procedures and what impact they would have. In fact, the general principles of obtaining a search warrant would remain entirely unchanged. The police would still have to approach the procurator fiscal in the first instance to explain why they thought that a search warrant was necessary. The procurator fiscal would then  consider the matter and, if he or she was satisfied that there was sufficient legal basis for applying for a warrant and that it was in the public interest to do so, prepare the necessary documentation. The warrant would then be placed in front of a sheriff to consider, and he or she would in turn have to be satisfied that there was good reason to grant it. That is what happens at the moment, and all those levels of scrutiny would remain unchanged. What would change, however, is that the search warrant would not have to be moved long distances around Scotland between police, duty fiscals and sheriffs, especially for out-of-hours requests. Furthermore, additional flexibility will be provided in section 49, which will permit sheriffs, if need be, to deal with warrants while they are not in their sheriffdom, as they must be at the moment. That will apply equally to traditional warrants and their proposed electronic counterparts, and will be particularly helpful in dealing with out-of-hours requests. In addition to contributing to the efficiency of the system as a whole, I believe that amendment 8 will make an important contribution to the fight against crime. In many instances, it will reduce the time that is needed to process search warrants in the chain between police, fiscal and sheriff, where time can be a critical factor. I move amendment 8.

I am happy to give Stewart Stevenson the assurance that we will give careful consideration to the need to ensure that those who will operate the system are properly trained and given adequate guidance.  Amendment 8 agreed to.  Amendment 109 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.

Bill Aitken suggested in his speech that the offence that he proposes in amendment 76 would apply when a person is arrested. In fact, if members read amendment 76, they will see that that is not the case. It would apply when anyone, including an innocent accident victim, comes into contact with a constable. No member would disagree with the sentiments behind amendment 76. The issue is important, and there are well-documented cases of officers being bitten or spat at by offenders who may be drug users carrying infection. We would all agree that, in such circumstances, it is perfectly reasonable for an officer to want to know whether they have been exposed to HIV or some other infectious disease. The Scottish Police Federation has already raised the issue with the Executive and the Parliament's Public Petitions Committee. The Executive's position on the issue is clear: we have indicated that we believe that the Scottish Police Federation has a case. However, the solution is not as simple as Bill Aitken and Phil Gallie suggest. Before we commit to legislating, a number of questions need to be answered. What is the nature of the blood test that could be carried out? Who would carry it out and would there be limits on the types of blood infection for which they could test? What would happen to the information after it had been collected—must it be destroyed or could it be retained?

I disagree. Particular anomalies could arise and particular mistakes could be made if the amendment was accepted as drafted. Should protection extend to civilian members of police forces, such as turnkeys or traffic wardens, who come into contact with the public? Should everyone be compelled to submit to a blood test? Should that include suspects who have not been charged? What about innocent parties, such as victims, who may have been injured in an attack or a road accident? One of the fundamental problems with the amendment is that it talks about people who "come into contact" with the police; it is not necessarily about those who are arrested.

Brian Fitzpatrick is right. The concerns that he has articulated about the problems that confront police officers are well documented, and there is huge sympathy for those concerns. I give Brian Fitzpatrick the assurance that something needs to be done—I think that I speak for everyone across all parties on that. Indeed, something should be done. Let me return to the situation in which we would find ourselves if we were to agree to Bill Aitken's amendment 76. Phil Gallie may describe it as a reasonable amendment, but it is a reasonable amendment that could have grave implications. People can cut themselves, perhaps because of falling on ice, as the First Minister recently did at Bute House, because they have tripped or because they have been mugged. If a police officer were to come to the assistance of someone who had cut themselves in that way, then amendment 76 would apply to them, even if they have no criminal convictions, have not been involved in any crime and have done nothing wrong. Under the terms of the amendment, if such a person did not give a blood sample, which may be recorded on a national database, they could be charged. That cannot be right, yet those terms would apply if amendment 76 were agreed to. I assure the Parliament that we take the matter seriously, but we want to clarify the questions involved before we move to legislate. We have told the Public Petitions Committee that we intend to consult publicly on the matter, and the consultation paper will be issued in March. I give Brian Fitzpatrick, Bill Aitken, Pauline McNeill, Phil Gallie and anyone else with concerns the assurance that we intend to act. However, we need to ensure that we get it right and, unfortunately, Bill Aitken's amendment would not do that. I hope that he will not move the amendment, on the understanding that the Executive will be taking action on the issue.

Absolutely. Although Roseanna Cunningham clarified her comments, her initial remarks created some confusion. Amendment 71 will ensure that those who are employed in the courts—if chief constables choose to employ civilians—will be employed by the police. The work will not be contracted out.

The issues of security and solemnity, along with other matters in the courts, will be taken seriously. Again, that will come down to operational decisions that are made by the chief constables. I have heard nothing to suggest that chief constables would do anything other than ensure the highest level of security in the courts. I am aware of the time pressure, but I will quickly address some of the other questions that have been raised. I hope that I have made it clear that there will be no contracting out of security services in courts. Beyond the courts, chief constables will be able to contract out certain duties. That will not be mandatory, but it can be done if they believe that it is appropriate. The training of officers is a matter for the police; the civilians will be inspected by HMIC. Finally, a question was raised concerning the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. As I have said, that act will apply and will be used under the direction of ministers when we believe that that is necessary. I give that assurance.

I will briefly deal with some of the points that have been made. Concerns have been expressed about financial issues. Roseanna Cunningham and George Lyon spoke about potential budget savings. Roseanna Cunningham asked whether, if money was removed from the police budget, the number of police constables would be reduced and, conversely, George Lyon asked for an assurance that any money that was saved would release police constables for the front line. Chief constables will be allowed to use their resources most appropriately to get the best value from them and to improve the service that they provide and the wider public's confidence and security. Our proposals are not about reducing the number of police officers by using civilians. Equally, it would be wrong for ministers or the Parliament to try to say how the chief constables should use their budgets. That is an operational matter for the chief constables. However, the chief constables have told us clearly that, if they have the discretion to use civilians where that is appropriate, they will be able to free up resources to improve services at the front line. Jim Wallace's letter of December 2002 to Pauline McNeill, the convener of the Justice 2 Committee, cites the example of Lothian and Borders police. Currently, some 40 police officers are deployed routinely to Edinburgh High Court and to Edinburgh sheriff court. Lothian and Borders police believe that those courts could be policed by a mixture of officers and PCSOs with the appropriate powers. The chief constable of Lothian and Borders police believes that, if PCSOs were to be used, 30 court custody officers could be employed, releasing five officers to front-line duties. In other words, Lothian and Borders police would make an operational decision to put more police officers on front-line duties as a result of the provisions.

I will start with amendments 71 to 73. It was unfortunate that the power to enable police authorities to contract out the provision of certain services, mainly in police stations, was removed by amendment at stage 2. The order of stage 2 business meant that we did not have the opportunity to demonstrate that we had accepted members' concerns about the impact of our proposals in court premises and that we would have supported an amendment to remove the power to contract out in relation to the provision of police custody and security officer functions in court premises. As a result, the bill as it now stands precludes contracting out completely. It would be unfortunate if we left it that way. In particular, we would be ignoring the recommendations made by Her Majesty's inspectorate of constabulary and representations from chief constables. Although we accept that there is a case against contracting out court functions that are undertaken by the police service, I have heard no strong arguments against giving police authorities the option to contract out turnkey and escorting duties. We have never said that police authorities must contract out anything. However, as responsible bodies with budgets that will exceed £900 million next year and a duty to deliver best value, they must at least be given the tools to do the job. Amendments 71 to 73 will provide a balanced and reasonable position on contracting out PCSO services.  Amendments 71 and 72 will restore the power of police authorities to contract out the provision of PCSO services, but amendment 73 will rule out the use of PCSOs—other than those employed by a police force—in court premises. As a result, only PCSOs employed directly by the police authority could fulfil the duties and provide PCSO services in and around court buildings. I firmly believe that the amendments will achieve our aims of effective service delivery and best use of resources without compromising safety and court order. Amendments 100 to 103 relate to the training to be provided to PCSOs. Throughout consideration of section 61, we have made it clear that PCSOs will be fully and professionally trained to deal with the circumstances in which they will be operating. Jim Wallace set out the position in a letter to the convener of the Justice 2 Committee on 3 December. In a letter to the committee on 9 December, the honourable secretary of the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and the chief constable of Strathclyde police subsequently confirmed that appropriate job-specific training would be provided to PCSOs. The Scottish police service already operates to very high standards. The police have given assurances that the high professional standards that apply in training for police duties generally will apply equally to PCSO services. I believe that that is satisfactory. I also strongly resist any measure to regulate for the level and standards of training carried out by police forces. That is an operational matter for chief constables and should remain so. It would be wholly inappropriate to make an exception for PCSOs. The tripartite basis on which policing in Scotland operates sets out clear roles for Scottish ministers, for police authorities and for chief constables. It would be wrong for the Parliament to consider legislation that cuts across that long-standing position. Amendment 104 relates to contractual arrangements with third parties for PCSO services. The police already have arrangements to ensure that appropriate contract monitoring takes place for services provided by third parties. From 1 April 2003, every local authority, including police authorities, will have a duty under the Local Government in Scotland Act 2003 to secure best value for the functions that they discharge. The new duty requires the authority to maintain an appropriate balance between the quality of the performance of its functions and the cost to the authority of that performance. It is for chief constables and others within the police authority to ensure that those requirements are met. That will include arrangements with a third-party provider on the handling of complaints and disciplinary matters. As a result, any police authority that seeks to secure PCSO services from  a third party should have robust contract compliance and monitoring arrangements in place to ensure a high-quality, professional standard of service and to represent best value for public expenditure. I therefore see no good reason to require third parties to provide reports to ministers or the Parliament on what is rightly the responsibility of the police. Amendments 105 and 106 relate to the duties of Her Majesty's inspectorate of constabulary. With regard to amendment 105, HMIC already has a duty, if directed, to visit and inquire into any general matter concerning a police force. HMIC currently inspects all aspects of a force, including officers and support staff. It will therefore inspect the use of PCSOs as a matter of course. The law does not need to be amended to achieve the intention behind amendment 105. Amendment 105 is therefore unnecessary. Amendment 106 is also inappropriate. The Scottish ministers have already given a firm commitment to propose measures to regulate the private security industry. The authority established to undertake that role would be the appropriate body to inspect private sector organisations involved in the provision of PCSO services. That body could in any case consult HMIC. I assume that the intention underlying amendment 107 is to ensure that a contractor who enters into a contract with a police authority to provide PCSO services is subject to the requirements of the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. Section 5 of that act already provides for the Scottish ministers to make an order in respect of relevant services provided by a person under a contract with a Scottish public authority if it is considered appropriate to make such an order. We will consider that as and when appropriate. Amendment 107 is therefore unnecessary. I move amendment 71.

Section 57 deals with the functions of local authorities in respect of arrested persons and persons on whom sentence has been deferred in their area, and the functions of local authorities in respect of the supervision and care of persons put on probation or released from prisons. Amendment 64 provides local authorities with statutory powers to deliver strengthened throughcare services to prisoners from the point of imprisonment and following release. It seeks to clarify that local authorities can provide services to prisoners who are required to be under supervision on release during their term of imprisonment and to ensure that other prisoners who are not required to be under supervision can benefit from those local authority services on request. At stage 2, the Justice 2 Committee stressed that the development of throughcare services for prisoners must be taken forward in equal partnership between local authorities and the Scottish Prison Service. I undertook to ensure that any amendment to the provision met with the intention behind the recommendations of the tripartite group's report and with the agreement of the agencies involved. I am pleased to inform the committee that that is the case in both instances. I thank Scott Barrie for his work on the issue, and the Association of Directors of Social Work and the Scottish Prison Service for their contribution towards ensuring that the policy can be progressed. Because of amendment 64, prisoners will soon be able to benefit from improved services that are delivered in partnership.  Amendments 65 to 70 recognise that, although the initial engagement by the arrest referral worker will be in the police cell, the worker might have an on-going involvement with the accused for a follow-up period. As drafted, the bill allows for a service to be provided only during the period of detention. The amendments seek to change the existing provisions to enable services to be provided following a person's release from police custody. However, we have set a limit of 12 months on the service to ensure that schemes have the capacity to deal with new referrals. Amendment 68 seeks to clarify that the local authority's responsibility for providing services on arrest is confined to those who are arrested or detained within its area and who remain in that area following their release from custody. Amendment 69 seeks to make a minor adjustment to the bill's provisions on deferred sentence to clarify that the duty on the local authority to provide services in respect of offenders who are subject to deferred sentence lasts only as long as the period of deferment and while that person is in its area. The extension and clarification of the functions under section 57 through amendments 65 to 70 are important in increasing the range of assistance that is available to the accused and to offenders, particularly those with drug misuse problems. We are anxious to see the wider development of arrest referral schemes across Scotland and the amendments will ensure that the scheme works effectively. I support amendment 64.

Like Brian Fitzpatrick, I understand and sympathise with Dennis Canavan's intentions and motives in introducing amendment 99. I do not think that anyone would support a system that is bound in secrecy and which wrongly protects people who do not want to face up to their responsibilities. Although Dennis Canavan's amendment is understandable as a hasty response to recent events, the proposed section would be a rather crude implement, which would not necessarily achieve his aims. Indeed, amendment 99 could cause significant damage in a range of areas. As Brian Fitzpatrick highlighted, not least of the problems is that subsection (2) would allow the Thomas Hamiltons and other such unsavoury characters of this world to have access to that information. In addition, although the personal references to the children could be deleted, there might be general circumstances about the cases that might attract some of these undesirable individuals, who would take some strange and perverse pleasure from reading about personal tragedies. We must therefore be very careful about what we are doing. Another reason why we must be careful is that much of the information that is held by the police comes from people who are involved with the criminal justice system unwittingly. For example, they may be involved as informants or as victims or, indeed, as witnesses. Their evidence is often given in good faith, on the understanding that it would be used appropriately, including in a trial. Of necessity, some of that information is of a personal nature such that, if it was disclosed outwith the court process, it could cause real distress and embarrassment to those affected,  especially the victims or the alleged victims and their families. Even though we might give the assurance that individuals would not be identified, the circumstances might nevertheless mean that those people could become open to investigation by others for whatever motive. Amendment 99 might result in that evidence being disclosed, possibly to criminals such as paedophiles and possibly before a trial took place. Even if reports were to be made completely anonymous, with detective work and persistence—which such people often have—it might be possible to deduce identities or, perhaps even worse, wrongly to deduce identities. It is not difficult to foresee cases in which the amendment might not only damage those who are affected, but undermine the criminal justice system and the confidence of ordinary people in that system. The existing statutory arrangements and other arrangements, bolstered by the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002, are sufficient. The assurances that the First Minister has given in the past week go some way to addressing the other concerns that have been articulated. We all sympathise with Dennis Canavan's point but, to put it crudely, Parliament would make a major mistake if it tried to use amendment 99 as the means to achieve his intention.

I will take up Bill Aitken's response to Scott Barrie's question. Bill Aitken's amendment 97 would reduce the age of young people whom the children's hearings system could deal with, whether they were referred on care and protection grounds or on offence grounds. Bill Aitken offered no alternative for children who are referred to children's hearings because they are victims. It is all very well for him to say that they will be dealt with in some other way, but he offered no other solution. He diminishes and demeans the children's hearings system's valuable work in providing a service to many 15 and 16-year-olds. I welcome Bill Aitken's suggestion that youth court pilots will have an effect. We are confident that the youth courts will have an impact. Testing the scheme through pilots is the right approach and any developments will be based on evidence. The youth court pilots will not deal with 14-year-olds. It was said at the launch that youth courts will deal primarily with 16 and 17-year-olds who persistently offend and sometimes with 15-year-olds who would otherwise go through the adult courts system. If youth court pilots are to be effective, they will be so because of the measures and procedures that we put in place. They will involve special training and procedures for dealing with that age group, with the court keeping an eye on progress through review appearances and the provision of supported programmes to engage the young person in dealing with his or her offending behaviour. All those measures are central to the fast-track hearing pilots that are operating in three areas. Bill Aitken's amendment 97 identifies only one strand of the Executive's approach to persistent offending. I hope that, if the fast-track hearings show comparable success in dealing with young people, he will extend similar support to their development. The Executive is committing significant resources to the pilots because we want them to have a lasting impact on young people. We expect fast-track hearings, by targeting the 8 per cent of young people who offend persistently, to tackle those who commit one third of the crime in communities. The fast-track hearing pilots will seek to show what the system can achieve with targeted and dedicated resources and the aim of changing young people's offending behaviour. We need to show how the pilots work in practice. Bill Aitken's amendment 97 deals with one part of the equation. Even if we consider the intention behind and not the wording of the amendment, it is premature and does a disservice to the children's hearings system. I ask Bill Aitken  to withdraw his amendment. If he does not do so, the Executive will oppose it.

I fully understand and support the intention behind amendment 98, which is that the police service should be accountable for its use of voluntary screening. At present, there are no statutory powers authorising the police to conduct voluntary screenings of sections of the population in respect of specific offences—for example, mass screenings of particular communities following a crime such as a sex attack on a child. I appreciate what the amendment seeks to achieve but, as Richard Simpson indicated, it is already clear under section 47 that the police can use samples derived from such exercises only if the person provides written consent to the process. For the consent required under the bill to be regarded as fully informed, and therefore valid, the police will require to provide information to the person as part of the process of obtaining written consent. We will also issue formal guidance to the police that sets out the procedures that will need to be put in place to meet the requirements of the provision in a robust and consistent way in forces across Scotland. The police forces will be required to comply fully with the requirements and to  ensure that those involved have the necessary information, because otherwise the consent to use the sample will not be valid in law. On those grounds, I believe that—as Richard Simpson said—the amendment is unnecessary.

Amendment 58 makes a slight  alteration in the provisions for adjournment between conviction and sentence. Most adjournments are to allow time for preparation of further reports on the individual who is to be sentenced. Sometimes those reports take longer than three weeks to prepare. At present, when reports are not ready within three weeks, a convicted person who is remanded in custody must be brought back to the court for remand to be renewed. Bail cases are slightly more flexible, and adjournments may be for "four weeks or, on cause shown, eight weeks." Amendment 58 simply brings the time limits that apply in custody cases into line with those that apply in bail cases. In many cases, it is obvious to the judge that more complex reports will take more than three weeks to prepare. The tighter time limit in relation to those who are remanded in custody results in a considerable number of repeated adjournments. Those result in inconvenience to the convicted person—who must be brought from prison to be present in every case, even for a five-minute hearing—and considerable cost to the public purse. The amendment should reduce the number of unnecessary procedural hearings by giving limited additional flexibility in custody cases. I am happy to support amendment 79. Through her amendment, Pauline McNeill has achieved helpful clarification in establishing the power of courts in dealing with offenders who, for example, are contesting alleged breach of their community sentence when the court wishes to adjourn to enable inquiries to be made or to determine a more suitable way to deal with the offender. At present, there is considerable doubt as to whether the courts have those powers. Placing the provisions on a statutory footing ensures that sentencers can deal with such situations with consistency and confidence.

Johann Lamont has been tireless and determined in her efforts to see action taken to curb anti-social behaviour in the communities that she represents. Much of what she has said on the issue has reflected the views and concerns that other members have expressed in committee and in debates. Johann Lamont is right to say that the people whom she represents and whom we  represent want to live in peace and quiet with some dignity. They need to be supported and protected from the minority of individuals who seek to make their lives a misery. As Johann Lamont said, members have expressed some concern that anti-social behaviour orders are not as effective as we had hoped that they would be. The Executive acknowledges that there is scope for improving how we tackle the problem, because we know that the orders must be effective to protect the people whom we represent. Interim anti-social behaviour orders were part of the bill from the outset, but we are now moving to support a wider range of measures to tackle anti-social behaviour more effectively. At stage 2, members made clear their concern that interim ASBOs could become subject to delays similar to those that full ASBOs have experienced. That is a worry, because such delays have undermined ASBOs' effectiveness and confidence in the obtaining of ASBOs. We have reflected on members' comments and considered European convention on human rights implications and other issues. We are satisfied that, provided that the right to intimation is maintained, the removal of the explicit reference in section 38 to "any representations made by or on behalf of" the respondent before an interim ASBO is granted has no ECHR implications. The court still has discretion to consider any representations that are made following intimation. In supporting Johann Lamont's amendment 4, I acknowledge that it will have the same effect as Stewart Stevenson's stage 2 amendment 44 would have had. Amendment 93 will add a new section to the bill. We will extend the power to apply for ASBOs and interim ASBOs to registered social landlords. That will make it easier for registered social landlords to obtain ASBOs against persons who behave anti-socially and who reside in, are otherwise on or likely to be on or in, or are likely to be in the vicinity of, an RSL's properties. It is important to extend the right in that way. Many good social landlords throughout Scotland want to protect their tenants. The housing stock transfer in Glasgow will mean that Glasgow's public sector housing will comprise solely properties that are managed by social landlords. Those landlords will have the opportunity to tackle anti-social behaviour by private residents in the vicinity of their properties. As Johann Lamont suggested, some complications make it more difficult to tackle such behaviour in places such as the west ends of Glasgow and Edinburgh, but we  will reflect on those issues. Although anti-social behaviour orders can be made against persons in any housing tenure, most ASBOs have been made against local authority tenants. The perception among social landlords has been that local authorities do not attach enough priority to cases that involve social landlords' tenants. Whether or not that perception is justified, we want to take immediate steps to make it easier to apply for ASBOs. Like local authorities, social landlords will have to consult the police before applying for an ASBO. The local authority will have to be notified of the social landlord's intention to apply for an ASBO. We will issue guidance to all relevant authorities before the new powers are brought into effect. I commend Johann Lamont for amendment 109. We make clear our commitment to joint working. At stages 1 and 2, some members complained that local authorities, the police and other agencies do not work closely enough together and do not share information enough. We think that many improvements have been made to such practices in recent years, but through the bill, we will make clear our intention for that joint working to take place. Local authorities and the police are key agencies in dealing with such behaviour and the requirement to prepare a joint strategy will go a long way towards ensuring a co-ordinated approach from organisations. Together with our housing legislation and initiatives such as the introduction of community wardens, the amendments can have a major impact on the anti-social conduct that, cumulatively, causes considerable alarm and distress to many in our communities. I commend Johann Lamont for her amendments. I understand, and am wholly sympathetic to, her concerns about the extent of anti-social behaviour in many of our communities. She may be speaking for her constituents in Glasgow Pollok, but she echoes the views of many MSPs throughout Scotland.

In essence, amendments 49 to 53 replace the provisions that are in the bill at present, but do not change what they aim to achieve. As the policy memorandum for the bill explains, we wish to provide the courts with a new power in relation to life sentences. Currently, a life sentence cannot run consecutively to another sentence, nor vice versa. We want to give courts a new power to order that a subsequent determinate sentence of imprisonment for an offence or the punishment part of a second life sentence can be ordered to run consecutively to the punishment part of an existing life sentence. Similarly, we want to give the courts the power to order that the punishment part of a life sentence can be ordered to run consecutively to a determinate sentence that a prisoner is serving or is liable to serve. In a nutshell, the provisions introduced by these amendments will do just that. Furthermore, they will mean that a prisoner in respect of whom such sentences are imposed will have no right to be considered for release, or to be released, until he or she reaches the point at which he or she may be considered for release or must be released from all the sentences that the courts have ordered to be served. I move amendment 49.

I echo some of what Michael Matheson said. Amendment 32 replicates section 13(2)(b) of the Crime and Punishment (Scotland) Act 1997. Commencing the provision would pre-empt the findings of the summary justice review committee. Members will know that we set up that committee, which is chaired by Sheriff Principal McInnes, to consider all aspects of summary justice, including the important matter of the dividing boundaries for sentencing powers between the different levels of criminal court. Sentencing powers cannot be taken in isolation, but must be considered in the context of the structure of the criminal justice system and, in particular, of the types of cases that should be dealt with at each level of the criminal courts. We must also bear in mind the need to distribute work appropriately between summary and solemn courts. The summary justice review committee is considering sentencing powers in that context. If the committee recommends that there should be a change, we will certainly consider seriously its recommendation. As the terms of amendment 32 are already enacted, I invite Bill Aitken to withdraw it.

At stage 2, Richard Simpson made it clear that Scottish ministers were to lay a  copy of the report before Parliament. Roseanna Cunningham raised a number of issues relating to direction, accountability and independence. Cabinet Office guidance on non-departmental public bodies, which the Executive has adopted, states that one of the key tasks in setting up a public body is the preparation of an agreed management statement. Such a published statement is required for all new public bodies. It is a key document that defines the nature of the relationship between the Executive and the public body at a strategic level. We recognise that each management statement will be different, but at the very least such a statement should set out the role and aims of the body, what it is responsible for and how it relates to the sponsor department. The statement should specify arrangements for publishing an annual report and accounts, which outline performance of the body against key targets. As Roseanna Cunningham indicated, there are concerns both about accountability and about independence. It is right to define the relationship between the RMA and the Scottish ministers. The Scottish Executive cannot give directions on fundamental issues that are within the discretion of the RMA. However, the Scottish ministers can direct the Parole Board for Scotland, for example. That is a standard power associated with NDPBs. The Scottish ministers must exercise their powers reasonably. In doing so, they cannot contradict the RMA's statutory functions. In the management statement, the existing guidelines and the commitment given at stage 2, we have addressed properly the concerns that Roseanna Cunningham has articulated.  Amendment 12 agreed to.

On amendment 82, we believe that the word "likelihood", which the bill uses, is acceptable terminology. It is a recognised phrase in law and it is understandable. On amendment 83, we believe that "seriously endanger" is stronger than "present ... a risk". Our policy is that the package will apply to the high-risk offender throughout his life. Our measures have addressed the concerns of the Parole Board for Scotland and the British Psychological Society. Neither body has made adverse comments on the amended provisions that we introduced at stage 2.  Amendment 11 agreed to.  [Amendment 82 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham].]

Sections 8 and 9 of the bill deal with the preparation, implementation and review of risk management plans. The provisions include a power for the risk management authority to direct a lead authority to take steps to bring any version of the risk management plan into line with the agreed standards. Although we do not expect the RMA to have to exercise that power often, the power has to be available in respect of the initial plan and any amended plan. We believe that it is important to ensure that the RMA has all the necessary powers to ensure that risk management plans are implemented. The Justice 2 Committee shared that view.  Amendment 12 is a minor drafting amendment to section 8(7) to make it clear that the right to appeal against any direction given by the risk management authority under section 8(6) applies to the lead authority and to any other person with duties under the risk management plan. It also ensures consistency with references to any "other person" in sections 8 and 9. There is currently no way in which the RMA can address the situation—albeit highly unlikely—in which a risk management plan is not being implemented. That potential gap was spotted by the Justice 2 Committee during its thorough scrutiny of the bill, and I acknowledge with thanks the committee's helpful contribution. At stage 2, Richard Simpson said that he would lodge an amendment to enable the risk management authority to act when it was clear that a plan was not being implemented without reasonable cause. He stressed that we wanted to ensure that any amendment was in tune with the rest of section 8 and reflected the balance of the relationship between the RMA and the lead authorities. I confirmed in my letter of 5 February that we would be lodging amendments to achieve that. Amendment 13 will give the RMA the power to direct a lead authority or any other person to implement a new risk management plan where they are failing without reasonable excuse to do so. The amendment also provides a right of appeal against the RMA's direction on the ground that it is unreasonable. Amendment 14 will give power to the RMA to set the time limit within which an amended plan may be required. Those provisions are the same as the ones that are already provided under the bill for circumstances where the risk amendment plan has not been prepared. Amendment 15 amends section 9(5) to clarify that intention. At stage 2, the committee accepted an amendment requiring the Parole Board for Scotland to have regard to a risk management plan on each and every occasion when it is considering the case of an offender who has an order for lifelong restriction. That requirement now comes under section 35A. Amendment 17 removes a provision in schedule 1 that has become redundant as a result of amendments at stage 2. Section 13 details the risk management authority's statutory accounting and annual reporting functions. Roseanna Cunningham's amendment 84 seeks to make specific provision for the risk management authority to include an account of any directions given to it by the Scottish ministers under their powers detailed in section 12. As we said at stage 1 and during stage 2  consideration of section 13, such prescription is not necessary in primary legislation. The purpose of sections 12 and 13 is to provide for the standard accountability and enabling powers that are required when establishing a new public body. Those provisions, which accord with Government guidelines, give the statutory basis for the construction of the framework under which the RMA will operate. I am happy to give the assurance that any directions that Scottish ministers give to the RMA under section 12 will be publicly available—for example, on the RMA website. It will be open to the RMA to include information about those directions in its annual report, although that may not always be appropriate—for example, if the directions relate to standard housekeeping matters about the keeping of records. Clearly, however, important issues would be contained in the annual report. In any event, as the directions will be publicly available, there is no need to require the RMA to include that information in its annual report. I agree that it is essential that the RMA be obliged to report annually on fundamental matters such as whether the Scottish ministers have exercised their directional powers under section 12 and we will ensure that that happens. Those matters are not, however, for primary legislation, and I ask the member not to move amendment 84. I move amendment 12.

Section 1 of the bill will introduce a number of new sections to the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 relating to the new order for lifelong restriction and the associated risk assessment provisions. New section 210C of the 1995 act deals with the preparation of the risk assessment report. A list of requirements that the risk assessor must follow when taking account, in the risk assessment report, of any allegations of criminal behaviour, whether or not that behaviour resulted in prosecution and acquittal, was inserted by an amendment at stage 2. The amendment reflected the Justice 2 Committee's concerns that the use of such information should be properly regulated. We confirmed to the Justice 2 Committee on 5 February that we would accept the intention of the change introduced at stage 2. However, we must ensure that there is consistency between the relevant provisions as they now appear in the bill. That is the purpose of amendment 11, which will ensure that, where information about criminal behaviour is to be used in the risk assessment report, the assessor is required to explain the extent to which that behaviour has influenced the risk assessment. Amendments 82 and 83 try again to implant extracts from the MacLean committee report into the statutory risk criteria—set out in new section 210E—that will be used to assess an offender's level of risk. As the Parliament knows—indeed, members have supported this—the new high-risk offender strategy is based extensively on recommendations in the MacLean committee's excellent report. However, as we tried to explain to Duncan Hamilton when he tried unsuccessfully to introduce identical changes at stage 2, we do not  believe that the MacLean committee intended that the wording of the relevant recommendation should be adopted verbatim in the legislation. The MacLean committee was providing a steer in that respect. We believe that the construction of the risk criteria in new section 210E will achieve what the MacLean committee recommended and the agreed objective of providing an understandable and workable measure that the court can use to establish whether an offender is high risk. We recognised the concerns that were expressed at the earlier stages of the bill's passage that the risk criteria as drafted were too wide and could have had the effect of drawing offenders who are not high risk down the risk assessment route and potentially into the new order for lifelong restriction sentence. We acted and lodged amendments to the risk criteria at stage 2 to tighten them up and to ensure that they are fit for purpose. The Justice 2 Committee accepted those amendments and I believe that, as a result, we now have an improved set of criteria. Duncan Hamilton failed to persuade the majority of the committee to accept his proposed changes to the new criteria when he lodged identical amendments at stage 2. Roseanna Cunningham has now lodged the amendments again. We do not believe that the suggested rewording is an improvement or that it will achieve what we are all agreed should be a set of tight criteria. Indeed, as Richard Simpson said during the stage 2 debate on the same proposals, there is a real concern that the revised wording would have the reverse effect and throw open the criteria once again. In fairness, I know that that is not what Roseanna Cunningham wants. We are confident that the construction of the criteria that now appears in the bill is the best way of achieving the agreed objective. The criteria are understandable and workable in law. Most important, we have had no indication from the judiciary, who will apply the criteria, that they present any problems or that there might be difficulties in comprehending their purpose. I move amendment 11.

The Scottish Executive accepts the need to ensure that there is an appropriate balance between spending on process and spending on the provision of services to tackle youth offending. Over the past 10 years, the Executive has invested significantly in services to support the increased range of community disposals available to courts. Further investment in community programmes for young offenders is planned as part of our 10 action points for youth crime.

In the past three years, spending on community justice services has risen by more than 50 per cent, and in the five years to 2005-06, the budget will increase by nearly 100 per cent. We also need to recognise that the process to which Keith Raffan refers can cover important activities, such as crime prevention, crime detection and the prosecution of individuals through courts. He makes a valid point about the need to deal with young people appropriately. Secure places in residential schools should be made available where there is a need for them. Equally, we should consider effective alternatives for those who can benefit from other forms of disposal, not just for reasons of cost but for social reasons. We are doing that and we are providing the necessary investment.

I understand Johann Lamont's sentiments. Many communities across Scotland are plagued by unacceptable behaviour from a minority—I stress that word—of young people who cause a disproportionately large problem in local communities. She is right: we need to send out to those young people the message that they will be dealt with appropriately and severely if they persist in causing problems in communities. I hope that that will act as a deterrent to the youngsters around those who behave unacceptably. We also need to recognise that there are other ways of assisting and supporting young people who are engaged in bad behaviour. It is a question of ensuring that the right disposals and the right measures are available at the most appropriate time. Although we will be firm—we will tackle youth crime and bad behaviour—we will also seek to address some of the underlying problems.

The contingency arrangements for emergency fire cover provided by the armed forces remain the same as for previous strikes. The number of armed forces personnel involved also remains the same. Any proposed changes in numbers would be the subject of discussions  between the Executive and the Ministry of Defence.

The Deputy First Minister and I met the responsible chief of the armed forces for Scotland this morning. He indicated that they plan to continue providing cover at the same level, if required.

I agree that negotiations are the way to resolve the dispute and I hope that, even at this stage, the Fire Brigades Union will call off the proposed next round of strike action. Such action is not just putting strain on the armed forces; it is putting communities across Scotland and the UK at risk. Yesterday, the Deputy First Minister made clear the Scottish Executive's position. We have also made it clear that the negotiations are a matter for the FBU and the employers. We want those negotiations to come to a successful conclusion.

I think that hundreds of thousands of Scots would rather that the armed forces did not have to be used in these circumstances. It is regrettable that, in order to provide vital safety cover and protect lives and property, the armed forces are being used. I argue that people across the UK would be appalled if there were no one to  cover for striking FBU members. The armed forces are absolutely essential to protect safety across the country. Without them, there would be many fatalities and situations of crisis. It would be absurd if there were no cover to protect our communities when the FBU walked out.

In 2001, we set the Scottish police service targets to increase the seizures of class A drugs and the detection of drug trafficking offences by 25 per cent by 2004. The Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency, which we established in 2000, is playing an important part in achieving those targets. Operations involving the agency have so far led to the seizure of controlled drugs with a potential street value of just over £92 million and 477 people have been arrested for engaging in drug-trafficking activities.

Maureen Macmillan identifies a problem that is common to many communities in Scotland. She refers to an important group of people who are campaigning against drug activity: families who are attempting, in response to their experiences, to help others in the community. There are a number of similar groups in Scotland that are doing an excellent job. I highlight for the benefit of Maureen Macmillan and other members an initiative that was recently launched in my area. Renfrewshire against drugs was launched by Strathclyde police and is supported by the Paisley Partnership. The initiative provides information, leaflets and posters to local communities, asking people to give information—anonymously, if necessary—to the police using pre-paid envelopes or a confidential telephone line. We hope that, through the initiative, people will have the confidence to give information about drug-dealing activities in their communities. We believe that ordinary men, women and young people can play a part in the war against drugs. The police have given a commitment to act sensitively and vigorously on the information that is provided. I hope that the initiative will prove that communities can be effective in working in partnership with other agencies.

We have made it clear on a number of occasions that we will assess the effectiveness of the drugs courts. If they prove to be effective, we will consider whether their work should be extended. We should consider what the drugs courts are achieving and what the cost and administrative implications of their work are. Undoubtedly, alcohol abuse and the violence to which it sometimes leads are a huge social issue. However, let us focus on what we are doing to tackle drug-related offences. Let us wait to see the results of that work.

Both the justice department and the health department have done what the member is suggesting. Prevention is an important strand of our activities. However, we recognise that we should try to get people who are addicted off drugs and that we should support rehabilitation. The drug treatment and testing orders have been very successful and have recently been extended to other areas of Scotland. They have led to a marked improvement in the success of attempts to get people who are involved in criminal activity because of their drug habit away not just from their drug habit, but from the criminal activity that is associated with it.

This has been a good debate and we have heard a number of considered and extremely constructive speeches. I thank all members for that. Like other members, I emphasise the importance of delivering better protection for Scotland's children. Members have highlighted specific, appalling cases and have referred to documents that describe absolute horror stories. I do not think that anyone in a civilised society can tolerate the continuation of such incidents. We have discussed the range of professionals who are involved in protecting children and the need for effective joined-up working. A range of Executive departments are closely involved in that  and are brought together at ministerial level in the Cabinet sub-committee on children's services. The sub-committee provides a top-level cross-Executive steer to our work in the area. As Deputy Minister for Justice, I have a particular interest in ensuring that the justice system works effectively to protect children and to bring their abusers to justice. A key part of that work is to ensure that children are supported in giving evidence in legal proceedings. It is of paramount importance that children receive special support and that the criminal justice system respects the best interests of the child. We are consulting now on how we can support child witnesses, both before they go to court and during court proceedings. The consultation includes proposals to establish a child witness support service, with the aim of increasing and improving the support available for child witnesses and co-ordinating the work of the many agencies involved. We are consulting on a package of guidelines that will establish national standards. They include guidance on investigative interviews, on questioning children in court and on the provision of therapy to children that will not contaminate their evidence in court. We are consulting on a code of practice on how court familiarisation visits should be carried out to help to prepare children who go to court. Just before Christmas, we published a report on our consultation paper, "Vital Voices: Helping Vulnerable Witnesses Give Evidence", which looked at how vulnerable witnesses, including children, can be given the right help to give evidence. We are now working on proposals for changes to the law, which we plan to publish before the end of March. We will focus particularly on the needs of child witnesses and on ways in which to reduce their anxiety and trauma, especially in cases involving violence or sexual abuse. I turn now to some of the comments that members have made during the debate. Irene McGugan mentioned the feedback of concerns to agencies. Following the inspections that take place in each area, the teams feed back to the chief officers or their representatives the findings of those inspections, which makes a valuable contribution. Irene McGugan, Ian Jenkins, Alasdair Morgan and other members spoke, in different ways, about promoting and valuing the role of social workers. We cannot say this too often: we value and support social workers. Ian Jenkins was right to say that it is unacceptable that the only time social workers seem to attract comment in the press is when they are being scapegoated and criticised, with all the good work that they do over the years being ignored. It is wrong to pick up on social work  issues just when things go wrong. We value social workers and we are investing in them. In particular, we are investing in social work training and in child protection. We are putting in an additional £30 million over three years as part of a bigger package of support for the service. Ian Jenkins mentioned communication between agencies. I think that that has improved over recent years—there are some good examples of co-operative working. We might suggest, however, that there is always room for improvement. Scott Barrie referred to guidance and the use of refuges. The interim report by the working group on young runaways and children abused through prostitution recommends that the Executive should undertake an assessment of how local agencies deal with refuge provision, demand for such provision and models of good practice. Following that, additional guidance will be issued on the provision of refuges. We have identified up to £600,000 to develop work on refuge provision and will issue additional guidance when that is appropriate. In a considered and thoughtful contribution, Alasdair Morgan raised a number of important issues. There are concerns about bureaucracy, which the Minister for Education and Young People has already addressed. Like other members, Alasdair Morgan expressed support for the profession. However, he was right to say that we cannot condemn those who criticise social work unthinkingly but not criticise social work when that is appropriate. Criticism must be balanced and must be made where appropriate. However, it should always be tempered with praise for all the good work that is done. There seems to be a split within the Tory party on the issue. Some Conservative members recognised the value of investing in social work. Unfortunately, Murdo Fraser reacted in his usual manner, arguing that we need more policemen. We do need more policemen—that is why we have invested to provide record levels of police in this country. However, we also need well-trained and well-supported social workers. Jackie Baillie was absolutely right to talk about the need for early detection. Many issues must not only be taken up in social work training, but be dealt with in social work practice, both in the voluntary sector and in local authorities. I support Colin Campbell's comment that we must always consider children's needs first. Social work is a needs-driven service. We do not determine how to support children simply on the basis of resources. The Executive—with Cathy Jamieson as minister—has a first-class record of putting the needs of children first. Donald Gorrie and others raised some funding  issues. I do not have time to discuss all the details of funding, but I have already mentioned the extra money that we are investing in social work training and child protection through sure start Scotland and the child care strategy. Under the 2002 spending review, we are investing £91 million over three years. We have allocated £22 million over three years to the aftercare of looked-after children. Donald Gorrie may be interested to know that £250,000 has been allocated to support diversionary activities, through the Duke of Edinburgh's award scheme. That money will make a valuable contribution. Pauline McNeill—echoing Colin Campbell—touched on international issues. As well as considering what is happening in this country, we must always be aware of the developing international perspective on the horrendous trade in young people. Jamie Stone asked about remoteness. The Minister for Young People and Education will reflect on his comments and give consideration to that issue. All those who have taken part in the debate agree that we can and must take action in response to the findings of the child protection review. That action needs to be taken by a number of professionals and agencies, working together in a joined-up way. We need to provide a strong steer and direction at national level—on the detail of establishing standards, roles and remits and on helping to raise awareness and to change behaviour and approaches. We look forward to receiving members' support in seeking to achieve that over the next three years, as we develop and implement the reform programme.

I am grateful for this opportunity to confirm to the Parliament the Executive's position on the Council of the Law Society of Scotland Bill. The Executive fully supports the principles of the bill. Its enactment will remedy a defect in the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980, which has meant that the council of the Law Society of Scotland has been unable to delegate its functions under that act. That constraint has disrupted the efficient discharge of the council's business in the past two years and has imposed a heavy and unnecessary burden on council members. The bill will relieve those pressures and provide the Law Society of Scotland with powers to delegate its functions. The English Law Society already enjoys such powers under the Solicitors Act 1974. The bill will increase the speed at which the society can handle its business. In the context of complaints handling, faster processing will be of substantial benefit to complainers. The society anticipates that the average time taken to resolve complaints about inadequate professional service will be reduced by up to two months. From the perspective of the complainer, that will certainly be a significant gain. Members will be aware that the bill is supported by the Scottish Consumer Council. We want to ensure that David McLetchie's bill, which has cross-party support, has safe and certain passage to the statute book in what remains of the current parliamentary session. It is significant that the Justice 1 Committee reported at the end of November on its inquiry into the regulation of the legal profession. There is, of course, some common ground between the subject matter of the bill and the recommendations that were made by the Justice 1 Committee in that report. The bill has the simple purpose of remedying a statutory defect and, for that reason, its scope has been narrowly defined in the long title. The Executive's view is that we should guard against the bill's being regarded as a suitable vehicle for implementing the wide-ranging agenda that was raised by the committee's report on its inquiry into regulation. The detailed recommendations that flow from the committee's inquiry require full and careful consideration, and I share the views that were expressed by David McLetchie about the need to separate the two. It would be inappropriate to seek to take on board in the bill some or all of that  agenda and doing so could jeopardise the safe passage of the bill in what remains of the current session. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton asked when the Executive would respond to the committee's report. The report is a comprehensive and thorough piece of work, which deserves careful consideration. We intend to give our initial response within the next month to six weeks, and a more detailed reply will follow thereafter. The Executive supports lay representation on the society's complaints committee, which ensures that consumer interest is kept to the forefront, and the bill confirms that the society's committees can include lay representation. Indeed, the bill expressly provides that lay representatives can form the majority on the committees. Lay representation on committees helps to boost public confidence in the transparency and fairness of committee processes. We were pleased by the society's ready agreement on 20 December to increase lay representation on its complaints committee from 40 per cent to 50 per cent, as recommended in the Justice 1 Committee's stage 1 report. As members have said, it is possible to debate exactly where the optimum balance should lie. The Executive's view is that it is best to avoid a prescriptive approach to the matter if the resulting statute is to stand the test of time. We consider that the council should have flexibility in this area and that the bill should not fix a required ratio.

I am sorry. I meant the report on the regulation of the legal profession. That is what I understood Lord James Douglas-Hamilton to be referring to. Over the past few years, the Law Society has responded positively to recommendations made by the Scottish legal services ombudsman on increasing lay representation. The society has progressively raised the level of lay representation from 20 per cent to 50 per cent over that period. The bill will be enabling legislation and therefore avoids an unduly prescriptive approach. We are aware that the Justice 1 Committee has identified some detailed issues that the Law Society has been asked to address regarding an implementation scheme that will be considered at subsequent stages of the bill. Those detailed issues include whether the council of the Law Society should delegate all decision making to committees, as recommended by the Justice 1 Committee, including decisions in cases of serious  professional misconduct that have previously been taken only by the council; whether an individual should be able to decide whether a complaint should be investigated by the Law Society; and how the handling of complaints by the Law Society's client relations committees should best be co-ordinated. At later stages of the bill, it will be relevant to consider how the Law Society plans to exercise the discretion that the bill provides. However, for the purpose of this debate, I confirm that the Executive fully supports the principles underlying the bill.

In lodging the motion, Bristow Muldoon has done the Parliament a favour. If I can use such a word in the context of the debate, by lodging the motion, he has stimulated an informed range of contributions about an important issue. Although many of the specific points that members raised are matters that are reserved to Westminster, the debate has given us the opportunity to air some concerns, which I hope can be reflected back to our colleagues at Westminster. The debate has also allowed us to reflect on some of the issues for which the Scottish Parliament has responsibility, such as road safety education and publicity. One issue that has emerged clearly from the debate is that, although there may be differences between those who take medicinal drugs and those who take illegal drugs, the implications and effects are often similar. As far as the drugs that are legally prescribed for medicinal purposes are concerned, the 1992 European Community directive on the labelling of medicines requires the packaging of all medicines that affect the central nervous system to carry warnings advising patients not to drive. We recognise that recent research on over-the-counter medicines suggests that those recommendations on labelling are not universally complied with. It is clear that the Medicines Control Agency will have to give consideration to that issue. As Keith Raffan and other members suggested, people very often do not read the recommendations on medicine labels. In our education and publicity campaigns, we need to advise people to be cautious when they are taking medicines. People need to think through the implications and work out what they have to do. I am not sure whether Bill Aitken was referring to medicinal or illegal drugs when he said that some people take drugs and drive but would never think of drinking and driving. In a sense, it is neither here nor there whether the drugs are medicinal or illegal; we have to get the message across that people should think carefully and clearly about their actions. The use of drugs impairs a person's performance as a driver, and driving while unfit through taking drugs has long been a criminal offence. The more that we can do to prevent the  problem, the better. Firm information about the number of drug-related road accidents is not available. Many members expressed clearly the difficulties that arise in respect of testing.

I understand what Brian Adam is getting at. Nevertheless, judgments need to be made about the commitment of resources to a process that is to some extent unreliable and unproven. That should not deter us from trying to encourage better ways of evaluation. That said, I do not want to try to minimise the problem. A pilot for a proposed system for recording contributory factors in road accidents is currently under way. Research in Great Britain that was published in 2001 found that 18 per cent of people who had been killed in road accidents had used illegal drugs. On that basis, around 59 adults who had used illegal drugs could have been killed in road accidents in Scotland. We know that there has been an increase in that number. There is concern that 5 per cent of drivers under the age of 40 had driven after using illegal drugs.

I will respond to Christine Grahame at a later date. We know that young people are more inclined to  use drugs and then drive. The problems of cannabis have been clearly highlighted. Reference has been made to advertising. The advert that was launched in May 2002 demonstrates the techniques that are used by the police to detect drug drivers. The message is that those who drive under the influence of drugs run the real risk of being caught. Keith Raffan asked about the advert's effectiveness. That is being evaluated and we expect the evaluation to be finalised and published in the next couple of months. Initial results are broadly positive, with the highest awareness levels among 20 to 24-year-olds, which is the highest risk group. I am sure that we all await with interest what comes out of the evaluation. The Scottish Road Safety Campaign is implementing a publicity strategy that is aimed at raising awareness of the dangers of drug-driving. A leaflet that outlines the key facts was launched in June 2001 and continues to be widely distributed. The campaign liaised closely with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland on the development of the television advert and leaflet and is now working on the development of further publicity to complement and build on the television advertising. We recognise the problems and the differences between drugs and alcohol. The United Kingdom Government is considering legislation on powers for testing drivers for drugs at the roadside, notwithstanding the difficulties that that involves. Members have made many points that are worthy of comment. Bristow Muldoon has given us the opportunity to focus on an issue that is clearly not just a social concern, but a real social problem. It blights and destroys individual lives and the fabric of many families. We will continue to work closely with our Westminster colleagues and to look at the effectiveness of our advertising and education powers. We will do anything that we can do collectively to get the message across that people who use illegal drugs should not only stop using them, but should not think of using them before driving. We should continue to reinforce the warning to those who take drugs for medicinal reasons and caution them that there could be considerable difficulties with their driving if they take certain medicines. We still have a job to do individually and collectively, but the debate has been useful.  Meeting closed at 18:24.

The debate has stimulated a lot of interest from members. It is unusual to see so many members not just staying behind, but participating. It is clear from the passionate contributions that have been made that people feel strongly about the service provided by firefighters. I want to echo many of the remarks that have been made during the debate and to put on record the appreciation of both the Scottish Executive and the people of Scotland for the work of the fire service and all emergency service workers. They are rightly held in high regard for their professionalism and dedication in often difficult and hazardous circumstances, which have most recently been demonstrated during the devastating fire in Edinburgh's Cowgate. In answer to questions a fortnight ago, I put on record my recognition of the valuable work firefighters do as public servants and as trade unionists. That has been generally recognised in tonight's debate. Cathie Peattie asked whether I will meet the FBU. I met FBU representatives in a private meeting last Friday. It was a constructive meeting at which I took the opportunity as a new minister to introduce myself and to hear from the representatives at first hand some of the issues that concern their members. That discussion was on the basis of a shared commitment to promoting a calm and constructive environment in which the national talks and negotiations can move forward. The members of the FBU made it clear to me that they want the settlement to be made at the UK level. We will play our part in helping to reach a settlement, but the negotiations should be between the FBU and the employers. We will look to our responsibility for whatever comes from those negotiations, which I will return to later.  It will be impossible for me to answer all the precise questions that members have asked during the debate, but I will try to touch on some of them. On 29 April, the Deputy First Minister launched a policy paper entitled "The Scottish Fire Service of the Future", which members have already mentioned. The paper was debated in the chamber on 15 May and was generally welcomed. On Monday, the independent review of the fire service—the Bain report—was published. I know that members have very strong views on the report; however, it has proposed a number of reforms that are in many respects not dissimilar to the recommendations in our policy paper. Like our paper, the report is aimed at producing a modern, efficient, effective fire service. Our policy paper did not deal with pay, which is handled on a UK basis and is a matter for negotiation between the employers and trade unions in the National Joint Council. The Bain report, however, has a lot to say about pay, much of which has been highlighted tonight. The report concluded that there is no basis for a pay settlement of more than 4 per cent this year and that firefighters' pay compares well with other, similar, jobs in the public and private sectors—indeed that pensions and other aspects such as job security make firefighters even better placed. Bain suggested a further 7 per cent increase in the pay bill from 7 November 2003, subject to agreement on a programme of modernisation.

The FBU is raising those matters directly with the employers. We are not directly involved in those negotiations. I will also talk a little later about any financial consequences of the eventual settlement. The Bain report estimated that the increases would exceed by a small amount the resources that are available to the fire authorities through the spending settlement and modernisation over the next two years. As I pointed out, many of the report's recommendations closely chime with the issues that we covered in our policy paper. Our paper also extensively covers issues that Sir George Bain's report addresses such as risk-based fire cover, the duties of fire authorities, the importance of collaborative work and the need for a much greater emphasis on prevention. We intend to compare the Bain report with our policy paper in our considerations of how to modernise  the fire service in Scotland.

I am sorry—I am running out of time. It is in the context of such changes that we and the UK Government have indicated our willingness to provide transitional funding to support an agreement that leads to changes in return for significant pay increases. Like the UK Government, we have said clearly that we will consider providing any additional funding from our own resources as a result of an agreement that is based on such terms. John Prescott has already indicated that any additional money will be met from his department's budget, not from central contingency funds, and the Scottish Executive will have to meet any contribution to transitional funds from its funding. I do not have the time to go into the pay formula in any detail and whether any advantages and disadvantages should be considered when determining future pay. I assume that those issues will be reflected in negotiations. Like all members in the chamber, I recognise that firefighters deserve a pay increase. However, as Tommy Sheridan indicated, they are not the only public sector workers who are looking for such increases through negotiation. Many public sector workers do a fantastic job. I should also put on record my appreciation for the work of the armed forces during the recent strikes. I do not accept the claim that modernisation is a euphemism for reducing the number of staff and stations. Risk-based fire cover is not about cutting fire stations or firefighters, but about targeting services at identified risks to people as well as to property instead of having rigid targets for a set number of appliances. [ Interruption. ] Presiding Officer, yet again we hear ill-tempered and unmannered contributions from members. I listened with respect to other members and I have taken notes. If you want me to use my time doing this, Presiding Officer—

Tricia Marwick asked about the legislative changes. We will look to do that as quickly as possible—at the first available opportunity, as the First Minister has said. We are considering what options are open to us. Cathy Peattie and one or two other members mentioned overtime. One of the new factors in the debate is the working time directive introduced by Maastricht. I think that there is no possibility for  unrestricted and unacceptable overtime working. We do not propose and have not considered, as Lord James Douglas-Hamilton suggested, a ban on strikes. We share some of the views expressed by Alex Neil, Pauline McNeill and others about the need to avoid demonisation on both sides. We do not want the dispute to continue on the basis of recrimination. We want a settlement based on negotiations and we want some common sense to be brought to the debate.  This has been a useful debate. There are hard decisions to be made. In the circumstances, it is best left to the firefighters and their employers to get round the table to negotiate. We in the Parliament and the Executive will do what we can to make the settlement effective. I hope we can proceed without any further industrial action.

I congratulate Marilyn Livingstone on the motion, which allowed us to have the debate. I pay  tribute to John O'Brien and his family. We need to acknowledge the role that the O'Brien family played in prompting the debate. That is not to be churlish by denying Marilyn Livingstone's role, but without the O'Brien family's concerted activity, neither she nor anyone else could have facilitated tonight's debate. The tribute to the O'Brien family is more meaningful if we understand the circumstances in which the debate takes place. It is right to convey our sympathy and condolences to the family, but we should also convey our admiration for their courage in adversity and our gratitude that they are determined that something should result from the tragedy. Recently, I met the O'Brien family when they visited Edinburgh with Marilyn Livingstone to present a petition to the Parliament. I listened to what they said and was moved by their resilience. I could empathise, to a large extent, with what they said. I have two daughters and one son, who is only a year older than Lee was. I thought, "There but for the grace of God go I, or any member of my family." The meeting brought home to me starkly the fact that none of us can be complacent about what our children are doing and that none of us can take it for granted that our children will be safe from society's horrors. In a much more meaningful way than any document, report or paper could do, the meeting brought home to me what solvent abuse does to ordinary families throughout Scotland and the United Kingdom. The O'Briens could have been my neighbours. Our family or friends' families could have been affected, but the O'Briens were. They have stuck with what they are doing and are determined that some good can come of things. Unfortunately, far too many young people are exposed to solvent and alcohol abuse and drugs because of their immaturity or foolhardiness. They think that they are invincible and that things will never happen to them. Too many succumb. In the past couple of weeks, there has been a tragic case in Paisley, in which a 16-year-old girl died as a result of consuming a mixture of cannabis, ecstasy and alcohol. Another family was blighted by dangerous and inappropriately taken substances. John O'Brien and his family have said that huge attention has been paid to drugs and alcohol and that solvent abuse has somehow been left off the front pages. John O'Brien is right to remind us of the dangers of solvent abuse. We are talking about cheap substances that are widely accessible alternatives to alcohol and illegal drugs. Many youngsters might dabble once or twice and not return to them, but others persist. Unfortunately, even the first or second incident can be fatal. While such substances are not physically addictive and dependency is rare, some people will regularly indulge in them, despite the fact that taking them irregularly can be dangerous.  It is possible to develop a tolerance for butane that can lead to the intake of several cans a day, which entails many risks. Such substances are not only volatile, but the use of them and behaviour resulting from them can be volatile. Young people are playing Russian roulette with their lives. We need to be aware of the significance of exposure to and use of such substances. Members have raised similar issues. I hope that some legal issues that are reserved matters for our colleagues in the UK Parliament will be considered, but what can we do? The issue of test purchasing has been raised. There is a role for trading standards officers throughout the country in considering the current law and how it should be applied, determining what can be done and identifying gaps in legislation. One of the matters that we must reflect on carefully in relation to test purchasing is the problem about evidence in Scots law, to which Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and others have referred. We need to consider some issues carefully to ensure that there is no danger that we are encouraging incitement or entrapment, which would invalidate the evidence. The Executive and the Lord Advocate are sensitive to that issue. The Lord Advocate has relaxed prosecution policy in four pilot areas to see whether the use of test purchasing can be sustained in law. Although that experiment was driven by tobacco sales, the fundamental legal issues are the same. The experiment will start in February next year and run through the year, and we can apply anything that we learn from it about sales to under-age children across all substances, including volatile substances. I will make a suggestion, which is not about the Executive ducking responsibility. Given that the four pilot areas will be up and running in February, it is unlikely that we could do anything more quickly that would throw up evidence in relation to solvent abuse. If someone sells alcohol, tobacco or solvents to under-age children, they are breaking the law and we need to do something about it. We will learn lessons from the pilot areas about how we tackle the problem. One thing that Fife Council could reasonably do now would be to consider whether it could run test-purchase schemes. Under current rules, the evidence would not be admissible in court but it would demonstrate the scale and extent of under-age sales—particularly of solvents—which would be of enormous benefit in determining whether anything further could be done. Although Fife Council might not be able to prosecute on the basis of such evidence, it could establish facts and figures that could help the Executive to determine whether more legal action is required. I would be willing for our officials to talk to Fife Council to see  whether its trading standards officers could run test-purchase schemes on the issue. We could then reflect on the evidence. If the pilot schemes show that abuse is happening throughout the country, we will take whatever action is necessary to tackle the problem. Although the pilots will focus on tobacco, the results will be applicable to other issues. Something practicable can be done. I hope that Marilyn Livingstone can facilitate some discussion with Fife Council to see whether that approach could make a contribution. We are aware that education is of fundamental importance but, as I said, young people think that they are invincible and that it will never happen to them. We must ensure that education on solvents, like alcohol and drugs education, is pitched in a way that gets information across to young people, and make it clear that we are not lecturing them, preaching to them or ordering them about. We must encourage better understanding of the dangers. Scotland Against Drugs and the Health Education Board for Scotland have produced a booklet, "The facts of drugs: a parents guide", which includes a section on volatile substances. That publication is currently being updated. A Scotland Against Drugs publication, "Drugs: know your stuff", which is widely available, also deals with solvent abuse. Anyone who is concerned about volatile substance abuse—parents, teenagers or children—can contact our free and confidential "Know the Score" information line to speak to a trained operator. Logging on to the "Know the Score" website also gives access to a great deal of information.  Like Marilyn Livingstone, I pay tribute to the work of the charity Re-Solv, including its video "A Loaded Gun". Re-Solv has provided a lot of supporting information, which is being distributed widely in schools. We cannot be complacent. Although the number of people in Scotland who die from solvent abuse is far smaller than the number who die from drug abuse, any death is one too many. The death with which the O'Brien family have had to cope should be a telling lesson for us all. Such an incident can happen to any of us, anywhere, at any time. The O'Brien family are to be commended and thanked genuinely for allowing us the opportunity to reflect on a serious issue that still blights and destroys far too many lives in Scotland. I will do what I can—and the Executive will do what it can—to support the on-going work to ensure that substance abuse is taken seriously.  Meeting closed at 17:35.

In the current financial year we are making an additional £5.4 million available to fire authorities to assist in meeting rising pension costs. Significant additional provision has also been made over the next three years through the 2002 spending review, in recognition of pension pressures. The requirement to fund pensions should not lead to any reduction in front-line services.

I am sorry, but I could not hear all of that, Presiding Officer. I join the member in congratulating the fire staff who attended the recent blaze in Edinburgh. Their professionalism and commitment in response to the incident were evident. We have taken seriously the issue of pensions, hence the additional allocation of £5.4 million. In 2003-04, there will be an additional £9 million; in 2004-05 there will be another £15 million; and in 2005-06, there will be another £19.5 million. We believe that we have addressed the  fundamental problem. Grant-aided expenditure for the fire service throughout Scotland has been rising. It is kept under review during our deliberations. I believe that we have done everything that we have needed to do to address the problem.

It is disappointing and regrettable that, for party-political reasons more than anything else, the Scottish National Party opposes the opportunity to increase international co-operation to deal with crime. It is sometimes difficult to place the matter in context, because particular legal issues have been raised, but it is important to reflect on what the bill will mean for ordinary people in our communities, many of which are blighted by the horrors of drugs. We know that major drug criminals are reliant on being able to operate across borders. The new measures will make an important contribution to our ability to track down drug criminals and to determine whether money laundering, for instance, has been used to conceal  the proceeds of crime. The bill is important because it will enable the UK to implement several outstanding international commitments. It will also help to deliver practical, effective action against those who are engaged in serious crime. International inquiries into serious crime face practical difficulties because of the need to operate across different jurisdictions. We want to do all that we can to support cross-border inquiries to ensure that big-time criminals cannot exploit national boundaries in the way that was mentioned earlier.

We have before us today a series of measures that will make an effective difference. If there are measures that we can take ourselves from time to time or measures that we can take as part of UK-wide legislation, that will be the right thing to do. The issue before us today is whether we are prepared to accept the bill. When we are asked whether we believe that it will make a difference, we say that we believe that it will. Those who refuse to accept the opportunities that the bill presents will have to answer for that themselves. It is also important to remember that we are debating reciprocal arrangements that will benefit our law enforcement agencies if they need to get urgent assistance from a partner country. It will also help to deter overseas elements from coming to the UK to carry out criminal activity. In addition to the major issues that are before us, some small anomalies are also dealt with, for example the unacceptable anomaly that people with a driving conviction in Northern Ireland are not banned from driving in the rest of the UK, which Pauline McNeill and Phil Gallie mentioned. Pauline McNeill raised other issues and I will try to give further background on them, but if I do not answer all her points, I will do so later. There will be a right of appeal against the recognition of an overseas disqualification in the UK. Grounds will include the driver not having an adequate opportunity to defend himself or herself abroad or the fact that the offence was not covered by the European convention on human rights. Drivers will have 21 days within which to appeal and the court may, where it sees fit, suspend the disqualification pending the outcome of the appeal. We believe that that provides crucial safeguards. UK drivers must abide by the laws of the member state in which they are driving. If a person breaks a member state's drink-driving law,  for example, we believe that they should not escape the consequences when they return home.

The point that we are making is that the rules that led to disqualification in the other country will lead to disqualification in this country. In the case of drink driving, the other country might apply a higher or lower level to a ban on driving, but whatever the application is in the other country, it will lead to a ban in Scotland irrespective of the fact that our levels are different. I can talk to Pauline McNeill later about the other issues she might want to raise. Time and again, we hear the point that was made about Council of Ministers meetings. The arguments are always the same, so the replies are essentially always the same.

Brian Fitzpatrick makes his point very well. Our officials are in regular contact with UK Government officials, and we have the opportunity to influence what they take to meetings and to receive the information that they obtain at them. At a political level, we have time and again documented and detailed our influence on European policy and legislation through our participation in the UK. As we have said, being part of a major European nation that is a major player in Europe gives us influence way beyond any influence that we would have if we were simply a member country of 5 million people. Scottish ministers attend EU councils and regularly discuss EU policy on EU matters with UK counterparts. It is not correct to say that we have no influence on EU law. Phil Gallie mentioned prior consultation on the bill. I should point out that, as soon as a UK bill is published, we publish a detailed memorandum  that sets out any devolved elements. However, we will certainly consider any measures that we can take to improve such consultation. Peers have raised several substantive issues about cross-border surveillance, which the UK Government will consider further at committee stage in the House of Lords in January. There was a second reading of the bill in the House of Lords on 2 December. As for the operation of the Schengen information system in Scotland, the system's Scottish base is the National Criminal Intelligence Service in Paisley. The NCIS controls access to information, and the information commissioner will be able to inspect data security at any point and without notice. On the question about requests for assistance under clause 7, the Lord Advocate might need to make any such requests at the investigative stage—in other words, before proceedings come to court. Finally, on Michael Matheson's question on the admissibility of evidence under clause 6 and whether we can be sure that such evidence is obtained fairly, the courts will ultimately adjudicate on the admissibility of evidence in all cases. The bill is an important piece of legislation that will bring major benefits to our partners in Europe and—significantly—to us. Not only will it enable us to deal with some small anomalies such as driving disqualifications, but it will mean that we will be able to work together to tackle some of the worst aspects of international crime. I invite Parliament to support the motion.

The Crime (International Co-operation) Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 19 November, represents an important new step in the fight against international crime. The measures in the bill will lead to better cross-party—I hope so, yes—I meant to say cross-border anti-crime co-operation. They will speed up the process of tackling international organised crime, and by improving the methods of co-operation that are in place to get the evidence needed to conduct cross-border investigations and prosecutions, they will enhance the ability of law enforcement agencies to deal effectively with some of the most serious of criminal activity. In particular, as far as Scotland is concerned, both outgoing and incoming requests for assistance will now be dealt with here, rather than having to be routed through London, thus speeding up and making more effective mutual co-operation as far as we are concerned. The bill, in four parts, is a comprehensive package of measures that will improve and modernise international co-operation between law enforcement and other agencies. Part 1 provides for a range of mutual assistance measures in criminal matters, including assistance in obtaining evidence and freezing it where there is a danger that it might disappear. New measures will help in the fight against financial crime—and money laundering in particular—by enhancing co-operation with European Union partners with regard to providing information about banking transactions where criminal activity is suspected. Part 2 makes provision so that extra-territorial jurisdiction is taken over certain offences against British citizens and the premises and staff of UK diplomatic missions abroad in relation to terrorist acts and threats. Part 3 reforms the law so that drivers who are banned in a country other than their own cannot continue to drive in another country. Part 4 makes a variety of provisions. For  example, it makes provision for the authorisation of urgent cross-border surveillance operations by overseas officers in tightly controlled circumstances, and it brings in new measures to combat fraud. The bill consists of a mix of reserved and devolved provisions across a range of international obligations. The matters in the bill that would be within devolved competence have been detailed in the memorandum published by the Executive. However, at this point, it might be useful to summarise those as follows, in relation to the various international obligations. Many of the provisions in chapter 2 of the Schengen agreement, the 2000 mutual legal assistance convention and its protocol, and the framework decision on the freezing of evidence, would be within the competence of the Scottish Parliament, relating as they do to the practical details of giving mutual assistance between different jurisdictions. The legislative provisions necessary to meet these obligations are in part 1 of the bill. Parts 2 and 3 of the bill deal with matters that are reserved to the UK Parliament, but part 4 contains two measures within devolved competence. They are the provisions needed to counter fraud, as required by the framework decision on non-cash means of payment, and the obligations of Schengen article 40 with respect to urgent cross-border surveillance by the police, where serious criminal activity is suspected. The bill is a complicated mix of reserved and devolved provisions reaching across a multiplicity of agreements and the Executive believes that there are good reasons why those should be implemented in the UK in one piece of legislation. First, it is crucial that there is consistency of approach throughout the UK when dealing with organised crime. Big-time criminals are adept at operating across borders and seeking thus to escape detection. That is a highly significant consideration, for instance, in effective police surveillance operations. It is not difficult to imagine that an international criminal might seek to exploit different arrangements between Scotland and England to further his activities and escape detection. That is why it is necessary to ensure that the conditions attaching to urgent cross-border surveillance operations in the UK are the same north and south of the border. In practical and operational terms that position also recognises the potential that, although a foreign surveillance operation might start south of the border, it could feasibly end up in Scotland, and vice versa. Secondly, the UK legislation would be more effective from the point of view of practitioners and the courts. The bill makes provision to implement  the necessary measures in some seven mutual assistance agreements, ranging from the agreed UK participation in Schengen to the convention on driving disqualification. The main issue for practitioners and the courts in dealing with major cross-border criminal activity is having a clear set of implementing provisions across the UK. That is a practical matter essentially, but it is important nonetheless, so that a clear procedure is set out in one piece of legislation should a rapid response be required to international criminal activity that might have a locus in both jurisdictions. There was extensive discussion of the general use of the Sewel convention during the debate on the Extradition Bill that was held in the chamber on 21 November and there has been further discussion in the preceding debate today on the UK Criminal Justice Bill. There is no need to repeat that general discussion here. As was observed in those previous debates, it was anticipated from the outset that there would be circumstances where the Executive and the Parliament would want to ask the UK Parliament to legislate for Scotland on devolved matters. The key point is that there must be a UK-wide bill anyway to implement the measures that are reserved, and in my remarks, I hope that I have set out a good case for why it makes sense to include in the bill matters that are within devolved competence. I move, That the Parliament recognises the need for the United Kingdom to ensure compliance with the international obligations for which the Crime (International Co-operation) Bill makes provision and agrees that those provisions in the bill that relate to devolved matters should be considered by the UK Parliament.

I doubt that I will be the source of definitive arguments on the treaty of union. At least, I could not give an answer that Christine Grahame and others would accept. I will return to  that matter shortly. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton asked about, among other things, the difference between a deferred sentence in Scotland and a suspended sentence in England. Far be it from me to give a legal tutorial or legal revision to someone of Lord James's expertise and experience, but I believe that, in Scotland, a deferred sentence means that no sentence is passed and the accused returns to court later for the court to determine whether they have been of good behaviour. In England, with a suspended sentence, the court imposes a sentence, which will bite if the accused behaves badly. If there is anything else that we can help with at a later stage, we surely will. Phil Gallie and others referred to measures that they would like to see introduced in Scotland. It is interesting that the Conservatives had 18 years in which to enact some of the measures that he desperately wishes to be introduced. The Labour Government at Westminster is to be commended for moving on some of the measures that the Conservatives chose to ignore over the years.

It is easily explained: we have a different legal system and a different set of political responsibilities. The Westminster Government is doing what is appropriate for England and Wales. We are doing what is appropriate for Scotland. The Westminster Government will learn from some of the things that we do here and, equally, there will be times when we learn from what it does in England. If anything comes from the English experience that is of benefit to Scotland, we will reflect on that. Bill Aitken probably misquoted me when he said that I gave him some faint praise for supporting the victim ahead of the criminal. I was probably referring more to his enthusiasm for draconian sentencing in all cases and at all times. However, I confirm for him that the Home Office proposes that the word "document" should include computer material; it covers anything that is listed in the warrant. If there are any other issues, I will investigate them. I confirm for Christine Grahame—to whom I passed a note, but I will confirm it for the record—that the Court of Appeal that is referred to in the Criminal Justice Bill is the Court of Appeal in England, as she said. There have been some useful, specific and technical comments from SNP members.  Inevitably, however, some of their comments were predictable political posturing—SNP members have not welcomed the opportunity to improve legislative operations in Scotland. I was intrigued by Michael Matheson's conclusion that, because Annabel Ewing was the only Scottish member who spoke in the debate and because she is an SNP member, that means that the SNP is the only party interested in criminal justice. If we accept that, we must draw the conclusion that, because no SNP member participated in the debates on the minimum wage, the SNP has no interest in the minimum wage. Michael Matheson raised a number of issues, which I will try to address. On reporting restrictions and clarity, the question is not about the jurisdiction of the court. The bill provides for reporting restrictions throughout the United Kingdom—for example, the Edinburgh and London editions of any newspaper would be affected. In relation to comments on hostel owners and parents, it has been said that the provision in the bill increases the maximum penalty available to courts. However, the sentence passed in any specific case is a matter for the court, which will take into account the particular circumstances of the case. Christine Grahame talked about the Court of Appeal. The equivalent reporting restrictions made, for example, by a Scottish court under section 47 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 will apply in England. Generally, although there might be particular issues of concern—

I am just finishing. What has been proposed has not only been largely welcomed, but is of benefit to us, despite the SNP's concerns about Sewel motions.

The Criminal Justice Bill, which was introduced at Westminster on 21 November, represents the UK Government's proposals to bring about change across a range of provision in the criminal justice system in England and Wales. It is inevitable that such a bill raises many issues. However, in the context of today's debate and the motion before the Parliament, most of those matters need not concern us. The motion seeks to permit the UK Parliament to legislate on matters in the bill that are within devolved competence and which it is proposed to extend to Scotland. The fact that those matters are limited to a few areas is not surprising, given that the bill is essentially about proposed changes in England and Wales rather than in Scotland. At this stage, it would be useful to highlight those areas, for the sake of clarity. Part 1 of the bill makes provision to amend section 2 of the Criminal Justice Act 1987, so that an appropriate person who carries out a search where serious criminal activity related to fraud is suspected, and who is accompanied by police officers, has the same powers as the police in relation to executing the warrant and seizing anything to which the warrant relates. Although the provision relates to fraud investigations that have a locus in England and Wales, section 2 already applies to Scotland. That is to enable effective action to be taken quickly in a situation in which it becomes clear that there might be valuable information in Scotland that is relevant to the case. The purpose of the amendment of the 1987 act is to enable someone who might have a particular expertise—in computing or finance, for example—to contribute effectively to the search. A police officer might not have the specialist expertise that is required to identify criminal material that might be held on a computer hard drive. A financial expert would be much more able than a police officer to assess the significance of financial documents. It is therefore proposed that the amended provisions should apply in Scotland. I  should point out that fraud investigations that have a locus in Scotland are carried out under Scottish legislation—the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995—and that there are reciprocal arrangements that allow our authorities to initiate searches south of the border. In parts 9, 10 and 13, the bill makes provision in relation to reporting restrictions. The proposed provision relates to proposals in England and Wales for a prosecution right of appeal against judicial rulings that terminate a case early and for the ability to bring fresh prosecutions in serious cases, where there is new evidence that might cast doubt on an acquittal. There is also provision in connection with the holding of preparatory hearings in certain fraud cases. That provision already extends to Scotland. The purpose of the re-enactment of those provisions in the bill is to extend them to Northern Ireland. The aim of the provisions is to ensure that fair judicial process takes place, for example, by ensuring that potential juries will not be influenced by the media and that they will be time limited. Part 12 makes extensive provision on sentencing. I must mention two matters in that regard, although the amendments and re-enactments concerned maintain the status quo as far as Scotland is concerned. The first relates to situations in which a suspended sentence that has been given out in England or Wales is breached in Scotland. The bill seeks to re-enact provisions that impose a duty on the court in Scotland to intimate the breach to the court in England or Wales that gave out the original sentence, provided that the court in Scotland is aware of the suspended sentence. The second relates to situations in which it is proposed that a sentencing provision within the European Communities Act 1972, which applies to Scotland, is to be changed, but only with regard to England and Wales. The Executive believes that it makes good sense for the provisions in the bill that are within devolved competence, and which it is proposed should extend to Scotland, to be legislated for in the UK Parliament. In relation to some of the bill's provisions, although there is what might be described as a rearrangement of the furniture within existing statutory provision in England and Wales, arrangements in Scotland are left unchanged. That is the case with the provisions that relate to sentencing and reporting restrictions in certain preparatory hearings. The Executive believes that it makes sense for those provisions within devolved competence to be re-included in the bill, where no change in relation to Scotland is proposed and where there are no other issues at hand. In the interests of combating serious financial  crime, it makes sense for the proposed changes for search operations in connection with serious fraud to extend to Scotland. Although the provisions on reporting restrictions in relation to prosecution appeals and the proposal to allow fresh trials in England and Wales are new proposals, it is already accepted that—in the overall interests of justice—it is correct, in certain circumstances, that the media should not report certain things at certain times. Such matters are dealt with generally under the Contempt of Court Act 1981, but there are other specific provisions that relate to criminal proceedings in which children are involved, for example. Members will have personal views on the merits or demerits of the proposals on prosecution appeals and fresh trials.

I will clarify that point in my summing up. I doubt that anyone could argue with the proposition that, if such reporting restrictions are agreed to in England and Wales, in the interests of justice, they should apply throughout the UK, according to the same timetable. If that is agreed, the only realistic means of achieving that goal is by including the provisions in relation to Scotland in the bill. It can fairly be said that the matters that fall within devolved competence in the bill are straightforward and limited and do not have any significant implications for Scots law. They are a good example of why the Sewel convention exists. Therefore, I hope that the Parliament will support the motion. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the provisions in the Criminal Justice Bill that relate to devolved matters should be considered by the UK Parliament.

He will rule you out.

A major research report into the nature and prevalence of stalking and harassment in Scotland was published on 15 November 2002. The report concluded that there is little support among practitioners and victims for a change in the current law, but that there is a widespread view that the current provisions could be used more effectively. We will be taking steps to ensure that the recommendations of the report are acted on appropriately.

It is the intention to ensure that all agencies work together. We will be mindful of the concerns that Paul Martin raises and learn from the experience of that case and others. I hope that what has been produced will make an effective contribution.

As I indicated, there was little support for a change in the law. However, we want to ensure that the existing law is acted on effectively and that those who face stalking and harassment receive the proper protection.

The contingency arrangements that are in place for the fire service strikes are working very well. We are grateful to the armed services for the very professional service that they are providing in response to incidents in Scotland. We have also taken steps to augment the Ministry of Defence's existing capability through the provision of a number of red goddesses and those are being deployed across Scotland. I would like to take this opportunity of putting on record our thanks to the police for the additional duties that they are undertaking and to the many retained firefighters who are continuing to provide a dedicated service to their communities.

I want to put on record my respect for the contribution that firefighters have made both to the public services and to trade unionism in this country over many years. I, like many on the Labour benches, want to see a speedy conclusion to the dispute. We want people to keep talking to come to a resolution that is acceptable to everyone and the Scottish Executive will do everything that it can to contribute to that conclusion.

I have spoken to Bill Spiers about  his suggestions and he has made it very clear to me that he did not intend to suggest that there should be a Scottish settlement to the negotiations. The Fire Brigades Union and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities have indicated that they wish to be part of a UK settlement. Some of the comments have been misconstrued and taken out of context. If there are any suggestions about the modernisation of the service that could lead to an early settlement, I know that both the FBU and the employers will make them. We are willing to listen, but we are not part of the negotiating machinery. Anything that we can do, in whatever way, will be done.

As John McAllion will know, further discussions have been held yesterday and today, and I believe that there will be a further discussion with the trade unions tomorrow. It would be utterly irresponsible, at this stage, if we were to make unguarded comments that might prejudice those delicate negotiations. The more that we can do to contribute to the avoidance of strike action next week, the better. Therefore, it would be completely inappropriate if we were to do anything that would prejudice the strike talks tomorrow.

To some extent, I agree with Michael Matheson's point that the Conservatives have presented an ill-thought-out motion and debate. Having said that, the debate was valuable because there were some thoughtful, considered and constructive contributions. As I am new to the portfolio, I will certainly reflect on those contributions. If I am allowed to say so, what was missing from the debate was Richard Simpson's contribution. He brought enthusiasm, knowledge and commitment to the issue and I do not believe that anyone could doubt the contribution that he made.  I regret that his observations and experience are not part of this debate. I am sure that Richard Simpson will continue to develop his interest in the subject; that will be welcomed. It is important to consider the context of the debate. We are just into the process and as some other speakers and I have said, we will inevitably make mistakes. The scale of the problem that confronts the country is so great and—as Stewart Stevenson and other members have said—the failure of what has been tried so far is so evident that something else must be tried. Annabel Goldie asked what the resources are achieving. The early indications are that the investment is beginning to have an effect. We will, however, have to reflect on how effective it has been, what lessons can be learned and whether drugs courts can easily be spread across the length and breadth of Scotland. I disagreed with very little of what Roseanna Cunningham had to say; indeed, there is little in the SNP amendment that I could disagree with. Where we cannot agree is on the demand for an early roll-out of drugs courts. It is right to test, analyse and reflect on the experience. That is the only thing that I could disagree with in what Roseanna Cunningham had to say.

I really do not have time. Some particular questions have been raised and comments made today. I will consider them very carefully and come back to members where necessary. I agree with a point made by Roseanna Cunningham and echoed by Keith Raffan—any evaluation should not be just about the cost of the drugs courts. The evaluation must be of the effectiveness of getting people out of addiction and of reducing crime. It would be a false economy if all we considered was expenditure. We will therefore have to consider the wider picture. Richard Lochhead asked about having a drugs court in Grampian. We have made it clear how we intend to move on that. Christine Grahame raised the issue of social workers. I do not believe that the vacancy rates are as bad as she made out, but Cathy Jamieson has made it clear that she is concerned about the need to give a boost to the social work profession. She is considering the training of social workers and some initiatives have already been set up. We want to encourage and retain social workers. We know that there is a particular issue for social workers in the criminal justice system and we will consider that very carefully. Mary Scanlon mentioned Mothers Against Drugs. I have some experience of families in my area who are tackling the scourge, and one thing  is clear: many of those people welcome the initiatives of DTTOs and drugs courts. I recently visited a project in Foxbar in my constituency called Family and Drug Support—FADS—and it was moving to listen to the horrors that families face in dealing with the problems of drugs and the turmoil that that causes, and to listen to people like Ellen Donnelly and Doreen Polson, who wrote a moving poem about her experiences. That is why drugs courts are important, because we have got to help those ordinary people. It is not just the drug addicts who need support; their families need support as well. I say to Stewart Stevenson that we will work with colleagues elsewhere. I agree with him that we are talking about a get-out-of-crime card, not a get-out-of-jail card, which I thought was a cheap jibe from Bill Aitken. Pauline McNeill raised the issues of rehabilitation and better chances for offenders. We will reflect on those comments. We have a problem that we need to tackle but, equally, we recognise that those who have addiction problems and who are not offenders also need to be supported. Despite its ill-thought-out premise, I have found the debate to be useful. Some constructive comments were made. We should reflect on the relative success that we have already seen with drugs courts and use our determination to learn from the experience to do something that is effective in ending the scourge.

I welcome the opportunity that Bill Aitken and the Conservatives have given us to debate this issue. The debate provides us with an opportunity to recognise the success that the drugs courts have had so far. We should remember that it is less than two years since Iain Gray announced that the Executive would set up drugs courts in Scotland. This month the Glasgow drugs court marked its first year in operation. An evaluation of the court's first six months was published two weeks ago. A second drugs court is now up and running in Fife. In a very short time we have moved from wondering what to do about the increasing menace of drug-related crime and the drug dependence that causes it to a situation in which two drugs courts have been established and are dealing with the most difficult offenders. From Bill Aitken's speech, I was not sure whether he had thought through what he was saying. He spoke about the need to give the system a chance to succeed, but then launched into a condemnation of its failures. He did not recognise that it takes time to bed in new systems and to try things out. One way of moving forward is to learn from our mistakes. If the drugs courts do not work, we will try something else. This experiment is well worth pursuing. It is welcomed across Scotland and by many political parties. It is also being examined carefully by people outside Scotland. These are early days. It is right to pilot drugs courts, instead of introducing them throughout the country at this time. We need to learn how drugs courts are working and to learn from their achievements. We will examine the viability and effectiveness of drugs courts as part of the criminal justice system in Scotland before deciding how to proceed.  Critical to the success of drugs courts are drug treatment and testing orders, which are the principal orders that the courts use. The evaluation of DTTOs was published at the beginning of October. It reported that they had made a positive impact and had reduced the level of drug misuse by people subject to them. Weekly reported expenditure on drugs fell from £490 before the introduction of a DTTO to £57 after six months of an order's having been made. DTTOs have also led to a reduction in associated criminal behaviour. This is the serious end of offending, but it has been proved that we are making an impact on it.

I will deal with Keith Raffan's question later. We are committed to extending the coverage of DTTOs. Today I announce that, as a result of this year's spending review, local authorities in Lanarkshire and Ayrshire will receive funding to set up local DTTO schemes. When the schemes are up and running, a further five sheriff courts will be able to make drug treatment and testing orders. That will ensure that courts covering around 70 per cent of the Scottish population have access to DTTOs. Those will be significant milestones in providing courts with a full range of options in dealing with the problems presented by offenders with drug misuse problems. The experience of operating DTTOs will be a crucial factor in deciding on the location of any future drugs courts if and when the full evaluation of the latter suggests that it would be appropriate. We made it clear from the start that we would base future decisions on the evidence of the two pilots, which is why we commissioned the independent evaluation to which Keith Raffan referred. It is also why we asked for a review, which he also mentioned, of the first six months of the Glasgow court's operations. We want to make changes where they are necessary and the evaluations will help us in that. The report highlights the main strengths of the court. The fast tracking of offenders, the existence of a trained and dedicated team, the members of which are in regular contact with each other, the system of pre-court review meetings and the regular reviews in court are all reported as positive innovations. The role of the drugs court sheriffs is also seen as critical in the success of the court. However, what really matters is what happens  with the offenders. I offer no apology for saying that our intention is that the drugs court deals with offenders who have serious drugs problems linked to an established pattern of offending. Those are the people who create the problems. Those are the problems that we need to solve. Other interventions are available for drug misusing offenders at an earlier stage in their offending. The drugs court pools the expertise and experience of seven different agencies to deal with the hard end of the market. In the course of its work, the drugs court team is developing an understanding of respective roles and building up knowledge of the issues that surround drug misuse and crime, not from the viewpoint of a single agency but from one based on a multidisciplinary perspective. Most of the offenders in the drugs court will have been in prison before. Most of them will have come in and out of using and offending. We want to stop that revolving door. I thank the people who came together in Glasgow and in Fife to help us devise a different approach, which has a greater chance of success. I also thank the drugs court teams for their dedication in making the models work on the ground. All the offenders who were interviewed as part of the evaluation reported a significant reduction in drug use and offending, a finding which the evidence from the drugs court team supports. Overall, the offenders were positive about their experience. We know from research that the longer an offender stays on an order the greater the chances of success. During the first six months only one order had been breached. The evaluation has identified some areas for improvement. That was the intention behind having a pilot. More work will be done to extend the availability, for example, of a wider range of sanctions and rewards for non-compliance and progress. It is the philosophy of the drugs court that there will be relapses. We know that. The court deals with them through the regular reviews of progress of the offender. Failure to comply is investigated and dealt with appropriately. The Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill will strengthen the powers of the drugs court by providing it with a range of interim sanctions. We propose to amend the order-making power for variance of the duration of interim sanctions from negative resolution procedure as it stands in the bill to affirmative resolution procedure, giving the Parliament the opportunity to debate any proposed change if at any time the need arises. Interim sanctions will send a warning to the offender without the need to revoke the order. The  offender who fails ultimately faces the possibility of a custodial sentence for the original offence and the loss of access to the supervision and support offered by the drugs court order. If the offender succeeds, he has the chance to reduce or eliminate dependence on drugs, to re-establish family ties or reduce the burden on the family, to eliminate crime and to become an accepted member of the community. That is what lies at the end of the order. I make it clear that it is imperative that we provide extra funding that DTTOs and drugs courts need so that offenders have quick access to treatment. The money comes on top of the additional resources already going into building the infrastructure to combat drug abuse. Some £13 million is going to NHS boards for drug misuse treatment from 2001-02 to 2003-04; an additional £21 million is going to local authorities for rehabilitation services from 2001-02 to 2003-04. That is a clear demonstration that we intend to take the fight against drugs seriously. Our drugs strategy is not focused on either treatment or enforcement. It is wide ranging, combining improvements in specialist provision, expansion of needle facilities, better shared care arrangements, a tough drugs enforcement policy and innovative criminal justice interventions. The DTTOs and the drugs courts are an essential part of that strategy. I move amendment S1M-3641.2, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "welcomes the commitment of the Scottish Executive to address the problem of drug misusing offenders by establishing pilot drugs courts, the success of Drug Treatment and Testing Orders and the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency, the additional resources made available to agencies within the criminal justice system, local authorities and the NHS to support its co-ordinated approach to reducing or eliminating the dependence on or propensity to misuse drugs and its integrated strategy to tackling drug-related crime and reducing the impact which this has on communities."

I congratulate John Farquhar Munro, not just on securing the debate, but on stimulating a debate that has real resonance among members and which reflects huge concern throughout Scotland. It is telling that all the members who spoke were well informed and often spoke from personal experience or the experience of their constituents. That brought a richness to the debate that is sometimes lacking in parliamentary debates. John Farquhar Munro has done us all a great service this evening. Far too many detailed, specific points were raised for me to reply to them all in the extremely short time that I have. I note the point that Murray Tosh made. Even in an Executive debate, we would have been struggling to include all the  members who wanted to speak. I will reflect on some of the direct suggestions that have been made.

I will give the same answer to that question as I did to Sylvia Jackson's question about the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Bill—I have absolutely no time to deal with such issues in the short time that I have available. However, we will try to reflect on as many of the practical suggestions as we can; some of them are perhaps more practical than others. It is evident that rural Scotland faces particular problems. Yes, far more people require good-quality public sector housing in urban areas, but the density of the problem in rural areas compared with the rest of the population is obviously significant.

I acknowledge Edinburgh's problem, which, as Margo MacDonald said, is similar to that of the south-east of England. John Farquhar Munro commented on the amount of investment in England, but some of that investment reflects the fact that the south-east of England has a particular problem. However, since 1999, we have spent more as a percentage of our housing expenditure specifically on rural Scotland than was previously the case. That is a reflection of the Executive's willingness to listen and of members' good arguments in the chamber over the period. John Farquhar Munro is right that money is needed, but I argue that our decision on the prudential housing regime will release more money for investment for councils with low debts. For those councils with high debts, the stock transfer would be able to release significant investment. Therefore, money should be available either way in the future to back up what we have already planned to spend. In the past four or five years, we have built over 6,000 new public sector houses in rural Scotland, with more to come in the future.  Alasdair Morrison asked me a specific question about the Western Isles because he, like others, has a problem with the issue of waiting lists. Margaret Curran and I are more than happy to discuss with Alasdair Morrison over the next week some of his specific points. The main issue, which came up time and again during the debate, was council tax. The Executive will soon consult on whether the suggestions that were made during the debate should be progressed. My colleague Andy Kerr will do that in the near future. Several members mentioned the right to buy. Jamie McGrigor intrigued me, because I was not sure whether he was condemning or promoting the right to buy. However, he certainly advanced many compelling arguments against the right to buy, on which I will dwell. We have already reduced the discount in the right-to-buy scheme. In addition, we will consider carefully whether the right to buy should be suspended in areas that councils believe are pressured. Councils in rural Scotland have the opportunity to come back to us with their proposals, should they decide to do so. My colleagues in the environment department are aware of the problems with sewerage and water infrastructure, which also exist in urban areas. I acknowledge that there is a bigger problem in some of our rural communities because of their remoteness and we will certainly reflect on that. George Lyon mentioned the release of agricultural land. I will go back and check the documents that we issued, but I remember signing off a document not long ago that contained an agreement to consider releasing agricultural land for development where appropriate, because of the changing nature of our agricultural needs and the demands in local communities. I am sure that that document has seen the light of day, but I will double check. I have run out of time and cannot therefore take this debate much further. The debate has been constructive, however. The Executive has shown commitment in its attempts to shift a greater percentage of its money towards housing in rural Scotland. We have demonstrated our faith with some of the schemes that we have introduced, but there is much more to do. The quality and diversity of communities across rural Scotland are part of what makes the fabric of this country rich. We must recognise the fact that rural Scotland is not a playground for the rich, but should provide living communities for everyone.

The programme for government target and the social justice target is that, by 2003, no one should have to sleep rough. We will never stop people sleeping rough who choose to do so, but sufficient resources have been, and continue to be, made available to ensure the provision of appropriate services and accommodation to meet the needs of those who find themselves roofless. In addition, since September 2002, local authorities have had a duty to provide temporary accommodation, advice and assistance to everyone who has been assessed as homeless.

I am aware of neither that interview nor the context in which the comment was made. What the Executive has done is clear. The coalition has provided significant resources and we will continue to do so. More than 800 bed spaces have been provided along with more than 30 outreach projects, 11 rent deposit schemes, nine health projects and six prison-based advice and support projects. We have done everything that we believe necessary to create the conditions for the ending of rough sleeping. We will continue to act jointly on the matter.

No. The resources have been targeted at a range of support services, not just at advice. We recognise that some people who require support and assistance have complex needs and money is going into a diverse range of support services. As far as we are concerned, the physical places are being made available. The most recent estimate was that there were more places throughout Scotland—including Glasgow and Edinburgh—than there were people sleeping rough. However, we are aware that there is an issue about the quality of the accommodation, which we are investing heavily in through our Glasgow hostels decommissioning programme. We are aware of some of the problems that are caused by inappropriate accommodation; I think that we have got the balance right, but we will continue to monitor the situation.

I agree that information and advice must be provided. Local authorities are charged with the responsibility of ensuring that everyone who requires the relevant information is provided with it. We are waiting on the latest target figures from our census. When the figures are available, I will ensure that Brian Fitzpatrick gets a copy of them.

I am wondering how to respond to much of the debate. It is hardly worth commenting on the Tories; how can we take seriously a party that impoverished so many so quickly in so much of the country? We should charitably recognise, however, that the Conservatives now have their own poverty problems to deal with: a poverty of ideas, a poverty of principles and a poverty of leadership. Iain Duncan Smith and the Tories seem to be more intent on preparation for the pantomime season than on being a serious political party. Today's speeches from the Conservatives reflected their complete detachment from the real world. They have failed to recognise what happened during their years in power, and they have failed to see some of the things that have been done since they were removed from power. It is a bit rich for David Davidson to sneer about benefits advice and call for an end to the dependency culture. In fact, the biggest increase in the number of welfare rights and advice staff took place during the Tory years, when hard-pressed Labour councils had to use scarce resources to give advice to the poorest people in our country because of the neglect on the part of the Conservatives.

The evidence shows that, during the years of Conservative government and since then, the local authorities that have invested in advice staff have successfully generated millions of pounds for people in their communities. That is something that I commend. Clearly, we have nothing to learn from the Tories and they have nothing to offer. SNP members sounded as if they were discussing a submission to the political equivalent of a fantasy football league, rather than a serious welfare plan for a modern state. Let us consider the SNP's priorities. Rather than lift the people of Scotland out of poverty, it wants to spend money on an ambassador to Afghanistan and a consul for Cameroon. It wants to pay for separation and divorce before moving on to tackle poverty. It wants to dismantle the UK benefits system, although it will not tell us what it will introduce in its place and how much that will cost.

Sandra White says that the SNP wants to change that, but we keep waiting to hear what measures the SNP will introduce. Its members tell us nothing. We know that the SNP will dismantle the working families tax credit, which is delivering £2,400 a year to the poorest families and helping 125,000 families in Scotland. It would dismantle the UK housing benefit system, but we do not know what it would replace it with. The SNP will abolish UK disability benefits, but it does not tell us what it will replace them with.

No, thanks. The SNP does not tell us what the minimum wage in Scotland will be, and that probably explains why not one nationalist MP turned up to the vote on that in the House of Commons. We just hear whinge, whinge, moan, moan—no details of the financial support that would be available to help Scotland's poor or of how money would be spent. Unlike the political fantasists, we are delivering progress. We heard today that the proportion of children in low-income households, according to an absolute measure, has fallen from 34 per cent in 1996-97 to 21 per cent in 2000-01, which is a 40 per cent fall. That is real progress for real people. In contrast with Sandra White's cheap, mean moan about central heating, we have delivered for 10,000 people and we will deliver for the rest; we have introduced free local bus travel and people are benefiting from that; we have introduced nursery places for three and four-year-olds; we have helped the poorest students; we have introduced educational maintenance allowances to help pupils from the poorest families to stay on at school; we have expanded child care; we have the minimum income guarantee; we have a child tax credit; we have the working families tax credit—and that is before we go on to talk about what we are doing in health, education and enterprise and lifelong learning to target poverty. Unlike SNP members, who want divorce, separation and disaster, by ripping us out of the UK, we are delivering real progress for Scotland's poor.

Will the member take an intervention?

The Scottish Executive currently monitors all aspects of Eaga's performance in delivering the contract for the central heating programme. We monitor how Eaga applies the rules of the scheme, how it maintains quality control and deals with complaints and how it meets the targets set for it. That ensures that the programme continues to provide the best possible service to Scotland's most vulnerable households.

The member's constituent had to wait during 18 years of a Tory Government that never got anything done. Since this Government came to power, a number of things have happened that are helping the very constituents about whom the member spoke, not least the central heating programme. We should celebrate the success rather than concentrate on some of the inevitable problems that come with a scheme of such significance. Some 7,000 households are waiting for heating systems and we recognise that one of the results of the success of the scheme is the fact that the demand creates difficulties. We are working hard to tackle those difficulties and to get the programme through as quickly as possible. However, there is a limit to the number of available heating engineers and to the number of heating systems that we can install. I would rather have the problem of having to apologise for the delays, which people clearly find frustrating, than have to say that there is no delay, because there is no system, which is what would have happened if the Tories had got back into power.

Eaga has considered a number of measures to help to improve the system. We should emphasise the fact that it met its target. It installed 3,559 central heating systems in the year 2001-02 and is on target to install 5,000 systems this year. We are happy with its performance. We will consider problems as they arise, but let us celebrate what we have achieved.

I must put the issue in its proper context. Like other members, I have received queries from constituents, asking why things are taking so long and whether the process can be speeded up. Equally, as a constituency MSP and as a minister, I have received a huge number of responses in which people have said just how pleased they are to have had their lives transformed since the introduction of the scheme. It is important to maintain a degree of perspective. We will try to tackle the problems that arise but, by God, I would rather have problems than not have such a scheme at all.

I say to Kenny Gibson that, no matter how often he repeats the SNP's trivial slogans on releasing potential, he will not move any higher up the SNP list. In all sincerity, I say to him that his remarks about some of his female colleagues explain why women do so badly in obtaining places on the SNP lists. He displayed chauvinism and a disregard for women as equals that was quite shameful and inappropriate to the debate. The debate should have given us an opportunity to recognise the consensus that exists around our attempts to achieve a better society, as Kenny MacAskill and others said. We should all realise that everyone in our society should have the same opportunity and should be able to achieve their full potential. Unfortunately—but perhaps not surprisingly—SNP members again disregarded the opportunity to say exactly what could be done by the Parliament or to describe the practical measures that could be taken, given the substantial resources that are available to us. Instead, they went on a constitutional rant. According to Linda Fabiani, we need more powers before we can do anything for people in Scotland and we must change the constitution. She still has to explain to us why embassies in Ethiopia and consulates in Columbia would make any difference to people in the communities that we serve. She said that we should own up about what we can and cannot do. This afternoon, we heard what the SNP cannot do. When it comes to the next election, people should remember that SNP members have admitted that they will not be able to do anything within the confines of the powers of the Parliament, because they do not believe that they are capable of achieving anything with those powers. Nicola Sturgeon also talked about the need to recognise what can be done and said that the document, "Closing the Opportunity Gap", was "less good" at doing that. One needs only to look at last year's social justice annual report to see the substantial achievements that have been made. That report showed the progress that has been made against the 29 milestones that are dedicated to tackling poverty and social injustice, such as reducing the proportion of children who live in workless households and reducing the proportion of pensioners who live in low-income households. The report showed real progress, based on real evidence, and it is simply wrong to claim that no progress has been made. Like my colleagues, I know from personal experience that progress has been made. Today, I again had the pleasure of meeting Mr and Mrs Hughes from Liberton in Edinburgh, who are Angus MacKay's constituents. The couple has  benefited from that progress through the installation of central heating, and they spoke with real pride about how their lives have been transformed by living in a warm house with affordable heating. I know from talking to people—particularly poorer pensioners—who have benefited from free local bus travel what that policy is doing for people throughout Scotland. Lyndsay McIntosh talked about improving safety in communities. I know that there are more police on the beat in my area. I have spoken to constituents who are desperate for the neighbourhood warden scheme to be extended because of the progress that has been made in their communities. I have visited communities such as Petersburn in Airdrie, which is in Karen Whitefield's constituency, and have looked at the new houses that are being built by Link Housing Association. I have talked to people who are genuinely proud of the fact that, for the first time in many years, they are able to live in a beautiful home in an area that has been transformed thanks to the efforts of local politicians and the local community. That is what the Executive has delivered. We have to do more in relation to health. We can consider the success of the Have a Heart Paisley project in my constituency and in Wendy Alexander's constituency, which is tackling chronic heart disease. For the first time, people are being made aware not just of the consequences of their actions, but of decisions that they can take to improve their lives. From talking to people in communities such as those that Wendy Alexander represents, I know what the health improvement through sport project is doing about getting young people—particularly young people from deprived communities—more involved in sporting activity. I know about the differences that education maintenance allowances, such as those that have been piloted in the constituencies of Margaret Jamieson and Cathy Jamieson, are making to young people who otherwise might not have been able to take advantage of a full education and go on to college and university. I know that much is being done. We are implementing the recommendations of the homelessness task force, which will mean that by next year no one in Scotland should have to sleep rough. We are investing more than £33 million in our child care strategy and £42 million in sure start Scotland. The warm deal programme will improve insulation. The list goes on. There are those who say that nothing can be done—that is just not true. Plenty is being done, but much more remains to be done. Several members have pointed to examples of significant progress. Jackie Baillie mentioned the contribution that is being made in community  schools and Duncan McNeil referred to what needs to be done to tackle some of the health issues in his constituency, which for too many years was abandoned by the previous Government, and to tackle the economic decline that that Government allowed to take place. Keith Harding is ignoring the evidence when he says that "Closing the Opportunity Gap: Scottish Budget for 2003-2006" is simply a well-meaning report. When he and Bill Aitken talk about quality depending on postcode and better-off parents being able to access better education, it is clear that they know little about Scottish education. This week, my son started a law course at the University of Glasgow. He went to school with children from areas such as Govan in Glasgow, Moorpark in Renfrew and Gallowhill in Paisley, where all the children were educated together in an excellent school that achieved excellent results. The children were educated together for the benefit of both the individual and the community. Real comprehensive education makes a real difference. My concluding remarks are aimed at Lyndsay McIntosh and the Tories. Kenny MacAskill made a highly reasonable speech. He seems to be much better when he is not making wild promises and when he is not ranting about independence. A social democratic consensus that focused on improvement developed in Scotland after the second world war. We need no lectures from the Tories. At every opportunity, we should remind people just what the Tories are capable of doing if they are let loose on our society. We do not need to listen to SNP members, to Liberal Democrat members or, indeed, to Labour members to find out what the Tories would do. We need to remind people of what the Tories have admitted that they are capable of doing.

No, thank you. I am just finishing. Today's debate should give us the opportunity to put the Tory days behind us once and for all—the Tory days of war on lone parents, as David Willets has said; the Tory days of refusing to discuss domestic violence, as Caroline Spelman has said; the Tory days of glib moralising and hypocritical finger waving, as Theresa May has said; and the Tory days of the hurt that was caused to people in this country, as Iain Duncan Smith has said.

We will have no more Tory days. Today's debate gives us the opportunity to move forward.

Supplementary to UK-wide tax and benefit changes, a number of measures are already in place to improve the disposable income of low-income households in Glasgow. Those measures include: supporting older people with free personal and nursing care; free off-peak local travel for pensioners; tackling fuel poverty through the central heating programme and the warm deal;  tackling financial exclusion by improving access to credit and other financial services through credit unions; and helping young people stay on at school or college through educational maintenance allowances. All those measures will contribute to closing the opportunity gap  for Glasgow's poorest citizens.

The Executive recognises that more needs to be done to reduce child poverty; indeed, our spending plan commitments will make inroads into that problem. However, we will tackle the issue in partnership with the UK Government, which has a Prime Minister and a Chancellor of the Exchequer who are passionately committed to that aim. I point out that there have been steep falls in child poverty from 34 per cent in 1997 to 21 per cent in 2001. As I have said, we recognise that more needs to be done. Everything that the Executive has done indicates that it takes the situation seriously.

The Scottish Executive will continue to encourage local authorities to give priority to the funding of adaptations from the resources that are available to them.

Two matters need to be addressed. One is the physical adaptations that are required to make living at home more appropriate for the individuals whom the member has identified. Much of the money for such adaptations comes from housing budgets, which are the responsibility of local authorities. It is for local authorities to determine how much of their community care budgets is allocated to the provision of aids. Local authorities throughout Scotland have been given unprecedented resources, including additional funding last year from the Executive's community care budget. I hope that local authorities will face up to the growing need to use that money effectively to ensure that bedblocking ends and that people have the service at home that they require.

I am not sure whether I fully understand the logic of those questions. Housing associations have again received significant funding from the Executive, but we should bear in mind that some of the needs of housing association tenants are met by the local authority social work department. The fact that a person is a housing association tenant does not mean that they are excluded from the support of the local authority social work department. On adaptations, we are providing record levels of investment for housing associations. We will continue to inject more investment through the housing stock transfers.

I cannot speak specifically about the community care and social work allocations within local authorities, but I point out that financial support to Glasgow City Council and to other local authorities across Scotland has increased significantly in recent years. In the Scottish budget, Andy Kerr announced that even more money will go to those local authorities. I am sure that Tommy Sheridan will agree that, when the money is allocated to local authorities, it is right for those authorities to be left to make the decisions that they believe are the most appropriate for their local communities. We work in partnership—we provide the local authorities with the funds and the local authorities must decide what the relative priorities are in their communities.

The Homelessness etc (Scotland) Bill provides the legislative framework to enable the phasing out of priority need by 2012. The bill requires ministers to publish a statement setting out an action plan for the abolition of the priority need test.

The Executive has taken housing provision seriously. We are making a significant commitment to addressing the supply and quality issues. We have exceeded our programme for government target to provide 20,000 new or improved homes in the three years up to 31 March this year. About 7,000 new or improved houses are expected to be completed in each of the years 2002-03 and 2003-04.

That is a fairly inane comment, which ignores what has been done. We have put record resources into tackling the problem of homelessness. The seriousness with which we have approached the debate about homelessness has been reflected in the actions that we are taking in our proposed homelessness legislation. It should also be recognised that we have been more effective in making people aware of their rights and entitlements. In particular, we are ensuring that women who suffer domestic abuse do not sit suffering silently but are confident about seeking assistance, including the provision of alternative accommodation. One issue that we as a society will need to face is that, as we encourage people to be aware of their rights and as we provide greater assistance to those who have suffered silently in the past, greater pressure will be put on the resources that are available.  Instead of criticising that, we should reflect on the relative success that we have had over recent years.

Supporting people is a new funding and policy framework for the provision of housing support services, and is due to be introduced from 1 April 2003. The Scottish Executive, together with local authorities and service providers, is making good progress in working towards the implementation date of 1 April.

From conversations with Kenneth Macintosh, I am aware of the excellent service that is provided at Crookfur. I know that he has campaigned to represent the interests of the residents. Some of the issues are nothing to do with supporting people. No existing user should lose as a result of the implementation of supporting people. I am advised that the proposed rent increases are due to the fact the Retail Trust wishes to restructure services. Free personal care is a matter for my colleagues in the health department. We have put substantial resources into the implementation of free personal care and into supporting people. I would feel regret if providers used the excuse of those policy changes to increase charges. We have brought about those changes to help people and to improve the quality of their lives. No one should use those policies as an excuse.

Debates such as today's present an opportunity for the Parliament to express in meaningful terms what it can contribute to the lives of ordinary men, women and children across Scotland. Although there is a lot of jargon associated with the debate—there are many acronyms and other terms that are only meaningful to professionals—in reality, the debate is about trying to express tangibly our desire, aspiration and determination to improve the quality of life of the people whom we represent. I am sure that I am not the only person in the chamber or associated with the Parliament who has experienced at first hand just what fuel poverty means. We should not forget what fuel poverty does to the lives of ordinary people. We all know the statistics on mortality and ill-health, but unless one has first-hand experience of waking up in a house with an inch of ice inside the window, or of the humiliation of going to bed in the winter with more clothes on than you wore during the day because your house is so cold, or of living in a  house where if you move 2ft away from the only coal fire you are immediately cold, then the rest of the debate is academic. Unfortunately, for far too many people in Scotland that is reality. The pain, suffering, indignity and ill health that go with fuel poverty still blight too many households and the lives of too many people. That is why the Executive is determined to do something about it. The statement and the Executive's programme set ambitious targets. In a sense, that ambition is relative, because we can look at other countries that have done so much better than us over so many years. In a sense, our ambitious targets are only ambitious because of our abject failure over so many years to have done something about it. We have come late to the debate, but having come late to it we are determined to do something about the matter. In relative terms, it is still ambitious for us to do what we intend to do in a short space of time. I am heartened by the consensus in the chamber—everyone shares the ambition to do something. We may quibble and argue about whether it is being done fast enough, but we all share the intention to do something about it. I was amused by Alex Neil's attachment to dates and targets. He wants it done by 2006. Having had his fingers burned by the SNP's target to be free by 2003, I would have thought that he might want to ca cannie on dates. Perhaps the target was to be free by 1983 or 1993. All I know is that Alex Neil's ambitions on dates are unachievable. We will do something about this problem and we will do it as soon as is practically possible. A number of specific points have been made in the debate, which we will try to answer at a later date. Some of those can be dealt with if members write to either Margaret Curran or myself. I will consider some of the general points that have been made.

The grant is being made in response to the issue that Cathie Craigie raised in her speech. There is a need to have an audit of the type of houses that we have and to encourage more energy efficient houses. Friends of the Earth will attempt to identify the energy efficiency of houses that are being sold. The aim is to give buyers information, not only about structural problems that surveys would pick up, but practical information about how much the house would cost to heat and what work would be required to make heating the house affordable. It is a trial to  establish what that type of exercise can show us and whether there could be wider applicability. We await the results of the exercise with interest. It is undoubtedly the case, as Cathie Craigie and other members have said, that we need to know more about the type of houses that we have and we need to encourage the creation of more energy efficient houses. Kenny Gibson mentioned the need for a single entry. We are attempting to do that as far as possible, to ensure that there is simplicity for those who require help and information and to eliminate complexities where possible. Robert Brown and other members have mentioned the need for training. We are keeping a close eye on that. We recognise that there is a need to have qualified engineers. We are not aware of immediate problems, but we are in contact with the agencies involved to ensure that, if necessary, the resources are put in to have qualified engineers to deliver the systems and meet the targets. Some interesting points have been raised about asthma and ill health. We will reflect on that matter. Asthma is an increasing problem in our society and it would not be wise to tackle one problem by creating another one. We will examine closely what has been said. Cathie Craigie, Robert Brown and other members have mentioned partial systems. By 2004, we will move on to public sector tenants who have partial systems. The intention in that phase is to give priority to the elderly. Beyond that, we will have to consider the resources that are available to us for those who are in the private sector. We recognise that partial systems are a problem, as are—as Linda Fabiani said—some of the houses that are now approaching what could almost be described as their mid-life crisis. Those houses were put up with the best of intentions, but some of them had peculiar heating systems. With Communities Scotland, we will examine that matter closely.

Alasdair Morrison raises a similar issue to that raised by Phil Gallie and Jamie Stone, which is the problem of supporting people in rural areas. We must consider that. We do not  want to ignore the plight of those in isolated communities. Tavish Scott mentioned complaints and I have had correspondence from other members and from constituents on that. So far, the Eaga Partnership has met the targets that we set, but we will continue to discuss with Eaga to ensure that it meets targets and deals with complaints. In the first instance, complaints should be directed at Eaga, but if the system fails to respond, ministers will want to do something about that. However, at present, the targets are being met. There are real and tangible examples of success. Members have mentioned correspondence from people who have benefited from their new heating systems. Mrs Baird, who is in the public gallery, is one such person. She did not have central heating until last Christmas. She told us that it was nice to get up each morning to the warmth. As Robert Brown said, the central heating scheme might be the single best thing that the Parliament has done. I echo the comments of Mr and Mrs Hughes of Liberton who told me, when I visited their home, that if the Executive does nothing else for them, receiving their first central heating system will have made it worth while. Those are the words of ordinary people expressing gratitude, but also what they think they are entitled to. Such words make the scheme worth while, but they should also make us more determined to ensure that the targets are reached and surpassed as soon as possible.

Oh dear! Thank you, Presiding Officer. The debate this afternoon has shown clearly the difference between the partnership parties in the Executive and the Opposition. We heard a passionate indication from Margaret Curran of the Executive's commitment to trying to improve the quality of life for people in our most disadvantaged communities. Robert Brown made a thoughtful and caring contribution. However, the SNP and the Tories made contributions that were fatuous and vacuous. To be frank, what they said was completely irrelevant. Half the time of most of the SNP contributions was spent on issues that were nothing at all to do with the focus of the document that we are debating. The SNP contribution was utterly irrelevant. Colin Campbell spent more time talking about Bridge of Weir than about the communities that are directly under threat. SNP members clearly do not understand the issues. We recognise that we still need to spread some important messages throughout Scotland. We  need to ensure that public services, which account for the lion's share of spending in deprived communities, are more effective, responsible and accountable to the people in those communities. It is a disgrace that, in the 21 st century, people in such communities suffer from a lack of opportunity to contribute to life when compared with others in Scotland. That is why we are determined to do something about social inequality and why social justice lies at the heart of the processes and measures that the Executive has proposed. Lyndsay McIntosh and other members said that those communities are under stress. However, we know that more needs to be done in those communities than in others simply to redress the balance. Indeed, we have introduced many measures in all Executive departments because we recognise that closing the gap is fundamental to the Executive's work on transport, education, health and everything else. We also recognise that service delivery is only part of the equation. As many members have pointed out, we have to examine how we raise the skills, confidence and expectations of people whose lives are blighted by poverty and disadvantage. That is why, as Margaret Curran pointed out, we are giving a high priority to community learning and development and to ensuring that those measures support local people's involvement in the community planning process. I want to address some of the specific points that have been mentioned. However, it is hard to comment on Kenny Gibson's speech because, like other members, he would have said what he had to say irrespective of anything else that was said in the chamber. He felt that he had a point to get across, despite the fact that that point was extraneous and irrelevant to the whole debate.

I am sorry, but—[ Interruption. ] Presiding Officer—[ Interruption. ]

Kenny Gibson said that we must work with those who are best placed to make decisions. I recognise that, given the events of the past few weeks, John Swinney and others in the SNP have a new-found interest in trying to change the decision-making process, but Kenny Gibson should not bring his party's private grief into the chamber. By and large, other members spoke about urban issues. As George Lyon pointed out, Kenny Gibson and others failed to recognise that rural poverty also forms a major part of our strategy.  Indeed, the policy document that Kenny Gibson mentioned was the urban regeneration document and had nothing to do with the widespread problems of poverty across Scotland. He made the strange comment that the SNP document was five times the length of ours, which is a clear illustration of the expression, "Never mind the quality, feel the width."

I find it hard to address some of Lyndsay McIntosh's comments. She claimed that the Conservatives' approach would be radically different. However, we know what is meant by a radically different Conservative approach: we have seen it in Easterhouse, Ferguslie, Foxbar, Drumchapel, Wishaw, Craigmillar, Vale of Leven, Dundee and Falkirk. It means destroying communities across Scotland. We know what radical Toryism is all about and we are not going back to it. Robert Brown was absolutely right to say that there is no magic wand. He spoke about the need to consider social justice as well as long-term employment opportunities. Robert Brown, Lyndsay McIntosh and others also mentioned monitoring and evaluation. We recognise the need to improve monitoring and evaluation. The Scottish centre for regeneration, which we are setting up within Communities Scotland with funding of £3 million over the next three years, will help us to produce a solid framework for evaluating projects and programmes and will be at the forefront of developing best practice in community regeneration. We want to know what that money is being used for and we want best practice applied across Scotland. Because of lack of time, I do not have the opportunity to comment on other contributions, but the Executive's document is a clear indication of the Executive's determination to make a difference to the quality of life of people who have for far too long been excluded. I therefore commend it to Parliament.

From the events of the past few days, I know that social inclusion is a concept that Margo MacDonald understands. However, the practice of social inclusion clearly causes problems for the leadership of the Scottish National Party. The Executive provides comprehensive details of progress towards its social justice milestones in the social justice annual report. The 2001 annual report, which was published in November last year, revealed a drop in the percentage of children living in workless households; overall levels of unemployment in Scotland down to their lowest in almost two decades; a further increase in the percentage of lone parents in employment; more women breast-feeding their babies; and fewer pregnant women smoking.

The provision of physiotherapy services is something that the Minister for Health and Community Care takes seriously. There have been significant improvements in support structures across the NHS in Scotland since 1997, particularly since the creation of the Scottish Parliament in 1999. We will reflect on Ms MacDonald's comments, which fit closely with the Executive's determination to improve overall levels of health provision in Scotland.

The member's last comment certainly helped to clarify matters. We would take seriously any abuse of public funds. Mechanisms are in place in social inclusion partnerships and other organisations to ensure that funds and resources are being used appropriately. If there is any evidence of fraudulent or criminal activity, it should be dealt with rigorously and vigorously by those who are responsible for doing so. There should be no tolerance of abuse of resources that are needed in poorer communities.

The First Minister   launched volunteers' week on 7 June at the Royal Concert Hall in Glasgow and joined children of Berryhill Primary School in Wishaw to celebrate their volunteer project. On 8 June, the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport gave a keynote speech at a conference on volunteering in the arts, which is  the theme of this year's volunteers' week. The Minister for Health and Community Care has also launched a new publication, "Celebrating Volunteers in Health". Throughout the week, several ministers have participated in volunteering opportunities across Scotland. Last Saturday, I visited the flexicare project in Paisley and tomorrow I will visit the Johnstone day centre for older people. We have distributed about 16,000 copies of our active communities newsletter, which focuses on volunteering in the arts and promotes volunteers' week. In addition we have provided Volunteer Development Scotland with funding of £10,000 to support the week.

I agree with Cathy Peattie about the role of young people in volunteering and the benefits that volunteering can bring. The flexicare project that I visited last Saturday not only provides services to young people but engages young people, from the age of 14 into their early 20s. I was impressed by their enthusiasm and commitment. We seek to encourage such enthusiasm in our work to support volunteering across Scotland.

That is a totally different issue from the question of encouraging volunteering. Volunteers' week aims to encourage people to participate in volunteering, but Fiona McLeod's point is about the funding of voluntary organisations. The Scottish Executive is undertaking a review of the way in which it funds voluntary organisations. Some of those issues are more properly the responsibility of local government and I am sure that it will consider the situation. That should not detract from our intention to encourage as many volunteers as possible to participate in many worthwhile organisations across Scotland.

I cannot give a specific commitment about an individual organisation. It would be completely inappropriate to do so in this forum. However, I share Lyndsay McIntosh's enthusiasm for the work carried out by groups such as those that she has visited, which could be replicated in every constituency in Scotland.

Yes. We recognise the importance of the voluntary sector to Scottish society and to the economy. We believe that voluntary sector and community groups are in close touch with many parts of Scottish society and are well placed to identify and respond to changing needs. The sector is uniquely placed to tackle many of the challenging targets set by the Executive and it is already a major provider and innovator in housing, child care and community care. Direct funding of the voluntary sector is crucial to enable that work to continue.

The Executive believes that encouraging innovation is essential. We want to examine and reward new methods of service delivery. Johann Lamont makes the valid point that we should not encourage the voluntary sector to rebadge or redefine work that has already been done to gain the label of innovation. A balance must be struck between encouraging new methods of service delivery and rewarding and sustaining the good-quality delivery that makes a contribution to communities throughout Scotland.

There are different ways of providing money advice throughout the country; the provision is not systematic. In some  communities, the voluntary sector takes the lead, while in others the local authority takes the lead. We believe, to our encouragement, that local authorities will engage with the voluntary sector and other organisations to ensure that good-quality comprehensive money advice is available. We have made it clear to those who disburse the money that we want quality assurance and service-level agreements. We want any money that is spent to be additional to the money that has been provided. We want the best-quality advice to be delivered to those who need it, but we will not tolerate the indiscriminate spending of the £3 million without regard to the quality of the service.

The six replies that have been received in response to the Scottish ministers' request for parties' views are currently under consideration.

In the couple of days that I have been in post, I have not have had the opportunity to go into all the planning applications that have been considered throughout Ayrshire. [Interruption.] I will get that done by the weekend. [Laughter.] I have no doubt that all the information will be considered properly when we come to make a decision. I am sure that Mr Gallie would not want an over-hasty decision.

I have been in post a matter of days. I am sure that Mr Gallie recalls the criticism that he levelled at the then Minister for Environment, Sport and Culture about the short time that he was in office before the Scottish ministers took the original decision. The process will reflect careful consideration of all the available information. I will consider the matter properly with my colleague Margaret Curran and we will come to a considered conclusion.

I say to Bill Aitken that I believe that, far from being a poisoned chalice, social justice is  every bit as much of a challenge as health. It is a privilege to make a small contribution to the work of many important people throughout Scotland. I take seriously Colin Campbell's advice about propellants and ejector seats. Unfortunately, he speaks from first-hand experience, as he told his friends in the SNP in west Renfrewshire about that and they removed him and replaced him with another candidate. On behalf of the Executive, I welcome the Social Justice Committee's inquiry into the voluntary sector. We recognise the importance of the voluntary sector to Scottish society and, as Helen Eadie said, to the Scottish economy. I am pleased to publish today the Scottish Executive's response to that inquiry. The Executive sees the voluntary sector as a key social partner. During the debate, many members mentioned the importance of partnership. This is not about one sector threatening another; it is about people working together for the benefit of our communities.

I will feed that comment back. Keith Raffan probably saw the papers at about the same time as I did, given the events of the past few days, but he makes his point well and I will pass it on. As many members said, voluntary sector and community groups are in close touch with many parts of Scottish society and they are well placed to identify and respond to changing needs. The sector is uniquely placed to tackle many of the challenging targets that are set by the Executive and it is already a major provider and innovator in housing, child care—which Johann Lamont mentioned—and community care. If it were not for the contribution that is made by many of those organisations and individuals, our society would be much poorer. I know that Margaret Curran has played a huge role in taking that agenda forward and that she has welcomed the comments made by the Social Justice Committee. Unfortunately, as has been mentioned, the minister is not able to be here today because she is being sworn in. She has taken a close personal interest in the issues that we are discussing. We want the sector to input fully to policy development and to the delivery of services. Working in partnership is the best way in which to meet the challenges that the Executive has set. We, too, value the independence of the sector. Lyndsay McIntosh said very specifically that there is a need to retain the independence of the sector.  We recognise the outstanding contribution that is made by many thousands of people, who give of their time to serve on management committees and boards. They bring good governance and, in most cases, high ethical standards to the work of their organisations. They have made a contribution to the debate on improving standards in our society. The Executive is committed to working in partnership with the voluntary sector. That commitment is embodied in the Scottish compact. Cathie Craigie was right to raise the issue of compacts. The partnership between the Executive and the sector must be strengthened and compacts could also make a local contribution. The Executive's experience of the Scottish compact has been positive—although no doubt it can be improved—and we recognise the value of such arrangements. We know that a number of local authorities have agreed local compacts with the voluntary sector and we think that more local authorities should do the same. We welcome the extension of compacts and the development of volunteering policies by many local authorities and NHS boards. From contact with groups in my area, I know about the contribution that volunteers make. There is still bureaucracy at local authority and health board level that needs to be examined and challenged in order to make it easier for people to get services. That is not about providing services "on the cheap"—as Keith Raffan said. Rather, we should recognise that the voluntary sector can make a difference in a different way. It is about complementing and supporting, rather than replacing. We believe that the community planning process will enhance the relationships between local authorities and public agencies operating at a local level. We are committed to working together with the voluntary sector, local authorities and others to strengthen and deepen those relationships. We acknowledge some of the comments that have been made about infrastructure. We need to strengthen the infrastructure. As several members—including Johann Lamont, Linda Fabiani, Karen Whitefield, Cathy Peattie, Keith Raffan and Murdo Fraser—have said, core funding and stability of funding are critical if good organisations are to have the assurance to plan for the future and the ability to deliver consistent services. We have made a commitment to strengthen the infrastructure of the sector; to review funding principles and processes; to promote volunteering, in particular by young people but also by older people—as Helen Eadie said, we should not forget the important contribution that many older people  make to helping others in our society; and to support measures to promote the use of new technology in the voluntary sector, including the establishment of a web-based portal. We are strengthening the voluntary sector infrastructure, for example by doubling the funding to the national networks of councils for voluntary services and volunteer centres, and by funding key organisations such as the SCVO and Volunteer Development Scotland. Helen Eadie raised the issue of mainstreaming. We are committed to promoting and mainstreaming voluntary sector issues across departments. That process will be reinforced and supported by a number of mechanisms and structures that are aimed at improving policy making. Those include the Scottish compact, to which I have referred, and the Scottish Executive/voluntary sector forum, which plays a crucial role in improving dialogue and understanding between the Executive and the sector. The provision of a broad range of funding schemes, both direct and indirect, is critical. The Executive's schemes are publicised in our leaflet "A Guide for the Voluntary Sector to Scottish Executive Grants", which is updated annually. Linda Fabiani asked about section 9 and 10 funding. Section 9 grants are being reviewed and no money is available for new grants at this time. Existing projects have been continued for one year. Generally, we are committed to making decisions on grants three months before they are due to begin. The system is not perfect, but we are working to improve it. We will bear in mind the points that Linda Fabiani made. We are sponsoring Volunteer Development Scotland to manage free SCRO checks—which were mentioned during the debate—for volunteers in the voluntary sector. A number of speakers—Lyndsay McIntosh, Robert Brown, Karen Whitefield and Donald Gorrie—referred to problems with regulation and bureaucracy.

Unfortunately, I do not have time to take an intervention. Johann Lamont raised the issue of regulation and training. We need to avoid having excessive regulation and interference, but we must impose minimum acceptable standards to ensure that organisations have an infrastructure that is capable of giving security not just to those who volunteer and provide services, but to the recipients of services. A balance needs to be struck. Providing financial resources for the services that I have mentioned is one of the main ways in  which the Executive supports the voluntary sector. We have made available increased resources across the board. We have increased funding for voluntary sector infrastructure from £4 million to £10 million, and for direct grant funding from £23 million to £39 million annually. That money is in addition to some £304 million that is made available indirectly to the voluntary sector through Communities Scotland, NHS boards and local enterprise companies, for example. We have made a commitment to funding for the voluntary sector. We recognise that there is a problem with short-term funding and that more stability and longer funding cycles are needed. We hope that local authorities and others will emulate our example. We need to take a strategic view of funding. Today, we are publishing our response to the consultation on our review of direct funding of the voluntary sector. That response sets out our plans to reform the arrangements for direct funding of the voluntary sector in Scotland. We shall adopt a number of principles and processes to make it easier for voluntary organisations to apply for funding. Because of lack of time, I will unfortunately have to skip some of the issues that have been raised. Those include crucial issues such as the funding and supporting of organisations in rural areas. Johann Lamont, Linda Fabiani and others referred to the contribution that is made by the social economy and we will consider that issue closely. I have worked in the social economy, know what contribution it makes and have a personal interest in it. I will be pleased to follow that through. Members have referred to the need to provide support for volunteering and I will not repeat the points that have been made. The Executive has an ambitious but realistic vision for the voluntary sector and we are making a firm commitment to back that vision with active support. The sector is vital to our shared social justice agenda. It engages people in society and provides opportunities for the expression of active citizenship. We now have the opportunity to build on a good working relationship with the sector. I will finish by putting on record my appreciation, and that of colleagues such as Margaret Curran and Iain Gray, for the hard work, commitment and energy that the voluntary sector has brought to our work. We thank the sector for that. The committee's report has played a major part in giving proper recognition to the sector's very valuable work throughout Scotland.

The Scottish Executive supports the view expressed in the Public Health Institute of Scotland's recent autistic spectrum disorders needs assessment report that priorities for improving services for people with autistic spectrum disorders must include the involvement of people with autistic spectrum disorders and their families, early assessment and integrated joint planning.

Some parents have argued that education authorities should fund the Lovaas approach. Research into that and other approaches to working with autistic children suggests that most approaches show some evidence of effectiveness. However, it has not yet been possible to demonstrate conclusively that one approach is more effective than another. Practice in schools throughout the United Kingdom tends to be eclectic, with staff drawing on features of a number of approaches, including that to which the member referred.

I congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing the debate. I thank her  for giving us a welcome opportunity to have an open and humorous but serious discussion on a subject that concerns all of us—if not now, eventually. As Keith Raffan said, our society has not been as good as others at valuing older people. Jackie Baillie made a telling comment on the way in which societies such as that of Hong Kong value older people. Parts of our society used to have that respect for older people, but we have lost it. Those of us who came from big, extended families in working-class communities will remember the role that the grandmother and the grandfather—if he lived long enough—played in supporting the rest of the family. The older members of the family did not just help to raise the kids and give the occasional thruppence—half a crown if they were really flush—but gave advice and support. They also helped to instil values that have become lost in our fragmented and fractured society. Sarah Boyack has done something useful in helping us to focus on an issue that is extremely important. I share her concerns and the concerns of others about the perceptions that exist. It has been stated clearly in the reports from the chief medical officer, which have been mentioned, that there is no evidence of discrimination against older people in the health service in Scotland. However, the perception that there is discrimination is worrying. If people feel that they are not getting a proper service because of their age, we have to consider that matter carefully. A number of points have been made in the debate. I will address some of them now and I will reply individually to the members whose points I do not cover. I want to put on record the fact that older people have been and continue to be a priority for the Executive. Rhona Brankin, Sarah Boyack and Jackie Baillie have mentioned some of the Executive's initiatives. We value older people and the Executive has invested time and effort into addressing some of the problems that face older people in our country. Not only have we introduced free personal care for the elderly, we have put in place initiatives on central heating and, later this year, we will address concessionary travel. We are making important improvements that will enable older people to play a full role in their local communities. Colin Campbell and others are absolutely right: we should not take the attitude that, just because someone has reached a fixed retirement age, they have lost their value to society and are to be dispensed with. Those members who have spoken about the economic loss to society that results from not involving older people are right. We do not want to take a hard attitude and raise the retirement age. For generations, many people  have fought to lower the retirement age. People who worked in heavy industries such as coal mining, ship building and steel working valued the opportunity to retire at an age when they still had at least a couple of years to go. Equally, we have to recognise that industries and workplaces have changed and that some people who are working now can continue to play an active role. The fact that we are living longer means that we can continue to play a more active role for more years than people could previously. People who want to continue to work should be allowed to do so and to contribute value to society. However, as Brian Fitzpatrick and others have mentioned, those who perform the valuable role of volunteering in our society should also be encouraged. The Executive is paying attention to that issue. As members have said, there is a wealth of experience and talent in our older population. Indeed, when we talk to older people's groups, we see a wealth of enthusiasm and energy that would put many others to shame. In a sense, it depresses me when I go around local community groups and find that the same people are active in all the various groups, but the older people who are involved—not just in the elderly forum but in tenants groups, health groups, church groups and so on—still have an energy and enthusiasm from which we could all learn. Sarah Boyack is right about flexible opportunities, which we want to encourage. As Sarah Boyack and Rhona Brankin have asked, I will speak to Malcolm Chisholm about the national advisory panel and the work of the Pennell project. We will see what we can learn from those ideas. As Sarah Boyack said, the better government for older people initiative must be viewed only as a start, not as the end product. There is a whole lot more still to do. Sandra White asked about age discrimination in public life. The Executive is trying to age proof its personnel practices to eradicate the potential for discrimination by April 2003. I cannot comment on the issue in so far as it relates to the Parliament, but I hope that those who are responsible for that will consider the matter. She mentioned the fact that I was laughing when she was talking, so I should point out that I was only sharing a joke with Colin Campbell. Donald Gorrie said that he has a past but does not have a future and Colin Campbell has, unfortunately, just been deselected as a candidate by the Renfrewshire branch of the SNP and replaced by a younger man. I do not know whether the SNP has examined its agism policies, but I am glad that Colin is still able to laugh. Brian Fitzpatrick mentioned silver surfers. Increasingly, we find that older people throughout the country are using new technology. Lifelong  learning developments are important in encouraging that. My colleague Wendy Alexander has spent time considering how we can continue to encourage people to learn throughout their active lives. Colin Campbell was right to urge young people to ask their grandparents about their experiences. I remember that my father would talk to my children about things that he would not talk to me about. An empathy exists between grandparents and their grandchildren—perhaps because they do not have to be up half the night with the children and can ship them back—which it is important that we cherish. Jackie Baillie mentioned promoting equal opportunities. She was right to say that enforced early retirement and the use of words such as "burden" must be put to rest once and for all. John Young talked, as others did, about employment. We want to encourage flexible employment policies. Some of the firms that encourage older workers, such as B&Q and Asda, say that they get more value from their older workers. Indeed, customers comment that they seem to get more and better service from older people. That is not to say that we want to start discriminating against younger people, who were the topic of the previous debate; it is just that we need to consider what older people can contribute to our society. I will not go into what Christine Grahame said about fun at 50, 60 and 70. I will leave others to comment on that.

Employment is a reserved matter, but that will not prevent Christine Grahame's colleagues in the SNP from putting it into their manifesto for the next election. Rhona Brankin was right that we need to mainstream equality issues. I will raise that with my colleagues in the Executive. She asked about the national physical activity task force and older women. Mary Mulligan and I had a meeting recently with members of that task force, which will report soon. One of the frightening things that is coming out of the task force's work is that our society is becoming less and less active and that that lack of activity is an even bigger threat to our health than smoking. It has also been shown that, not only do not enough young people participate in activity, but older men and women need to be encouraged to do a minimum amount of activity throughout the week. There is evidence that their lives will be prolonged and improved as a result. The debate has been important but not nearly long enough given the significance of the subject. We will continue to consult on age and aging  issues. I hope that, in that process, we can collectively develop a constructive debate throughout Scotland that values older people and says that they have a role to play. They have a voice that needs to be heard. They have a contribution that will make our society better.   Meeting closed at 17:59.

Unused medicines can pose a danger to public health and must be disposed of safely. Patients are encouraged to take unused medicines to a community pharmacy for safe disposal.

I commend Ayrshire and Arran for the work that was undertaken. Margaret Jamieson will be aware that there are significant concerns about public safety. The advice is that unused medicines should be destroyed. The pharmacists' professional code of ethics, which forms part 2 of the Royal Pharmaceutical Society's publication "Medicines, Ethics, and Practice" says: "The public and the profession are entitled to expect all stock to be obtained from a reputable source and be of high quality and fit for intended purpose." The code goes on to say: "Medicines returned to a pharmacy from a patient's home, a nursing or residential home must not be supplied to any other patient." However, I am aware of the significance of the statistics that Margaret Jamieson quoted. It is clear that there are professional and legal constraints that we would need to consider carefully, but I undertake to investigate whether anything can be done to minimise the loss to public funds.

Off the top of my head, Mr Gallie, I cannot answer that question. However, if information is readily available, I undertake to provide the member with it. I know that local authorities and hospitals try to reuse equipment. It  is in the public interest to do so. We encourage all organisations to take that matter seriously.

I acknowledge Dorothy-Grace Elder's serious point about other societies' difficulties in accessing medicines. However, I caution against a policy that says that drugs that are not safe or fit for consumption in our country can be shipped to Russia or elsewhere. That would not necessarily go down well. Public safety is of the essence here and in Russia.

It is clear from the contributions this morning that there is much support in the Parliament for many of our proposals. Most of us would acknowledge the fundamental role that primary care plays in the delivery of good quality health in all the communities that we represent across Scotland. People want to be supported to help them stay well; or, if they are ill, they want to be cared for in or near their homes, as many members have said. Primary care is about providing continuous, comprehensive and co-ordinated care to individuals and communities. That is why we are modernising primary care. We want to ensure equitable access to a wider range of primary care services, working towards a target of access to a member of the primary care team—not, as Tommy Sheridan suggested, to a GP—in 48 hours. We want to increase the number and type of staff in primary care in order to make full and effective use of their professional skills. That will allow us to provide appropriate, high-quality care.

There will be no difference to the situation at present. The role of nurses will continue to be critical. Many members have spoken about the contribution that nurses can and will play in the delivery of primary care. Equally, we want to be clear about wanting to free up GPs to do the work that they are qualified to do and to have nurses do the work that they are capable of doing. I am not talking about asking nurses to do work that is most appropriately done by GPs, but about freeing up qualified staff to do the work that they are best able to do.

No thanks, Tommy. We also want to pursue measures to recruit and retain staff, particularly in remote, rural and deprived areas. Malcolm Chisholm made a number of comments on that subject. I am sure that the announcement that Mary Mulligan is to make today on dentistry will be welcomed widely. We want also to improve the infrastructure of primary care by modernising existing premises and building new ones. Janis Hughes made reference to the contribution that is made by the centre in Rutherglen. Other centres in Ayrshire were mentioned as examples of primary care that is transforming the quality of service to people in  communities. I want to make clear our intentions in respect of the amendments to the motion. We do not intend to accept Tommy Sheridan's amendment. Tommy Sheridan has failed to answer the questions that were put to him about what he would do about doctors and the privately funded and run facilities that are used by doctors.

If I have time, I will return to the issue of physiotherapists. It is not for me to try to define what Tommy Sheridan has included in his amendment. It is clear that the terms of his amendment would have a severe and devastating effect on much of the privately provided care service that constitutes 60 per cent of GP services. We cannot accept the Conservative amendment. It is clear that the Conservatives are attempting to drive Scotland back to GP fundholding. John McAllion and others made it clear that fundholding was a disaster, but the Conservatives were clear about wanting to do that.

If Mary Scanlon had listened carefully, she would have heard us talk about primary care teams. In that respect, Shona Robison and Nicola Sturgeon have raised an issue that requires clarification. Shona Robison said that LHCCs are primary care teams. That is not the case. A distinction must be made between primary care teams and LHCCs. It is usual to refer to the team of primary care professionals who work in close association with GPs and individual practices as the primary care team. LHCCs are voluntary groupings of GP practices. To answer John McAllion's point, we are clear that we are not talking about transferring commissioning powers to LHCCs. We want to empower primary care teams. That is why, despite our reservations about some of what was said by Nicola Sturgeon and Shona Robison, we are inclined to accept the SNP amendment. It chimes with what we are trying to do, which is to devolve power to LHCCs to support and empower primary care teams. We will accept the SNP amendment.

No, I must press on. A number of points have been made, but unfortunately, because of lack of time, I will not be able to address them all. I mentioned our view on the SNP's attitude to commissioning powers. SNP members said that we must address undercapacity, recruitment and retention and the work load in the health service. We have introduced a number of measures that are bringing staff into the service. There are not enough new staff and staff numbers are not increasing fast enough, but we are doing more than ever before. We have addressed many issues about the conditions in which staff work and we will continue to do so. Mary Scanlon and her Tory colleagues are trying to take us back to the days of GP fundholding. I want to make it clear that our proposals do not include GPs holding funds for secondary care. Mary Scanlon endorsed our claim that we must listen to GPs and other staff. The issue of joint futures is critical to the delivery of care in communities and to people working in partnership at a local level. I hope that I made clear my point about nurses taking on appropriate responsibilities. Tommy Sheridan wants an assurance that no public money in the NHS will go to private care. I pointed out the inconsistencies in Tommy's amendment. It is clear from Gordon Brown's talk of a tax-based NHS system and from many of Malcolm Chisholm's comments today and in recent months, that in Scotland we are committed to a publicly funded and publicly delivered health care system. Nothing in our proposals for primary care will take us away from that fundamental principle. Physiotherapists have a role, which has been addressed in a number of reports and will continue to be addressed. If Tommy Sheridan is concerned about specific issues, he should contact me and I will be more than happy to consider them. David Davidson and Margaret Smith mentioned the role of pharmacists in communities, which is critical to delivering good care. One welcome change in attitude in recent years has been the recognition that pharmacists can make a significant contribution. The Executive has made significant steps towards empowering and involving pharmacists, but we can do more. Janis Hughes is right that the majority of care should be carried out at the primary care level. She mentioned the role that primary care can have in chronic disease management. I would welcome the opportunity to visit the Rutherglen primary care centre to see how that can be done locally. Margaret Jamieson is right that—as I said earlier—primary care is about more than GPs and that LHCCs are not the only issue related to  primary care. There are good examples of effective partnership in east Ayrshire. I have seen at first hand the work that is done by rapid response teams, which not only makes a difference to primary care service delivery, but can benefit the hospital sector significantly. Margaret Jamieson was right to talk about local delivery and empowerment. She can rightly take pride in the innovation in east Ayrshire. We must give credit to the Conservatives—at least they were consistent. They talked about private health and their determination to involve the private sector.

No thanks. It is good that the Conservatives are so consistent, but there is a problem—Ben Wallace's speech did not chime with David Mundell's. David Mundell did not answer the question about the money that would come to Scotland. Ben Wallace said that the Conservatives voted against the tax increases and the extra money for the health service that was proposed in the budget. If that money does not come to Scotland, how could David Mundell fulfil the commitments in Scotland that he mentioned? The development of the health service is dependent on that consistent flow of money. The Conservatives are inconsistent and contradictory, but the public will see clearly that they plan to dismantle the health service. Elaine Thomson mentioned the benefits advice that citizens advice bureaux provide. Malcolm Chisholm recently met Citizens Advice Scotland, which will have further meetings with officials to discuss how best its work with patients can be supported. Many local authorities also make a valuable contribution by funding welfare rights services, which provide that type of service. Mike Rumbles and others welcomed the money for dentists that will make an impact in many communities across Scotland. I cannot deal with Brian Fitzpatrick's comments on men's health in detail, but it is true that we need to facilitate the clout of primary care with the secondary and tertiary sectors. We will work carefully to see how the developing role of primary care plays in that. Because of time constraints, I cannot deal with the rest of the contributions that were made today, but I will say to Johann Lamont that we are aware that Glasgow has particular problems. The Executive has attempted to address many of the problems that are specific to Glasgow and that will form a considerable part of our thinking in the coming months and years. We know that there are acute problems in Glasgow. As there is broad support for the role of primary care, I am sure that we will start to see a real  difference in many of our communities. For us, primary care is fundamentally about unleashing the full potential of our staff in local communities to deliver more and better care sooner, and nearer to where people live.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will David Mundell explain the consequences of following the Tory policies in England, which would severely reduce expenditure on the NHS and privatise much of the service? There would be consequential implications for Scotland under the Barnett formula on how money is allocated to Scotland. If public spending on the NHS in England is reduced under that Tory policy, how will we be able to spend in Scotland?

I will attempt to answer some of the questions put by Tommy Sheridan, but it would help me in trying to frame those answers if he could indicate exactly what he means in his amendment. Is he proposing that we end the self-employment of GPs? Is he proposing that the 60 per cent of GPs who operate from privately owned and leased premises should no longer do so?

One of the benefits of having some loss of hearing in one ear is that I have missed some of the rubbish that has been shouted. I note the Presiding Officer's aspiration to have the debate come to a peaceful conclusion. I shall do my usual best to facilitate that. This afternoon's debate has been completely bizarre and disappointing. A useful opportunity for the Parliament to unite in support of a profession that is often overlooked has been squandered and turned into a petty squabble about nothing. The minister could have chosen not to issue anything and we could have concentrated on the motion. She could have made all the announcements that she made and they would have been taken up during the debate and responded to. There would have been no criticism whatever. Because of her deep and passionate commitment to social work, however, the minister used some initiative. She wanted the debate to be an opportunity to put social work on the agenda. She decided to encapsulate what she was going to say in the debate ahead of time in a document to be given to the Opposition and to all members, so that they would know in advance what she was going to say and so that they could participate more fully in the debate. It is an absolute disgrace that Opposition members have turned the minister's good intention into such a squalid debate. I had hoped that we could have taken forward many of the positive things that Cathy Jamieson spoke about today.  Because of lack of time, I will quickly address some of the specific points that were made. Irene McGugan said that the University of Edinburgh was being forced to close its degree course because of a fall in the number of applicants. The number of passes in the diploma for social work has not decreased in Scotland over the past few years. In 1997-98, there were 368 passes; in 2000-01, there were 402. She also said that academic institutions need to know by June, and not December, what direction social work training will be taking in order to provide courses by 2004. That is not the case according to the Scottish Social Services Council, which has said that November and December are the key dates. Irene McGugan also said that she hoped that joint ministerial meetings and project groups would take account of the generic-specialism argument. The answer is that they will. Clearly, that issue is a major concern for many in the chamber and for many in the profession, and it will be examined. We realise the importance of wide-ranging, generic preparation for social workers before they enter the profession, but we also recognise that social workers need to be trained for the many complex issues that they face. That has to be reflected in any good-quality training. In a most peculiar speech, Ben Wallace talked about pay issues and low-paid staff, but spent more time saying that Army officers are low paid compared with local government staff—he spent more time pleading the case of Army officers than the case of those about whom he professed to be talking.

No thank you. The concerns that Ben Wallace raised about registration and the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care are not for this debate, but if there are problems with the process, he should write to the commission. If he fails to get an adequate response, he should write to me and we will address the matter. However, this is not the debate for those questions. Trish Godman asked about the descriptions of social services and social work. The Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001 refers to "social service workers". Trish Godman is absolutely right: social workers and the social work profession are fundamental to the delivery of services in Scotland, but social services in Scotland are provided by professionally trained social work staff and by many social care staff, who also have to be considered in the wider debate that we need to develop. Ian Jenkins said that training should be accessible and available throughout Scotland. The Open University doubled its intake to the social  work qualifying course this year. In addition, access, including e-learning, will be examined, as points 3 and 11 of the action plan state. Sylvia Jackson raised a number of points about the introduction of the social work honours degree in England in 2003. Only some English universities will manage to introduce such a course in 2003; most will only achieve it in 2004, along with universities in Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland. She also made a valid point about postgraduate social work students being able to access bursaries when undergraduate students cannot. We intend to consider that issue as a priority under point 11 of the action plan. Scott Barrie made a positive contribution and tried to bring us back to the subject of the debate. I congratulate Mike Russell on being consistent, if nothing else. His speech was typically spiteful and did nothing to advance anything. Despite some Opposition members' histrionics and their lack of understanding of social work, the Executive is committed to advancing the social work profession and social care in Scotland. Cathy Jamieson is to be commended for her personal commitment, understanding and enthusiasm. Despite the lack of commitment from many members, she and the rest of the Executive will consider the issues further so that progress is made to support a valuable profession whose work is often not properly recognised in our society.

Will the member give way?

The Scottish Executive has taken action on a number of fronts relating to autism. We are contributing very significantly to the development of provision for children with autistic spectrum disorders through the innovation grants programme, and are taking forward improvements to services for people with autism through implementation of "The same as you?" Cathy Jamieson and I will be speaking at a conference on 21 May that will address recent developments in autism. The conference will also be used as a platform to launch the national service network, recommended by "The same as you?"

In recent years, a number of improvements have been made to the delivery of services for people with autism, and it is clear that more improvements need to be made. I agree with Lloyd Quinan that there should be integration of health education and other services. The Scottish Executive is doing that work, not just for people with autism but across every range of services. I will take the member's comments into account carefully. They will be fed into the discussions that  Cathy Jamieson and I will hold in the coming months.

The Scottish Executive has given a commitment to continue to support the voluntary sector in its efforts to determine what structures should be put in place for consulting with disabled people across Scotland. The Executive continues to work with groups of and for disabled people to achieve that.

We are anxious to ensure that disabled people have a voice and are able directly to reflect their concerns. We are also aware of the contribution that people without disabilities make to effective campaigning work. I hope that, at the same time as empowering disabled people to the fullest extent, the groups that have expressed an interest in coming forward to replace Disability Scotland will allow that wide area of expertise to influence their work.

We have asked Helen McDade, the secretary of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on ME, to help us to identify patient and carer representatives to serve on the short-life action group. She has been sent a copy of its proposed remit. The membership of the group, which will begin its work next month, will be announced shortly.

The chief scientist office of the Scottish Executive health department would be happy to consider good-quality proposals for research into all aspects of CFS or ME. Those would obviously be subject to committee review. In the longer term, the UK Medical Research Council's research strategy will address the new scientific advisory group.

The question of benefits is reserved, but a number of local authorities, supported by health agencies, conduct active welfare benefit take-up campaigns. I am sure that the good-quality advice throughout Scotland is as available to ME sufferers as it is to any other group. However, access to specific benefits is a reserved matter.

The representative nature of the group is under consideration and a number of people have been approached. We have sought to engage a cross-section of opinion and expertise that will give the group added weight. I note the comments that Alex Fergusson has made and I am sure that that will be reflected as much as is possible. However, it will not be possible to appoint every person with an expertise, or every person who is regarded as having a specific interest, to a group of this nature. It is unfortunate that some people will therefore be disappointed.

I congratulate Mary Scanlon on making what was, for a Conservative, a positive contribution to the debate. However, she is to some extent constrained by the history and politics of her party. Unfortunately, that came out in the debate. It is clear from all the speeches that we have heard today that there is a recognition that the Executive is putting an unprecedented level of investment into this sector of care and that positive things are happening. Although Shona Robison and Nicola Sturgeon may not be happy about the pace of change, there is a recognition that we are moving forward and have acknowledged the problem. Mary Scanlon raised a peculiar point. She asked how we could justify the fact that more funding is given to local authority homes than is given to the independent sector. She went on to say that, in many care homes, self-funders often pay more than those whose places are bought by local authorities do. In a sense, the logic of purchasing in the private sector—people bulk buying and using their combined resources to get a better deal—is the logic of the free market. I find it peculiar that Mary Scanlon cannot recognise that as the logic of a system that she claims so vociferously to support.

We will continue to do what we have said that we will do, which is to put a huge level of investment into free personal care and to support the better pricing of care home fees. We will continue to support the right of individuals to negotiate the packages that are most appropriate to their circumstances. We will also continue to support the freedom of local authorities to negotiate at a local level prices that are appropriate to them. We are not dictating and we are not centralising; we are giving financial support where it is appropriate.

Not just yet. Mike Rumbles talked about some of the comments that had been made in the debate and said that differentiation was not sustainable. I thought that that was the very point that Des McNulty and Margaret Jamieson had made—in  future, there should be no differentiation. If the Executive is putting in substantial additional resources, we should be quite clear in saying that we expect not just stability in the market, but the provision of better training opportunities and better opportunities for staff in the community care sector. I took from the debate not an attack on the care home sector per se, but a plea for differentiation to be addressed and for our money to be used to provide not simply additional profit, but better care and services in general.

Not just now. Murdo Fraser rightly spoke about the needs of carers, but the name Walter Mitty came to mind when he said that services were better under the Tories. The Conservatives did not address the needs of carers. Between 1999 and 2004, the resources available to support carers will have quadrupled; from 2000-01, the Executive doubled the resources that are annually available to local authorities for supporting carers to about £10 million a year. From this year, we are providing new resources to local authorities so that they can provide more short breaks for carers and the people whom they look after. Those are the facts. In the debate, members have recognised that the Executive has been moving and putting in additional resources. As Malcolm Chisholm indicated, Mary Scanlon seemed to ignore the motion, which she lodged. The fact that she paid so little attention to it makes it difficult to reply to the debate. What come out from her contribution was that the Conservatives continue to want to centralise. That view is shared by Scottish National Party members. They want power to be taken away from local authorities and to be centralised.

Presumably, they want it centralised in an unelected local body.

The Conservatives want to centralise—that is part of the continuing Tory obsession with reorganisation and upheaval. We saw what that did to the health service and we saw what it did to local authorities. We invested £17.5 million on care homes last  July. We will invest a further £24 million from 1 April. We will spend a total of £35 million from April. Our commitment to care homes now stands at more than £50 million from last July. Malcolm Chisholm mentioned the £250 million that we are spending on free personal care. We are also spending £20 million on delayed discharge. It is clear from our actions that the Executive is committed to supporting the generation of people who struggled to set up the national health service. We are repaying our debt to older people and we are acting on our promises.

Mary Scanlon has described a long-standing problem that the Scottish Executive is addressing. Will she take a minute or two to describe what the previous Conservative Government did to support the sector to which she refers?

No. The trust is resourced for management costs and the appraisal of procurement options is a normal activity that falls within those costs.

No. The hospital trust and Siemens were unable to reach an agreement that would provide the trust with the best value for money. The decision to pursue a review requires the approval of the trust's management board. That was given when the board met on 8 February. It is a local decision, which was taken in the best interests of the health service. I think that the Executive has acted properly at all stages.

The service plans to have a paramedic in every emergency front-line ambulance by the end of 2005.

The Scottish Ambulance Service has received additional money for three years to train 225 technicians to paramedic level. The year-on-year uplifts to its allocations have enabled it to increase the overall complement of emergency  ambulance staff. There are 200 more emergency ambulance staff in the front-line vehicles than there were 10 years ago. We value and appreciate the contribution of the staff. We will do everything possible to raise standards and to protect the staff's best interests.

I am not familiar with staff hours in the locality that Stewart Stevenson mentioned and members would not expect me to be familiar with them—that issue is the responsibility of local managers. The Ambulance Service is formulating proposals to improve ambulance provision in Scotland. I am sure that, as part of that, it will consider Stewart Stevenson's comments.

As I said, the funding regime is intended to provide additional paramedics. The proposals to consider response services will improve the service that is available to the public. Robert Brown is correct that the Ambulance Service must ensure that it liaises closely with health boards. Those who rely on the provision of services in hospitals often depend on the Ambulance Service to get them there. We will ensure that close liaison will continue and, where necessary, that the liaison will improve.

It is for national health service boards and trusts to plan and implement immunology and allergy services that best meet the needs of their local populations and periodically to review the operation of such services. In doing so, they should take account of the recommendations contained in the report "Immunology and Allergy Services in Scotland",  which was published by the Scottish Medical and Scientific Advisory Committee in September 2000.

I am unaware of the specific case to which the member referred. If he writes to me, I will have the matter investigated. On resources and services, we recognise that there is a problem that cannot be tackled overnight. However, additional investment is going into services in the Greater Glasgow NHS Board area. The NHS boards in the west of Scotland are involved in discussions with the Glasgow board and others to see how a more comprehensive service can be delivered. As for the specific case that the member mentioned, if he—or any member—addresses a specific case to ministers, that case will be investigated.

I thank everyone who has been involved with the bill over the past four and a half months. That includes a great many people. Within the Parliament, I thank all four committees that were involved with the bill at stage 1. I thank in particular the Health and Community Care Committee, which did so much work on the bill at each stage, providing excellent questions and stimulating debate and detailed scrutiny of the draft legislation. I thank the clerks to the committee and the other parliamentary officers who helped with the bill. I thank the members of the bill team who worked long and hard to make it a success. At times I marvel at how they, and committee staff, manage to meet almost impossible deadlines. I also thank the large number of members of the public, voluntary groups and other organisations who have made an important input by participating in the consultations on the bill's provisions and in the parliamentary process. However, it is clear from the letters that I am receiving that not everyone fully understands who will benefit and what the effects of the bill will be. Many people already receive free personal care; the bill extends that entitlement. We are preparing an information campaign to ensure that older people, their families and carers are informed of what the policy will deliver. As members have indicated, the bill has received widespread support. It is a major step forward in improving care in Scotland. Shona Robison and Janis Hughes mentioned  carers. My colleague Mary Mulligan has already apologised for the late lodging of certain amendments. In the spirit of consensus, I should point out that the blame for that lies fully with Janis Hughes. Her dogged determination to protect carers' interests and to ensure that carers are not fobbed off led to detailed negotiations and discussions and subsequently to the late amendments, which are purely and simply meant to protect the position of carers in Scotland. I pay tribute to Janis for her work. Mary Scanlon raised a number of detailed points and questions that unfortunately cannot be answered in this stage 3 debate—I think that she was making up for all the weeks when she did not have a voice. Nevertheless, some of her concerns will be addressed in the coming months and I am sure that members of the Health and Community Care Committee will raise them again as they continue to scrutinise the development of free personal care provision. Several members mentioned joint working. The issue was well discussed at stage 2 in the committee. Joint working is absolutely necessary. Although I hope that such working will develop on the basis of co-operation, we have ensured that, where joint working is not effective, we can implement further measures. Ben Wallace mentioned the fact that he had met the Faculty and Institute of Actuaries. It has been suggested that actuaries are people who think that accountancy is too exciting; in that case, meeting Ben Wallace must have been an orgasmic experience for them. I also listened with interest to John McAllion's definition of hyena socialism, which would probably take some of our debates on to a more voracious level. In response to members' questions, I can say that there will be no further delays. We are fully committed to meeting the bill's objectives; the money is in place and we look forward to working towards the bill's implementation. I regret Nicola Sturgeon's slightly negative contribution. She turned the Parliament's moment of pride over such a major achievement into another opportunity to criticise and to have a whine about Westminster. Although the bill represents a substantial piece of work, a great deal more still has to be done after today's debate. I stress the importance of the on-going implementation work and the regulations that will follow in the bill's wake. I am sure that the Health and Community Care Committee is looking forward to giving both its careful scrutiny. As Henry McLeish and other members have pointed out, we should recognise the achievement that the bill represents and the improvements in care that we will be able to deliver as a result of it. The bill is part of the biggest package of support to  older people that the country has ever seen. With the introduction of free personal care and other aspects of care delivery, alongside measures such as concessionary travel across Scotland and central heating programmes, the Parliament is simply repaying the sacrifice that our parents' generation made in the creation of a welfare state. Although, as John McAllion suggests, people of our generation might be selfish in how they prepare for their old age, I am proud that we have done something to repay our huge debt to our parents' generation. I thank everyone for their support and their efforts over the past couple of months, and I ask the chamber to join me in voting for the bill to be passed.

Amendments 1 to 17 are minor technical amendments to ensure consistency of drafting, style and clarity in the bill. I move amendment 1.  Amendment 1 agreed to.

Guidance on tackling violence against general practitioners and their staff was issued on 17 December to NHS boards and primary care trusts. The guidance sets out a model local development scheme, which ensures that medical services continue to be available to patients who have been violent. Health at work guidance is currently in preparation and will include a model policy for NHS Scotland concerning refusal of treatment in certain circumstances to patients who are violent towards staff.

We would consider anything that helps to give greater protection to staff. In addition to the guidance to GPs, regulations that were issued in July 2000 set out practice governing patients where there is a removal because of violence against staff. Anything that can help to protect the security and safety of staff will be given due consideration.

Specific incidents are the responsibility of local management and of the trust and should be dealt with appropriately at that level. Our responsibility is to set out a framework within which the trusts can operate. That is what we are attempting to do.

That question was answered in my reply to Trish Godman. Other factors need to be considered. The General Medical Council guidance tells doctors: "In an emergency, you must offer anyone at risk the treatment you could reasonably be expected to provide" in the circumstances. We must weigh those things together. John Scott is right that we should not tolerate violence against staff. We must ensure that the atmosphere and environment in which staff operate gives security and protection and says no to abusive and violent patients.

The debate is timely, given the publication this month of the report of the English chief medical officer's working group on care for people with ME or—for those who prefer to use the other definition—CFS/ME. We are all aware that, as many members have said, conclusive knowledge of the cause and development of this condition has eluded the best efforts of researchers. That elusiveness can too easily lead to frustration when we see the impact that ME can have on our nearest and dearest, particularly children. Alex Fergusson spoke movingly of the direct impact that the condition has had on Christopher and the way in which he has had to face up to a significant change in his life. I congratulate members on the positive and informed debate that we have had on a difficult subject. John McAllion is right to draw attention to the number of members who requested to speak and who have attended the debate and to the number of people in the public gallery. That is significant and reflects the fact that this debate deals with a growing problem. One of the difficulties with the willingness to participate is that I cannot possibly cover all the issues that were raised tonight. That is an indication that there has to be a longer and more informed debate in Scotland about ME.

Bruce Crawford is right: there is a need to change the culture. Winnie Ewing and others referred to the need to change the culture  in the medical profession, Robin Harper spoke about education and John McAllion and others spoke about the problems in the wider NHS. I agree that the culture in Government must change significantly as well. The report of the English chief medical officer's working group on care for people with ME is welcome for a number of reasons. It should lay to rest the controversy over whether the condition is real, which has sometimes been a barrier preventing sufferers from obtaining good-quality care. It is important that the report gives due weight to the views and experiences of patients.

I will return to research later. The debate gives us an opportunity to state clearly that some of the myths, scepticism and prejudice that have existed should be consigned to the past. Alex Fergusson, Christine Grahame and others have spoken about sufferers whom they know. I, too, have a close relative who has suffered. One point that has been echoed tonight is that a sufferer can go from being active—and almost, in my relative's case, from having to be chained down to stop them going to work when they were not well—to being suddenly physically incapable of going out of the house, not understanding what is wrong with them and not being able to turn to anybody who can give them assistance and advice. We must consider that. Another welcome feature of the report is its emphasis on the need for evidence-based practice. Because so much remains unknown or uncertain about the condition, it is easy to assume that there has been little research. That is not true: there have been more than 1,000 medical research publications. As we speak, nearly 30 research studies are being carried out in the health service. As is often the case, the quality of the published research varies widely and care is needed in its interpretation. Susan Deacon and others made some useful suggestions. She spoke about the need for action now that the report is published and about a mechanism to take the report forward. John McAllion spoke about identifying how we support the needs of ME sufferers. We will respond to  those requests by setting up a short-life action group to consider over three months the most effective ways of improving the care and quality of life for those with ME. The information from that group will be made available to the NHS at all levels in Scotland. Speakers tonight have been right: we need to ensure that doctors and everyone else who is involved in the NHS are aware of the findings of the report and, more important, of some of the things that could and should be done to support ME sufferers. The report's findings form a good platform on which to base our future research effort. We need to identify interventions that can be incorporated into routine clinical practice and to find out which therapies work best for which groups of patients. A number of speakers have mentioned the need for more research. Janis Hughes, Margaret Smith, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Nicola Sturgeon and Bristow Muldoon all correctly emphasised that need. However, research cannot be a substitute for action; we need to consider that. The working group acknowledged in the report the lack of good evidence on incidence, prevalence and trends and recommended further research. The Department of Health in England has asked the Medical Research Council to draw up a research strategy, taking account of the working group's findings, other recent expert reviews and the views of patients and carers. The work will be advanced by an independent scientific advisory group. It is appropriate to state that the MRC is a United Kingdom body. It funds research projects throughout the UK and has frequent contact with our chief scientist office. We support the initiative to establish such a strategy and will provide whatever help we can. Until that strategy is available, it would not be sensible for the Executive to commission large-scale studies. There are also disputes about definitions. Once the MRC's work is complete and the future strategic direction of research is clear, we shall of course be seeking to play our full part in the implementation of the strategy. We are not convinced at present of the arguments for a centre of excellence, but we need to consider some of the further research. Good-quality research proposals into other aspects of the syndrome will be considered by the chief scientist office through the usual peer review process. Those who suffer from ME are a well-organised group of people, who have right and justice on their side. The fact that so many people are now suffering makes it imperative for us to respond appropriately. We must take people who suffer from ME out of the shadows of being regarded as cranks, malingerers and people who are trying to avoid facing up to reality. ME is a specific medical  problem and, as members have said, we need to change attitudes and culture. We must ensure that local authorities, health services and others have the information that they need to provide a proper service to people who suffer from ME.

Throughout the range of the Scottish Executive's responsibilities, policies exist that are designed to assist people with a disability to live independently; those include consultation, adaptations to homes and managing direct payments. In addition, the Executive consults service users and disability groups throughout the country to ensure that the requirements of disabled people in living as independently as possible are identified.

Research shows that direct payments can increase independence and aid social inclusion, and the Executive is committed to making them more widely available. The Community Care and Health (Scotland) Bill introduces several proposals that will help to improve the take-up of direct payments. The bill will place a duty on local authorities to give eligible people the choice of using direct payments to arrange and purchase their care services. We have committed £530,000 to direct payments Scotland, which is a two-year development project that will help to put in place the local support systems that are needed to help people to manage their direct payments. That project will also offer local authorities advice, information and training.

I join my colleague Malcolm Chisholm in paying tribute to the Health and Community Care Committee for its  report. I would also like to join Brian Adam and others in the tributes to the work of those groups that represent hepatitis C sufferers. Those people have been courageous and determined. For some time, they have kept the debate at the forefront of the public and political agenda. They might not agree with one other and we might not always agree with them, but no one could doubt their fortitude and determination. As has been said by many members this morning, people who were infected with hepatitis C through infected blood—through no fault of anyone—deserve support and assistance. That needs to be emphasised time and time again. As Malcolm Chisholm said, the Executive is working actively to make progress on a range of fronts. I will return to the financial issue, but first I will examine some of the non-financial aspects. As has been suggested, it is important that the advice that clinicians give to patients on the risks that are associated with blood treatment is highlighted as being crucial. We agree with that. As Malcolm Chisholm and others, including Margaret Smith, have said, we need to change the atmosphere in which doctors relate to patients and advice is given. Vast improvements have been made in that respect, but we cannot be complacent. We have agreed that the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland will examine that as part of its accreditation process on patient focus. We are in active discussion with the CSBS on how best to progress that matter. We are determined that the process should be thorough and objective. A number of speakers have emphasised the similarities between hepatitis C sufferers and those who were infected with the HIV virus through infected blood products. While I agree that there are similarities, the situation is not the same. Questions have been posed by members including David Davidson, Shona Robison and Nicola Sturgeon about links to HIV and the Macfarlane Trust. Nicola Sturgeon asked why a distinction was made between HIV and hepatitis C. However, she answered the question when she said: "Back then, HIV infection was a virtual death sentence." That statement gives an indication of why the Government of the time set up the Macfarlane Trust. At that time, there was no known treatment—HIV was regarded as a death sentence. That is why a distinction was made in the case of HIV and that distinction led to the setting up of the Macfarlane Trust. As Malcolm Chisholm indicated, it is right that the Executive and the Parliament have a clear responsibility to take account of the bigger picture and to examine the long-term implications. That would ensure that the interests of the patient population as a whole were safeguarded in a fair  and equitable fashion. We have said, as have a number of members, that we cannot do something that creates a precedent.

In a minute. That said, in the debate, we have consistently looked back to HIV and the Macfarlane Trust and used them as a precedent. There might be a determination to create a precedent today—I respect some of those views—nevertheless members should be able to foresee that, at some time in the future, people could use the arguments around hepatitis C in the same way that we are referring back to HIV.

Malcolm Chisholm said that whatever we do we want to avoid creating precedents. However, he indicated that he and the Executive are willing to do whatever is possible to provide equity and justice. He has stated that the Executive will act on the recommendations of the Health and Community Care Committee report.

No.

It is not for the member to determine how much time we have in the debate—that is a matter for the Presiding Officer. As John McAllion said, we have witnessed in this debate some of the strengths of the  Parliament. Reference was made to Jack McConnell's tribute to the Parliament's committees. As John McAllion said, there is cross-party support in the work of the committees on reports such as this. I have heard no differences between the political parties this morning. With one or two exceptions, members have sought to avoid taking party-political advantage from this sensitive debate, and that is to their credit.

Yes.

It would be hard to sum up on all the points that Margaret Smith made in that speech. Malcolm Chisholm has indicated that progress is being made at the Executive and that he will act on the recommendations. Margaret Smith and others paid tribute to the fact that the Executive has accepted much of what the committee has said. Malcolm Chisholm has stated that we are not closing our minds to the concept of ex gratia payments. The fact that we are setting up an expert group means that hepatitis C will be treated as a specific issue, and that we will learn from that example and apply what is learned in the  future. As Malcolm Chisholm has said, any system that suggests financial assistance would need to be fair and open so that everyone would know where they stood in advance of seeking such a payment. David Davidson and Lord James Douglas-Hamilton asked about time scales. Malcolm Chisholm has indicated that there is a sense of urgency and that he wants the expert group to report back within six months. As Margaret Smith said, we would hope that relations between patients and clinicians would be more open in future. As she and others pointed out, there is no finding of negligence. Margaret Smith and others also raised the issue of the UK-Scotland compensation scheme. As Mary Scanlon said, it would be better if we could get a UK scheme, but we will not use that as an excuse for delaying. There are matters that are within our competence and we would not be deterred from making progress because of delays in a UK scheme. The demands are for compassion and justice. As Nicola Sturgeon and others said, this is a devastating illness for sufferers and their families. Mary Scanlon raised the question of patient representation. Malcolm Chisholm referred to that, and it will be discussed with the committee. Bill Butler and others spoke about the creation of precedents. The expert group will consider a wide range of issues. As the minister said, that will not exclude the question of compensation, which the group will seek to consider in a coherent and consistent fashion. We have had a good debate today, which has been marked with some sensitivity because of the nature of the illness and the suffering that is involved. However, as David Davidson and others said, we need to proceed carefully so that we do not create precedents. Any action that we take must seek to address the legitimate concerns of people with hepatitis C. However, it must also seek to protect the interests of the health service and the public in the future.

Bristow Muldoon outlined very eloquently the concerns that many people have about the proposed closure. He articulated tonight some of the real emotions that surround the decision. Members will be aware of my and Mary Mulligan's support for the motion before we were appointed as ministers. My support, like that of Mary Mulligan, was based on a desire to raise the profile of this issue in Parliament and to draw attention to the pressing urgency of the situation. More important, our support was driven by a concern to secure care for the current and future residents of Binny House. This, as many members have said, is the real issue—the securing of specialised care for vulnerable people with degenerative neurological conditions such as multiple sclerosis, Huntington's disease and Parkinson's disease.  I understand fully the emotions behind the motion, and why the local member feels compelled to use such strong words. As David McLetchie said, we need a sense of perspective, and I will attempt to bring that. I also recognise the fine work that has been done by Sue Ryder Care over many years. I am aware that many members are worried that it is not necessarily the question whether a suitable revenue funding package is available that is driving the decision; instead there are worries that the land value that could be realised from the sale of the asset might be influencing Sue Ryder Care at the expense of those who are immediately affected. I should add, however, that—from an Executive perspective—we cannot unconditionally rule out using Sue Ryder Care as a partner for future care projects. Little is to be gained by mud slinging, and I think that the speeches of Bristow Muldoon and others were about the anguish that people are feeling as a result of the proposal. As many members have said, we need to find a way forward that protects the interests of all parties, particularly the users of the service and their families. It is, of course, deeply regrettable that Sue Ryder Care has signalled that it intends to close Binny House. That cannot have been an easy decision, bearing in mind in particular the effect that the closure would have on residents and their families. The loss of Binny House would be significant; there can be no doubt about that. It would be a bitter loss, not only for residents and their families, but for the 80 or so highly trained and highly motivated staff who currently care for residents. Trish Godman and Cathy Peattie were right to highlight the unilateral way in which the decision was made and the lack of consultation, to which Bristow Muldoon also referred. I regret the lack of communication and consultation, which I think has distracted from the main issue and has impacted on the way in which the decision-making process has developed. There is a lesson to be learned about how service providers relate to the recipients of the service and to their families. Even at this late stage, our hope would be that diplomacy will prevail and that a practical solution can be found. We hope that Sue Ryder Care can again sit at the negotiating table with the relevant commissioners of care, and that a solution can be found to safeguard the future of the home. Like any other national provider of care, Sue Ryder Care has to make tough decisions. Increases in operational and other costs will, no doubt, have increased pressure on the organisation with regard to what it can deliver. Sue Ryder Care has had to take a hard look at what it can afford and has made some hard decisions about how it can best deliver the kind of care that  it provides. It has rationalised and proposes to act accordingly. It is slightly unfair of Nicola Sturgeon to make a passing comment about the lack of funding from the Scottish Executive. The latest information that I have received is that the local authorities and Lothian Health have come up with a significant offer to Sue Ryder Care.

I really do not have time. According to the figures that I have, that offer would mean that the public funding element at Binny House would rise to between 84 and 93 per cent, depending on the approach that is taken to the figures that have been set out. That would make the facility the second-best funded publicly funded Sue Ryder Care centre out of 26 centres in Britain.

No, thank you. We should be aware of that funding package, and that information should be used as the basis for discussion. We should try to understand the reasoning behind the decision, and I would encourage discussions between the relevant parties, with all possible information made available. It is to be hoped that the deal to which Euan Robson referred, which kept the Borders facility open, should inform a future resolution in West Lothian. The situation in the Borders is different from the situation in West Lothian, but what happened in the Borders was a positive step forward and should be regarded as a reference point for future negotiations. David McLetchie called for a sense of perspective and referred to the record of Sue Ryder Care. The organisation has had to bear the brunt of a number of accusations. Among other things, it has been accused of intending to terminate its Scottish operations wholesale in order to consolidate in England. The information that I have suggests that there is little to substantiate such accusations. Indeed, as David McLetchie said, the charity has signalled a long-term commitment to providing specialist services in Scotland. Its plans for a specialist neurological care centre in Aberdeen are part of that commitment. Sue Ryder Care appears to be committed to remaining in Scotland. The question of the future of Binny House should not be distorted by unfair accusations and we should concentrate on the situation that is immediately before us. We regret that Sue Ryder Care has signalled that it intends to close Binny House on 28  February next year. As I said, we should try to understand that decision. However, we hope that representatives of the charity will resume discussion with the commissioners of care in Lothian. We understand that the commissioners have worked very hard to put together a satisfactory package, comprising a substantial funding package and measures to reduce overspending in the future through a range of efficiency savings. It would be regrettable if that comprehensive package could not be used as the basis for a future working agreement. We understand that the commissioning partners would be prepared, even at this late stage, to discuss that and a range of other options to keep Binny House open. I recommend that the Parliament notes the current situation in West Lothian but refrains from rejecting Sue Ryder Care as a suitable partner for care. Apart from anything else, Parliament should recognise that the principle of subsidiarity leaves local partners free to make their own funding decisions. We do not want to do anything in this debate that might jeopardise delicate negotiations. At the same time, as Michael Matheson and others have said, very articulately, Parliament has the right to encourage everyone concerned, including Sue Ryder Care, to do everything possible to secure the future of Binny House. The service that is provided by Binny House is largely irreplaceable. If Binny House closes, that will have profound human consequences.  Meeting closed at 18:02.

I welcome the opportunity to close this debate about our most important public service—the national health service. I begin by reminding the Parliament why we are having the debate and why it matters so much to everyone in the chamber and the country. The NHS was the greatest achievement of the post-war Labour Government. It was founded on one simple principle: that health care should be provided on the basis of a person's need, not their wealth. Some objected to that principle in 1948 and some would like us to abandon it today. Defending that principle is one of the reasons why I, and many in the chamber, entered politics and why I am proud to speak on the Executive's behalf today. Our commitment to the NHS is not in doubt. Nothing that we heard from Opposition members denies the fact that the Executive is backing its commitment to the service with record levels of new investment. Not even the most hardened cynic can deny that new investment is starting to deliver change where it matters, for the people who need it most. However, we must recognise the scale of the challenge.

No thanks. In the 12 months since the Scottish health plan was published, the plan has attracted an unprecedented level of support. There is consensus in favour of our approach to improving health and health services for the people of Scotland. That approach is based on recognising the effects of decades of underinvestment and being prepared to provide the additional resources that are required; on being honest about Scotland's appalling health record and being prepared to tackle it vigorously; and on acknowledging that the key determinants of health are linked to deprivation and being prepared to  confront poverty and social inclusion. In responding to Margaret Smith, Dorothy-Grace Elder was right when she counselled that we must be careful about the language that we use. Margaret Smith was right to say that some of the cancer problems in Glasgow were caused by life factors and lifestyles. However, in cities such as Glasgow, generations have worked in unhealthy environments and generations have lived in poverty and under stress. As a result, they may not have had the opportunities for good, healthy living that many of the rest of us have had. We must be careful about how we phrase our comments on the causes of ill health. We must recognise people's legitimate expectations of a modern health service and work with staff and the public to meet those expectations. The Minister for Health and Community Care highlighted many of the Administration's key achievements. Members can read summaries of the many more successes in "Our National Health—Delivering Change" when it is published later this week. Those successes mark major progress in our efforts to improve Scotland's health record and to modernise our health service. The health plan never promised quick fixes. Speakers, including Shona Robison, were right to say that there are no quick fixes. The health plan was conceived as a strategy for the longer term. It was billed as a plan for action. We have heard how much activity has taken place over the past 12 months.

Primary care and GPs, who are part of primary care, are key to the plan. We look forward to working with them in the future. The health plan was billed as a plan for change. We have heard how change is being delivered throughout Scotland. As the Executive is the architect of the health plan, no one has higher expectations of it than we do. We share the frustrations of patients and staff alike when, on occasions, standards of service fail to match expectations. A lot has been achieved in 12 months, but no one in the Executive underestimates how much more has yet to be done. This afternoon, we have heard many examples of where the service has failed patients and their families. I do not dismiss those very real concerns. However, Janis Hughes was right to try to put the debate into a proper context. We need to contrast  the small and admittedly unacceptable number of people who face difficulties with the health service with the millions who receive an exceptional service. Janis Hughes was right to restate that that is the positive face of the national health service in Scotland. It is unusual for people to wait excessively but, unfortunately, it does happen and it represents a real cause of anxiety for their families. That is why tackling waiting is at the top of our priorities and why we will look at new and innovative ways to access spare capacity and cut the time that patients have to wait for treatment. A number of speeches have been made this afternoon.

No, I am sorry, but I cannot. Nicola Sturgeon and Shona Robison spoke about the use of private facilities. I see no distinction between what Nicola Sturgeon said and what was said by the minister. Nicola Sturgeon spoke about bedblocking but, unlike Susan Deacon, who spoke about radical alternatives and options, she yet again came up with no solutions to resolve it. She also spoke about staff shortages; peculiarly, she talked about the decade that it takes to train a consultant and then somehow blamed the Labour party for that. The reality is that in Scotland, over the next five years, 10,000 nurses and midwives will qualify. That is 1,500 more than was planned previously. By 2005, we expect the total number of NHS consultants to rise by 600.

Absolutely. It is critical that we retain nurses. That is why Malcolm Chisholm has been involved in an initiative to try to retain nurses in the health service. Nicola Sturgeon spoke about posts. We have funded 110 more doctors and 210 more nurses. In April 2001, we announced an additional £11.5 million to employ 375 more junior doctors by 2003. That is an increase of around 9 per cent. Unlike the SNP, we identify our targets and fund what we say we will do. SNP promises are always uncosted with no sources of additional funds identified. Indeed, many SNP suggestions are taken directly from the Scottish Executive health plan. SNP members say that they support many of the initiatives that were published in the health  plan. The SNP's policy platform is not an alternative—

I will move on to Mary Scanlon's contribution. The best that I can say about it was that it was a typical Mary Scanlon contribution. She spoke about the alleged closure of waiting lists in the Highlands. We have no record of that—according to the trust in Inverness, it is not the case. A paediatric consultant left the service in June 2001. As a result, referrals are being screened so that priority cases are recognised and seen first. No one is being turned away. Two new consultants have been recruited and will join the Inverness staff early in the new year. Waiting times will reduce substantially. Apart from her catalogue of woe, Mary Scanlon resorted to the old Tory mantra: bring back the internal market, boost private health care. She has nothing to offer and accused Nicola Sturgeon of not studying economics at school or university. However, Mary Scanlon proceeded to lecture us on what can only be described as voodoo economics. As far as Mary and the Tories are concerned, the private health sector is the only solution. If I were the SNP I would be worried that the Tories are supporting the SNP amendment. After the diatribe from Mary in favour of private health care, we need to ask what it is in the SNP amendment that is so attractive to the Tories. Susan Deacon spoke about identifying solutions and rightly talked about unfinished business. However, she also identified that radical options are needed for delayed discharge. Margaret Jamieson spoke eloquently about institutional barriers. As she said, the NHS is not just about doctors. The plan is a long-term solution, not a quick fix. David Davidson spoke about the crisis in staff morale. If there is ever a shortage of scrap metal in this country, we can bring the dealers into the chamber to collect the brass necks from the Tory benches. Murdo Fraser spoke about services in Perth being withdrawn because of budget cuts in NHS Tayside. I remind him that deficits were built up in Tayside under the Tories. It was this Administration that cleared the accumulated deficit. It is bizarre in the extreme to say that anything was better under the Tories. Unfortunately, there are a number of statements that I do not have time to address. I remind Parliament that, in the middle of the 20 th century, a Labour Government responded to public demand by creating a national health service, free at the point of delivery. By the end of the 20 th century,  the Tory party, driven by private profit and an antipathy to public services, had brought the NHS to its knees. Now, in the 21 st century, slowly but surely in Scotland the Executive coalition is undoing the damage of the Tory years. In partnership with the UK Labour Government, we are investing record amounts in health. We are determined to realise the vision of that post-war Labour Government and build a health service fit for the 21 st century, which meets the needs of people, not private profit.

Will the member give way?

I congratulate Ken Macintosh on securing tonight's debate about autism awareness year in 2002. As a number of members have said, the fact that tonight's debate is the second one in the Scottish Parliament this year to address the needs of people with an autistic spectrum disorder is an indication of the level of interest in and concern for those people. I concur with Tommy Sheridan's view that the cross-party group on autism is probably one of the most effective in the Parliament. The group is well supported and able to articulate the needs of the people whom it represents. It is a credit to all those involved. Ken Macintosh spoke about parents having to battle and jump through hoops, and gave one particular family as an example. He also spoke movingly about the need to develop the full potential of everyone on the autism spectrum. He continued by commenting on the role of the voluntary sector, as did a number of other members. Over the past couple of years, in my contact with people who are involved in the autism campaign, I have experienced a sense of humility that is not experienced in some campaigns that people might get involved in. The people in the autism campaign are absolutely dedicated—many of them are carers—but despite the pain and frustration that they and their families often experience, they have a joy in life. Sometimes, it would do politicians good to look, listen and learn from the dignity and determination with which some of those who are involved in the autism campaign conduct themselves. We cannot underestimate the problems that the families face. We must all do whatever we can to help. That must include the Executive, the national health service in Scotland, local authorities, voluntary organisations, support groups and others. There is an enormous need for people to work together. George Reid, who has a long and proud history of supporting many of the families who have been campaigning, made some general comments on autism and then talked about the impressive record of the Scottish Society for Autism. He detailed some of the society's achievements and described how it started from literally nothing. The centre of excellence was mentioned by George Reid, as well as by Lloyd Quinan and Keith Raffan. On behalf of the Executive, I am certainly interested in looking at that development. Clearly, I cannot make any further commitment and it would be wrong if I were to raise such aspirations. However, the proposals seem to be  consistent with some of the other work that has been supported. I look forward to the campaign's success and the major contribution that it might make in the years ahead. I can say to George Reid that I would be more than happy to visit the centre as soon as is practically possible. I am glad to say that work is in progress on many levels. The landscape is changing, despite many of the difficulties. We are learning more about the causes of ASD. The Medical Research Council is finalising the report of its review of autism, which will map the current status of scientific and medical knowledge. I hope that the report will also suggest ways in which the scientific and research community can help us to move forward. There is still more to learn. Lloyd Quinan mentioned the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine. There has been much debate about possible links between the MMR vaccine and autism. Earlier this year, we welcomed the Health and Community Care Committee's report, which concluded that, on the evidence that is currently available, there is no proven link between the MMR vaccine and autism or Crohn's disease. However, it is incumbent on us to continue to consider every possible avenue to give parents the answers to their questions about MMR. The expert group that was established recently by the Executive is considering some of those questions and examining the evidence on the apparent rise in the incidence of autism. I look forward to receiving the group's report early in 2002. The money that has been invested and the commitment that has been made are among a number of the things that—despite the problems that arise—are happening throughout the country. I would like to highlight those good things, but time may militate against me. Instead, I will deal with some of the points that were made during the debate. Keith Raffan mentioned Struan House, which I have already spoken about. Lloyd Quinan, who also mentioned the centre of excellence, commented on the army of determined parents. I echo his comment; I have referred to the quality of those parents' work. Although I have no knowledge of the building in east Ayrshire that Mr Quinan mentioned, I will make inquiries about it and respond to him in whatever way I can. Murdo Fraser raised a legal and technical question. The Millan report has been published, as has the Executive's response in a parliamentary statement. If Murdo Fraser has raised any further legal questions that need to be addressed, I will have them investigated and will respond to him. In spite of some of the problems that Mr Fraser identified, it is fair to say that, given the Parliament's short life, we have made significant legal progress in many aspects of the legislation.  Elaine Smith mentioned parents who had asked MSPs to intervene on their behalf with local authorities to get an appropriate education for their child. Those parents should, and do, have the right to ensure that their children receive such an education. Responsibility for that lies with the education authority, and Elaine Smith should speak to me if she is aware of problems that are being caused by a local authority that is not implementing the rules properly. I will also respond to the two other specific issues that Elaine Smith raised, one of which was success in monitoring standards in schools. Christine Grahame asked about Scottish Borders Council. I do not think that it is appropriate for this establishment to tell local authorities how to spend their money. Like other parties in the Parliament, the SNP believes in the principle of subsidiarity. We must ensure that the Parliament puts in place the right framework for local authorities to operate within—

I am sorry, but I really do not have the time to give way. We must give local authorities adequate resources to enable them to conduct their business. Although Christine Grahame raised areas of concern that I will examine, some of those areas are the responsibility of the local authority. I agree with Tommy Sheridan's point about respite services. George Reid and I have discussed that matter, which is something that I passionately believe in. As I have said to people in my community, such as Christine MacVicar of the Renfrewshire Autism and Asperger Group and others who do an absolutely fantastic job, the whole question of support for carers and respite care needs to be examined. However, as parliamentarians, we have to decide how money is spent. Instead of spending money on respite care and support for carers, we have decided to spend it on other priorities. In the past, I might not have wanted things to be done that way, but that is the will and the decision of Parliament. That said, it is still open to parliamentarians to make representations about priorities. I agree with Tommy Sheridan that the issue of respite care must be examined, although I point out that it has already been—and is being—seriously examined. We have had yet another excellent members' business debate. Now more than ever before, there is more awareness of ASD, and the Executive and local authorities are beginning to respond—I admit, sometimes inadequately—to the needs of those who are affected by the disorder. I will close by paying tribute again to the parents, carers and many voluntary organisations whose  commitment and dedication to improve the quality of life of those with ASD is unquestioning. I thank them for bringing a level of consciousness, reality and passion to the debate in their local communities and across Scotland in a way that has benefited everyone in this Parliament.   Meeting closed at 17:59.

As Susan Deacon said last week, we are taking forward the Scottish diet action plan "Eating for Health" in a number of areas to improve diet throughout Scotland. For example, we have appointed the first Scottish food and health co-ordinator, we have injected substantial resources from the health improvement fund and we are committed to developing nutritional standards for school meals.

I do not agree with Elaine Smith. Providing free school meals to the better-off is not a good use of resources. However, I agree that raising food standards in schools and throughout our society needs to be considered. Elaine Smith referred to breakfast clubs. Last Monday, the Scottish Executive announced that £250,000 would be provided for a breakfast club challenge fund. I hope that groups in her constituency will consider applying for those funds. Breakfast clubs in Scotland will also be the subject of a major review. We want to examine the coverage in social inclusion partnership areas, how clubs are being run and whether they are sustainable. Above all, we want breakfast clubs to provide good child care, good nutrition and good health.

Considerable progress has been made on providing free fruit in schools and a major initiative is under way in Glasgow. I am sure that we will learn many lessons from that and, where possible, apply them throughout Scotland.

Tommy Sheridan highlights a good example of a Labour-controlled authority using its resources to best effect. I am sure that he agrees that appropriate decision making at council level is best left to councils. We will scrutinise the exercise in Glasgow and see what lessons we can learn.

Can Sandra White tell us in which years the next two sets of Scottish local government elections would take place, under her proposals?

I agree with the minister that Scotland week was a success. However, will the minister agree to consider what will be done at future Scotland weeks? As well as seeking to extend Scotland's influence in institutions in Brussels, we should take the opportunity to engage in a dialogue with other regions of Europe with which the Executive is developing a partnership.

The Parliament does not often hear speeches from members that can properly inform, persuade and make us think again. However, we heard a profound speech from George Reid that was extremely illuminating and which will make some people stop to think carefully. The world was obviously shocked by the events in America on 11 September. With the shock and the grief has come understandable anger. Throughout the world, the clear message has been given that those who are responsible must be brought to justice. It is to the credit of the Prime Minister and the British Government that the US Government was persuaded to think carefully before engaging in action. I hope that a sense of proportion will continue to prevail in the coming months. As well as taking action to track down those who are responsible, politicians throughout the world  must ensure that that action does not lead to further atrocities. We have seen that it is all too easy to start something that is difficult to finish. The Russians found that out to their cost in Afghanistan. The reaction against terrorists must not be allowed to develop into a wider war, but must be tempered by an effort to consider some of the real grievances and problems that exist throughout the world, which can be a breeding ground for fanatics who are prepared to make the ultimate sacrifice. We must also ensure that, in taking action, everything is done to protect the innocent people of Afghanistan who have suffered terribly over many years. Ordinary people in Afghanistan have had to endure suffering brought about not only by other Afghans, but by foreign powers playing global politics at the expense of the people of Afghanistan. Any action should ultimately ensure that the people of Afghanistan are freed from the shackles of oppression and are allowed to pursue their lives in peace and with stability in their country. We have seen the evidence of the human cost of the Taliban regime: the starvation, the cruel oppression of women and the destruction of the infrastructure of Afghanistan—such as was left when the Taliban took over. It would appear that the protection of Osama bin Laden is a higher priority for the Taliban than the protection of the women and children of Afghanistan. In recent weeks, we have seen human suffering in Afghanistan grow. Everything possible should be done to support those faced with starvation and disease. As George Reid and others were, I was shocked to hear last night from Oxfam representatives that the Taliban have begun to demand extortionate payments from World Food Programme convoys seeking to cross into Afghanistan. The donations that John Swinney is encouraging the people of Scotland to make should not end up lining the pockets of the Taliban. The execution of military action is properly the reserve of Westminster. However, I hope that the Scottish Parliament can usefully spend its time in the coming months considering what we can legitimately do within our devolved powers. Whatever happens, let us resolve that justice, humanity and common sense guide us through the difficult period ahead.

I do not disagree with the principle that Iain Smith advanced about the need for discussion with the European Committee. A wide range of European issues needs to be discussed with the committee, such as the Executive's strategy and the direction that it is taking. Indeed, the committee has asked the Executive to present its proposals to members for consideration. In the fullness of time we can discuss how the Committee of the Regions and the other bodies that have been mentioned fit into the wider picture. It was strange to listen to the criticisms that SNP  members have advanced. I am sure that, had the minister proposed today that all the nominations to the Committee of the Regions should come from Scotland's local authorities, they would have been on their feet shouting about the slight that been given to the Parliament and the Executive's hypocrisy in ignoring it.

I will not take an intervention from Fiona Hyslop. I have only three minutes. I also find the philosophy that underpins the SNP's arguments bizarre, as it runs contrary to the line taken by the SNP's nationalist counterparts in places such as Flanders, where nationalists who are Government ministers play a full role in the Committee of the Regions. The same is true of other parts of Europe. The Executive's proposals are consistent with the practice in countries such as Belgium, Austria, Portugal, Germany and Spain. There is no reason why this Parliament should not be represented in the Committee of the Regions. Fiona Hyslop asked whether Scotland was a nation or a region. The United Kingdom, of which Scotland is still part—even though the SNP may not like that—is doing the same thing that other countries in Europe are doing. It is nominating representatives to the Committee of the Regions from an appropriate level of regional government. Scotland has a regional Government that represents the nation of Scotland.

No. Fiona Hyslop said that we are acting against the advice of Jean McFadden and reducing the role of councillors. Historically, there was recognition of the different layers of government in Scotland. When we had regions and districts, both were represented on the Committee of the Regions. In recent times, we have had only unitary authorities. The Executive is now recognising the new constitutional settlement in Scotland and it is to be congratulated on that. I finish by making a couple of points for the future. We have an opportunity to make our influence felt in the work of the Committee of the Regions. I am glad that that opportunity will be available to the Scottish Parliament. The stature of the Committee of the Regions is growing, but the committee must reflect on its effectiveness. It must examine what it has achieved and what it is capable of achieving, instead of merely doing more of the same. In Scotland we must continue to work as a team. Local government and Scottish Parliament representatives must work together on the  Committee of the Regions. I hope that the Scottish delegation to the Committee of the Regions will have the full support of the machinery of government and that it will have access to the resources of both the Executive and the United Kingdom Government. I also hope that this Parliament will create the time to allow our representatives to play a full role in the Committee of the Regions, rather than just taking up places.

At the risk of damaging Allan Wilson's local reputation, I say that the minister is renowned for having a catholic interest in sport, art and culture. I am glad that when he talked about sport in schools he took the opportunity to broaden its definition. Wide consensus about the significance of sport in life generally has developed in recent years. No one would argue now that sport does not contribute to improving self-esteem and health or that sport does not lead to increased educational achievement in schools. It is a tremendous step forward that we are using that as a starting point for our debate. However, it is regrettable that instead of focusing on some of the positive things that have been done and can be done, the SNP, and Irene McGugan, yet again indulged in its own adage whereby "a whine a day keeps the voters away." Instead of considering the opportunities, the SNP always considers the negative side. What about the opportunities that are presented by the £6.6 million from the sports lottery fund?

I cannot speak for how SNP councillors develop facilities locally, but Frank McAveety has mentioned the positive contribution that is being made by Labour councillors in Glasgow. I can speak about some of the positive initiatives that are taking place in Renfrewshire Council area.

I am sorry, but the Presiding Officer has said that we can take only one intervention per speech. There is positive partnership between the lottery, schools and many other local organisations. We could have focused on the positive things that have been happening, but the SNP has fixed on the negative things instead. I want to finish by talking about what is happening in my constituency. I was pleased to launch the health improvement through sports initiative—the minister is aware of it—at St Peter's Primary School in Glenburn. That initiative was eventually rolled out to 20 primary schools, involving 600 children from social inclusion partnership areas, throughout Renfrewshire. I was delighted that the First Minister was able to meet many of those children at an event at Love Street. Indeed, not only was the First Minister able to display his soccer skills at that event, he probably performed to more than twice the average attendance that he had when he was playing for East Fife. There is partnership with schools and many good things are happening, such as Total Soccer Experience, through the work of Tony Fitzpatrick. The debate should have been taken as an opportunity for us to look forward and to move forward.

By statute?

The gist of my question has been covered by Alex Johnstone. However, I am perplexed about the reason for having an emergency question on the matter.

On a point of order. A serious accusation of indolence has been levelled against the minister. It would be helpful to those of us who must consider the veracity of those accusations if the Deputy Presiding Officer could obtain information on how many Scotland away matches Andrew Wilson attended while Parliament was sitting.

During his speech, David Davidson said that Mike Russell had obviously read his speech. It might have been helpful if David Davidson had read his own speech before he contributed, because some of the content was not only contradictory and confusing, but downright mischievous. There were times when I did not know what he was talking about—I do not know whether he did either. Mr Davidson told the minister that he has a tool in his hand. I think I know what Mr Davidson was talking about, but I do not know whether he knew what he meant by that. The SNP's contribution today has been pitiful. We have here another example of a party bereft of leadership, ideas and relevance to the political debate in Scotland. There are contradictions and splits in the SNP. Mike Russell says that the blame lies with the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs, but Kenny Gibson said earlier, "Come back, Jack McConnell, all is forgiven." Kenny and Mike need to get their act sorted out about whether and where they want Jack McConnell. This is an example of the SNP's ability to talk up a crisis where none exists, to identify problems where none exist and to clutch at straws in its attempt to advance a weak form of opportunism. It would have been too much to expect the SNP to say that we should praise the Executive for introducing the mechanism of end-year flexibility.

If the member praises the Executive for introducing a mechanism for underspend he must recognise that, for specific reasons, there will be underspends from time to time. The minister and others have indicated some of those reasons. It would have been too much to expect the SNP to recognise that we have moved significantly beyond what was available before devolution. It would have been too much to expect the SNP to recognise the progress that has been made in two  short years. Never the ones to miss an opportunity to whine for Scotland, SNP members have yet again risen to the occasion. Mike Russell talked about McCrone and gave a very convoluted argument that, quite frankly, led him nowhere. If the minister and the Executive had not properly prepared or accounted for the McCrone money and had simply disbursed it for expenditure and then revealed that they had not budgeted for that money, SNP members would have been the first to criticise the lack of forward planning and forward thinking. We are hearing pathetic arguments from a pathetic party. When I reflect on my experience as an employee in local government and as leader of a local council, I remember attempts by officials in departments to spend money for the sake of spending money at the year end, with no thought for next year or the year after. The flexibility that is being introduced will be of tremendous benefit, not just in three-year programmes for local government, but also in Executive expenditure on behalf of the Parliament. We have moved forward and are making progress, and it is about time that the SNP started to face up to that.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. When you allow a member to intervene, subject to the agreement of the member who is speaking, is it for the member who was speaking to determine when the member intervening should  finish speaking, or is it for you?

Alasdair Morgan has listed his concerns about underspends and alleges that the Executive failed to react. If SNP members have been so concerned, can he explain why the SNP has never lodged any amendments to the budget over the past two and a half years?

It is interesting that Lord James Douglas-Hamilton has chosen to take the Tories back to the old certainties. I do not know whether that is in anticipation of the announcement at 5 o'clock. The tone of his speech was discouraging and dispiriting. I might not agree with what Mike Russell said, but at least he made a genuine attempt to take the debate forward in a constructive manner and recognised that there is a problem. Unfortunately, the Tories rest on prejudice and bigotry in the widest sense of those words. Over the years, there have been too many horror stories of physical, psychological and  emotional damage inflicted on children. We need a system that protects them. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said that it is easy to highlight the most obvious criminal cases that are clearly beyond the law. However, there are many recorded instances of people doing things that are not outwith the law but that left a terrible mark on individuals. Famous Scots stars have talked about their upbringing after the break-up of their parents' marriage when they were put out to live with other members of the family. They have spoken movingly about the problems that they faced as children and the mark that was left on them throughout their lives by what relatives did to them—possibly with the best of reasons and intentions. Unfortunately, in many instances society is predicated on and accepts violence. We must introduce a system that starts to move us away from the use of violence and from talk that violence is acceptable. Unlike Mike Russell, I welcome the Executive's motion. It is an opportunity for people to express concerns, doubts and worries. We need to ensure that we get things right. We need a system that supports and protects children, but that also supports parents. As Iain Gray said, we recognise the difficulties that parents face in bringing up their children and we do not want to do anything that would undermine or weaken them. Definitions must be precise. If we are to change the law, we cannot afford to introduce more confusion and dubiety. We need not only to ca' canny, but to ensure that we get things right. A credible system is needed. If we introduce legislation that clearly does not have parents' support, makes the law difficult to enforce and leads to nothing but legal wrangles and squabbles, we will have failed children and parents. However, it is right to try to take the debate forward. Dubiety must be removed and definitions clarified. Anything that can be done must be welcome. For too long, too many children have suffered, not at the extremes, but near the margins. That has left a terrible mark on those children.

It is suggested that the right to shake a child would be removed. We would all join the Executive and others in ensuring that children are protected and we know that shaking can damage a child. However, one of the examples that the minister mentioned was that of a child crossing the road. I have seen children attempting to run out into the road—it has happened in my family—and instead of smacking, the parent shakes the child gently. Will the minister ensure that the regulations are framed sensitively so that those who wish to avoid physical chastisement are not punished for actions such as gentle shaking?

Will the First Minister join me in congratulating the Paisley Daily Express  on its role in exposing the scandal  of a patient who had to wait 89 weeks for treatment? Will he assure me that the Scottish Executive will make it clear to local health agencies that action will be taken if they fail to deliver improvements, given the record investment that is being made in the health service?

When the Executive reviews the responsibility of the ombudsman, will it take steps to extend the scope of the ombudsman procedure to those public and semi-public bodies not previously covered by the ombudsman?

Will the minister give a commitment to continue initiatives such as meeting head teachers and teachers at the secondary schools that serve my constituency of Paisley South? Will he also give a commitment to listen to the concerns of teachers in trying to resolve on-going problems?

Will the member give way?

Would Mr Swinney care to list for us the countries in which he would establish full embassies and what the cost of that would be? Is he asking the Scottish electorate to endorse a blank cheque for independence?

I start by paying tribute to Stephen Imrie and his clerking team, who supported the committee and have once again done a first-class job in producing this report. I also thank my colleagues on the European Committee for the constructive way in which they approached this important subject. I am pleased to inform members that our report was agreed without division. Given that the subject is contentious and that it was discussed at a fairly lively time in the Parliament, I think the report shows how effective committees can be at working to achieve consensus. We have produced what I consider to be a balanced and fair report. I am also pleased that our colleagues on the Rural Development Committee have had time to assess our findings and have also endorsed them. I thank all the witnesses who came to give evidence to the committee or provided a written submission. We received more evidence on this subject than we received in any of our other inquiries over the past two years. Much of it was very detailed and all of it was passionate. I make special mention of John Goodlad's thoughtful and analytical presentation on behalf of the Shetland fishermen. John has now resigned as their chief executive to concentrate on his salmon fishing business. I wish him well. Such passion highlights the importance of the industry to the Scottish economy, and to local communities in particular, and fishing's resonance across Scotland. Like shipbuilding and coal mining in previous times, the fishing industry has played an important part in developing Scotland's character. I will pull out one set of statistics from the report. Whereas for the UK the fishing industry represents only 0.2 per cent of gross domestic product, the figure for Scotland is 3 per cent and for the wider Highlands and Islands region it is 6 per cent. Indeed, in some localities employment in the industry can be as high as 33 per cent of the economically active population. Although the industry as a whole might not be large in UK terms, it is as much of a lifeline for many communities across Scotland as coal mining used  to be. On 20 March, the European Commission published a green paper on the reform of the common fisheries policy. It has long been apparent to many that the CFP in its current form is failing on two main fronts: it fails to preserve fish stocks and it fails to safeguard the livelihoods of people involved in the fishing industry. The committee heard a number of calls for the outright abolition of the CFP or, failing that, for the UK to cede from its requirements. I can report that all committee members rejected that view, which is legally difficult, politically impossible and has no logic when we consider the fact that fish do not respect artificial boundaries or lines in the sea. We simply must co-operate in the management of stocks. The argument for unilateral withdrawal is—if members will forgive the pun—a red herring. The committee felt that the CFP should be reformed. The driver for that view is that we wholeheartedly believe that, in its current format, it fails to deliver in protecting stocks and in safeguarding a viable fishing industry. As Cathy Jamieson said during the debate in the Rural Development Committee—and as we say in our report—now is not the time for blame. I simply note that political will in the Council of Ministers is going to be vital. If my colleagues permit me, I will quote a former Conservative minister, John Gummer, who was more famous for hamburgers than for fish. At a recent conference, he said: "If you are a fisheries minister you sit around the table arguing about fishermen—not about fish. You're there to represent your fishermen. You're there to ensure that if there are ten fish you get your share and if possible a bit more. The arguments aren't about conservation, unless of course you are arguing about another country." Such an approach is simply not sustainable. Although this is not the time to question whether the industry itself has contributed to the problems that face the fishing sector, I note that at least some of the senior representatives of fishing bodies are putting up their hands and saying mea culpa. There is a recognition in some quarters that a more responsible approach is required. Although I welcome that, we now need to move on.

Although I acknowledge the member's comments, I should point out that people in the industry have also indicated that the  industry itself must take some—not sole—responsibility for what has happened. The committee felt strongly that it is critical to take a long, hard look at reforming the CFP, even if that means taking uncomfortable decisions. The EC's green paper provides the obvious backdrop to the options for reforming the industry. Although that has been broadly welcomed by many in Scotland, the issue that faces us is what exactly will be agreed by ministers over the next year. For that reason, we wanted to consider as a committee and as a Parliament the general principles that must underpin any reform. The overriding principle is that a regime must be created that protects stocks and creates a viable industry. Within that, fishing representatives must have their say. There is no point in excluding the industry from decisions about its members' livelihoods if we want it to buy into those decisions. Fishing representatives must be more than simply consulted; they must help to take the decisions in certain areas, such as the management of stocks. That must not be limited to emergencies, as the Commission suggests; it must take place over the longer term. I would like to draw on my upbringing and background and paraphrase a well-known advert about buying pets that appears at Christmas time: fish is not only for Friday, but for all the year round. We must manage stocks better. For that reason, the committee endorsed unanimously proposals for more localised zonal management, with fishermen, scientists and key organisations taking decisions together. Legal advice on this matter is clear: provided we remain within the framework of the powers the Council has, certain responsibilities can be devolved and delegated to newly established and inclusive management committees. Our committee does not underestimate the political obstacles to putting that framework in place, but we agree wholeheartedly that it is the future for the industry. Perhaps such a regime needs further analysis; it may need to be phased in, but it must happen. With a new regime of the type I have outlined comes responsibility. It is clear to everyone that there are too many fishermen chasing not enough fish. That cannot go on. As Commissioner Fischler announced on Tuesday, a 40 to 50 per cent reduction in fishing activity may be required. The committee did not comment on those figures, but we noted that some long-term equitable decommissioning and restructuring of the fleet is absolutely necessary.

I agree, but Commissioner Fischler has drawn attention to a problem that needs to be addressed. That should happen in the way Tavish Scott suggests. I know that decommissioning and restructuring will cause problems in certain areas. That is why the European Committee called for immediate action from the Executive and for the creation of a task force now—not later—to help communities diversify. We also noted that some areas may be hit harder than others. That may mean that a differentiated approach is needed that takes into account local circumstances. Any decommissioning moneys must be spread wider than to just the boat or licence holder. We want ordinary fishermen and their families to share in any support that is given to the industry. We also want a level playing field to be created for our fishermen. We heard anecdotal evidence that they are treated more harshly than others. We are not able to prove that one way or the other, so we argue for a more open and transparent system of recording enforcement and infraction, to highlight to all whether Scottish fishermen are treated unfavourably. We are very strong on the fact that, even if matters could be better co-ordinated, enforcement should remain a competence of the member states. Finally, we made a number of recommendations on quota setting, licences, access rights, the protection of inshore fishing and such basic matters as the continuation of historic fishing rights. I conclude by noting that nearly 10 years ago the fishing industry in the grand banks of Newfoundland collapsed. Something similar is close to happening in the North sea and other areas where Scottish boats fish. More than five years ago a House of Lords report stated: "In their heart of hearts scientists, fishermen, managers and politicians must all know that action must be taken now to prevent a repeat of the Grand Banks fiasco nearer to home. The question is, will they take it?" I urge the Scottish Executive to take heed of our findings. I welcome the positive and constructive feedback that we have received prior to today. I hope that in her discussions at the fisheries council the minister will succeed in having some of our recommendations accepted. I know that the Executive will work hard to achieve the best deal possible. I do not underestimate the difficulties in this  process, but it is now time for all to demonstrate that there is a will to ensure that the Scottish fishing industry and Scottish fishing communities have a future. I move, That the Parliament notes the 3rd Report, 2001 of the European Committee, Reforming the Common Fisheries Policy: A Blueprint for Negotiations (SP Paper 330) and commends the Report's recommendations to the Scottish Executive.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to expand out-of-school learning. (S1O-3553)

I am sure that the Executive will note the success of many of those projects, as they have raised attainment and helped pupils across Scotland. I draw the minister's attention to Renfrewshire Council's looked-after children project and to pilot homework clubs that were held in three libraries. Funding for those new opportunities fund projects finished at the end of March. Will the minister reflect the success of projects run by Renfrewshire Council in future plans for the new opportunities fund? Given the success of those projects, we do not want them to come to a premature end.

To ask the First Minister what progress has been made in recent discussions in Brussels regarding European Union structural funds. (S1F-1102)

The First Minister mentioned some of the benefits that come from participation in Europe. Does he agree that recent pronouncements from leading Conservatives about Europe not only threaten Scotland's economic well-being but introduce a tone of intolerance that could destabilise the political progress and lead to future tensions and conflict, which would damage Scotland's interests?

The Executive has given us a welcome opportunity to debate Europe in a useful context—the celebration of Europe day. Mr McConnell referred to the events of last night and today. It is worth putting on record our congratulations to the Commission and the Parliament, which worked together to put on such an interesting and stimulating event. The turnout last night reflected the degree of interest in matters European among a certain section of the population in Scotland. It was refreshing last night—and today, despite some of our differences—to have a debate about Europe that was not just about funds, structural funds and what we can get from Europe. Lloyd Quinan, although I may disagree with some of his conclusions, made an interesting contribution on what the future debate on Europe might be. I would like to take the opportunity to pay tribute to Winnie Ewing, not only for her speech today but for her work over many years. Although, again, I might disagree with Winnie on many of her political thoughts and conclusions, no one can doubt her passionate commitment to all things European. She has been not only a standard bearer for Scotland and its presence in Europe, but a standard bearer in Scotland for much of what Europe has to contribute. It was very relevant that she touched on some of the issues that we sometimes overlook when we talk about Europe and some of the major contributions that the European Union has made to developments throughout the world and, in particular, in the third world. It should be a matter of immense pride and satisfaction to us that—albeit belatedly—this country has made a small contribution to that process. Winnie was right to remind us of that. Mike Watson, Winnie Ewing and others spoke about other issues to which Europe has  contributed. We should not forget what the European Union and our participation in it have contributed to jobs and the economy. Some of the progress that has been made in the working life of many people in this country would not have been made had it not been for the contribution of the European Union. Bruce Crawford was right to talk about the significance of the contribution that Europe has made on environmental issues. Some things that we perhaps take for granted have come about because of pressure from Europe. We need to articulate those facts in our communities and remind people of some of the positive things that have come about. For example, the extension of parental leave rights for Scottish working parents, European Union standards of child care for working parents and many consumer measures have all come about because of European legislation and policy making. That is the positive aspect of participation in Europe. Unfortunately, we must accept that the context of the debate is not only Europe day, but the general election that was announced yesterday. Tavish Scott was right to point out the absolute confusion among Tories. I sometimes feel sorry for David Mundell and Ben Wallace, who have worked with me on the European Committee. Both have made a very positive contribution to the work of that committee, but they are sometimes strangled by the debate that emanates from the Conservative party nationally. There is confusion among the Conservatives over integration—in the past Francis Maude talked about the Single European Act 1986 providing scope for further integration, but last year he said that integration has gone far enough. There is confusion over the euro. Having listened to the Conservative speeches today, it is clear that they do not know whether they are against the euro in principle, or whether they simply want to delay entry to it. The Conservatives keep saying that they are opposed to the euro for the lifetime of the next Parliament, yet their language suggests that they are opposed fundamentally to the euro, in principle and for ever. It is about time the Conservatives spelled out their position clearly. One issue that David Mundell is right to flag up is that, as far as the future of Scotland and our participation in European matters are concerned, people have been given a stark choice between the Conservative party that is led by William Hague and the return of a Labour Government. The debate about Europe crystallises what could happen if we allowed the Tories—by whatever means—to get back into power. For that we should be grateful. David Mundell is almost becoming the Dougal of the Scottish Parliament—from modelling roundabouts to "The Magic  Roundabout". We should not ignore some of the points that were made by Winnie Ewing, Irene Oldfather, Helen Eadie and others about the fact that there is much that we take for granted. My generation and that of my children take for granted peace and stability, but my father's generation knew the reality of division and conflict—that generation paid a heavy price. In the debate about Europe and our participation in Europe we should not be afraid to argue that we are willing to play a full role as members of the European Union. Europe has been a force for peace and progress—we should never let anybody forget that.

Will the member take an intervention?

I can assure you, Presiding Officer, that my intervention is not about farming and fishing. David Mundell spoke about integration. Does he agree with the statement that was made by one of his Conservative colleagues, that the Single European Act 1986 provides great scope for further integration?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will give the same assistance, proportional to the number of jobs lost, to work forces and communities in urban Scotland as has been made available to the fishing and farming industries. (S1O-3354)

Many of us recognise that problems in fishing and farming communities need to be addressed. However, does the minister agree that companies such as Compaq and Motorola should be held responsible for the problems that are caused by their actions? Will she further guarantee that urban Scotland, where the majority of Scotland's population, poverty and problems are to be found, will be given the same proportionate support that has been given to the fishing and farming communities?

The debate has had a depressingly familiar tone. Members have traded statistics—which sometimes become meaningless—and insults and have avoided the real issues affecting people in the constituencies that we represent. I share some of Margo MacDonald's concerns about the Executive motion. I agree that the Parliament should welcome the reduction in the number of recorded crimes but, like her, I think that, rather than argue among ourselves, we should have used this opportunity to move forward and have a debate that is meaningful to people beyond the chamber. I fail to understand why the Opposition has not built on what the Executive has done by considering constructively what might be done to tackle crime. All we have had is the yah-boo-sucks school of debate, which will make no impact on the public. We all know that crime is a concern. We all know that people become overwhelmed if statistics are thrown at them. Hearing that there are more police and record investment does not matter to the people suffering crime. Those people expect members to start examining meaningfully and in detail what can be done to improve their lot. We need to recognise that, despite the increased numbers, the record investment and the surveys that show that the fear of crime is falling,  there are still people who live in fear of crime. We must address that fact. There are some fundamental issues. We need to consider parental responsibility. It is not just a question of putting more police on the beat. As Gordon Jackson said, we need to look at the responsibilities of communities and society. Unless we turn around attitudes to breaking the law, it will not matter how many police we put on the beat, as we will be no further forward. Of course, if we put more police on the beat and they have more success, if we encourage a willingness to report crime, and if the judicial system supports the police, more crime will be reported and it will be supposed that more crime is being committed. As is sometimes glibly said, we must eradicate the causes of crime. Success in our society is not simply having policemen on every corner. The police cannot resolve the fundamental problems in our society. If we tackle the problems of crime by investing in more police, we need to ensure that we have a judicial system that is able to support them. The Minister for Justice has received a number of letters from me on this issue. I am fed up with people in my constituency telling me about drug dealers on their streets who are let out on bail—the police oppose their release on bail, but they are let out and commit more crime while on bail, and the cycle continues. It does not matter how many police are put in, even if they are successful, because something is fundamentally wrong. I can also give examples of paradoxes. People come to me and say, "We want more police on the streets. We've got to stamp out crime," but when, in co-operation with Strathclyde police, we try to get more police into particular areas, people from the same community tell us, "It's absolutely ridiculous—the police are harassing our youngsters. This has got to be stopped." There is no balance in that argument.

That is a point worth considering, but the fundamental issue is that we must accept the human rights legislation and work with it to ensure that it works effectively on behalf of all people in the community, not just the minority who cause problems.  Although we have been talking about more serious crimes, we should not neglect pernicious crime that is carried out at the local community level, which is equally distressing to hundreds if not thousands of people throughout Scotland. For example, some types of anti-social behaviour are crimes and have a debilitating effect on our communities. I want an end to situations such as the one that a constituent of mine faced recently. My constituent's family had to be moved from their house, with the support of the police, because of anti-social behaviour. The family then found out that the tenant who had been causing the problems was on the police's wanted list. There was a warrant out for the tenant, who should never have been there in the first place. The issue is extremely complex. What depresses me about this debate is that we are more concerned about politics and elections than we are about trying to benefit our communities by putting some meaning into the debate.

To ask the First Minister what factors have led to the fall in recorded crime. (S1F-1020)

Does the First Minister agree that for many people in my constituency and throughout Scotland, violent crime and the fear of violent crime are a particular concern? If so, does he welcome the initiative at the end of last year that led to a 44 per cent decrease in the number of murders over a three-month period? Does he also agree that efforts need to be redoubled to ensure that violent crime does not pay? Will he guarantee that steps will be taken to ensure that the justice system supports police efforts?

Will the member give way?

I do not know whether the minister, fresh from the adrenaline buzz and emotional rollercoaster of watching Hibs, needed some balance in his life, but I am sure that the debate is providing an  alternative to that kind of excitement. I congratulate Kenny Gibson on his speech. Although he read it very well, I am not sure that he quite understood it, and there were several points on which he could have done with advice and counsel. In passing, I want to mention that, on the question of additionality, the European Committee's 6 th report—which was supported by SNP members—states that "the Committee considers that Scotland is receiving an appropriate share of the Structural Funds allocated to the UK by the EU." However, I should emphasise that a debate on structural funds sometimes brings out the worst aspects of the debate on Europe, because people start to judge Europe's contribution to Scotland merely in financial terms. Europe is much more important to us than that, and I hope that we will not judge success or failure by our ability to attract structural funds, important though they are. That said, structural funds have been a success story. We started off with many impoverished and deprived areas, and although there is still much evidence that such areas exist, structural funds have made an important contribution to tackling some of their most pernicious problems. Although we should congratulate the Government and local government on their work over many years, we should also congratulate the European Union and the Commission on the structural funds initiative and the attempt to disburse money to areas of greatest need. Furthermore, the Commission has often shown imagination and flair in the management and application of structural funds, and many layers of government throughout Europe could copy its approach with some success. There is evidence in Scotland that structural funds have been used well, and the country is cited as a good example of an area that can successfully apply for and manage such funds. From various comments to the European Committee, it is evident that other areas consider Scotland's management of structural funds as a role model. I also want to congratulate the Executive. Much of the European Committee's first year was spent on structural funds issues, and we always found the Executive to be responsive and, through the previous minister, ready to give evidence to us. Furthermore, the Executive has been willing to respond to some of our concerns, particularly in relation to the problem of the application of funds to the voluntary sector. However, the Executive still needs to address a number of issues. For example, I have received some representations from voluntary organisations on payments to the voluntary sector. In particular,  the organisation One Plus has contacted me about the Scottish Executive payment schedule. Although the guidance note from the Executive states: "Every effort will be made to ensure that correct claims are processed within a four-week time scale", a number of voluntary organisations have found that that is not being applied. In the case of One Plus, the first advance of 37 per cent requested from the Scottish Executive took seven weeks to arrive; and to date, the organisation has not received the remaining 63 per cent. If that process is not speeded up, it will have a serious effect on voluntary organisations throughout Scotland. I hope that the Executive will quickly address that issue. Yesterday in Paisley, I spoke at a conference organised by the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations for many west of Scotland areas on the local social capital project, which is largely financed by the European social fund. We heard example after example of imagination in local communities, which were directly benefiting from the application of structural funds. There is practical evidence that structural funds have been used to good effect. However, much more needs to be done, particularly on the LEADER programme and why the committee was not given sufficient opportunity to comment on it. Although we cannot rest on our laurels, we can build on some of the good examples that have been developed over many years.

Does David Davidson recognise that, as Angus MacKay and Kenneth Gibson said, the allocation of structural funds is largely to areas that are underperforming and which suffer high levels of poverty and that the success that the Conservatives managed was directly related to their management of the economy?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

That last speech was a total wind-up.

Alex Neil benefited from following Kenny MacAskill, because anything that he said was bound to sound reasonable after Kenny MacAskill's astonishing speech. Kenny MacAskill is becoming the Calimero of the SNP, saying, "Oh, woe is me. The world is falling upon my shoulders. I cannot say anything positive; I cannot be constructive about anything." Hard on the heels of trying to bankrupt the Scottish economy with wild and uncosted spending on roads, he now wants us to write the biggest blank cheque that Scotland has ever seen. I found it intriguing that the Tories and SNP were arguing, "Our blank cheque is bigger than your blank cheque."

I understand why Annabel Goldie  does not want to be associated with anything that Kenny MacAskill has said. There is an obligation on us to consider the seriousness of the situation, which affects many parts of Scotland. Unless we are directly affected—my area is not—we cannot begin to understand the devastation that many people in Dumfries and Galloway must feel. Equally, I cannot begin to understand the fear and anxiety that must apply in other parts of rural Scotland at the prospect of the disease spreading. I can well begin to understand the fear and anxiety of some of the small tourism-related businesses in my area. They want support and assistance from the Parliament, in two ways. One is—as Alex Neil said—hard cash. I welcome the commitment that the minister made, which was a direct response to the seriousness of the situation.

No thanks, Duncan. Businesses also expect the Parliament to make some positive noises about what is happening. We have a duty to be careful about the language that we use. We must talk Scotland up. We must stop promoting fear, as that message goes abroad. The misrepresentation in the press, not only in this country but elsewhere, is alarming. The press feed on careless remarks made by members of the Parliament. We must be careful about what we are saying. We must get across the message that Scotland is open for business. We want to promote the country and welcome people to it. Clearly, we will want to stand up for Scotland, unlike those who want to talk it down. It is incumbent on the Executive to introduce practical measures. I welcome the minister's statement that this is not the end of the story and that there will be further assistance for Dumfries and Galloway and others directly affected. This debate shows the difference not only between the destructive and the constructive elements in the Parliament, but between those who are willing to abandon the people who are most in need of help and those who are willing to support them.

On the point that those who are in need will receive help, the minister will be aware from correspondence that I have a case in my constituency in which an elderly person, having got into debt, will effectively be paying interest on a loan to install a central heating system until they die. They live on restricted income. They are poor, but they will not benefit from the scheme. I welcome what the Scottish Executive has done, not just with this initiative but with others. For the first time in many years, we are seeing a determined effort to tackle the problem, but will the minister examine some of the anomalies that have been created with the introduction of the scheme?

Members will be aware that Lloyd Quinan's point is valid. No committee in the Parliament scrutinises the external affairs remit of the Scottish Executive. Will the minister ensure that there are early discussions with parliamentary representatives to ensure that there will be scrutiny by an appropriate committee of the Parliament?

Will Mr Gallie give way?

The speeches that we have heard—especially the First Minister's—show clearly what is on offer from the coalition and what the consequences would be without it. What was inherited by the Labour Government in 1997, and subsequently by the Scottish Parliament, were crumbling public services, Victorian hospitals, rundown schools and a fragmented transport system. However, over the past three and a half years we have made slow but sure progress in tackling years of neglect.

I recognise that we have invested a record amount in the health service to tackle both the problems that the Tories left behind and some of the accounting manoeuvres that the health service had to cope with, which we are being told about locally. We know that the public are, quite rightly, impatient for change, and we want progress as a result of our record investment in the health service. Much remains to be done. The Minister for Health and Community Care has heard from me—and from many of my colleagues—that we want results. However, we also heard David McLetchie allude to the Tory alternative: private health care, privatisation and the removal of the health service from public control. The Tories are offering cuts in services; we are offering investment in services.  We also welcome the massive investment that has been made in education. In my constituency, not only has every four-year-old been given a pre-five place, but there has been steady progress to ensure that every three-year old will have a place. New pre-five centres have opened in Johnstone, Glenburn and Foxbar and across the south end of Paisley—something that would never have happened if the Conservatives had been returned to office. Classroom assistants have also been introduced. In every primary school that I have visited in my constituency, the teachers speak with pride about the introduction of classroom assistants and the difference that they are making to education in those schools. Notwithstanding the fact that some teachers have concerns about what has been achieved under the McCrone settlement, I look forward to progress on the back of that. The M74 would not have been offered for completion if the Conservatives had been returned, and there have been record levels of investment in local government. When I was a council leader in 1996-97, I would have given my right arm for the kind of settlement that local government has received this year.

I have only a minute left. There has been progress, but what happens when Labour makes progress? The SNP cries, "It is not enough. It is not happening soon enough." What does the SNP have to offer? It has aims but few commitments. It will abolish quangos, but will establish conventions and trusts. When it makes commitments, it simply echoes what has already been done and tries to claim the credit. When it promises legislation, it is to ensure that all Scottish universities have an elected rector. Most important, the SNP proposes to introduce a Scottishness vetting for all college and university teachers. I invite SNP members to look at their website information from 1998. It talks of "an appointments policy that gives due weight to an informed enthusiasm for Scotland's history and culture"— in other words, Mike Russell's appointed zealots applying the purity test. The SNP would also resurrect the Scottish Examination Board with a new remit. The UK Labour party—and, in the Scottish Parliament, the coalition parties—is delivering progress. In contrast, the alternatives are a return to the destruction of the Tories or a journey into the fantasy land of the SNP.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will review the legislation, both primary and secondary, governing the adoption of babies purchased outwith Scotland. (S1O-2847)

I welcome the minister's commitment. I am sure that he and everyone else in the chamber has been concerned to read recent press coverage of the scandal that is unfolding in England. Can the minister ensure that in whatever he and the Executive do, the welfare of children will be paramount and the issue will be handled with sensitivity? Notwithstanding the fact that there will be consultation, can he assure us that action will be speedy?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Like many members, I am not happy about the first part of your answer. On the second part, an investigation is going on into leaks from committees. Would it be competent—as you and the other Presiding Officers are also members of the Parliament—to use that same procedure to investigate the leaks, which clearly occurred? The press were aware of your ruling in advance and, as a result, many members in the chamber were also aware of what was about to happen. There should be an investigation. Can we use the procedure that applies to committee leaks? If not, what other procedures are available to ensure a proper investigation?

Notwithstanding what you say, Presiding Officer, I am asking what procedure is  available to allow an investigation to be undertaken into how this happened.

I can understand the political reasons behind the Scottish National Party amendment's hair splitting, but that should not detract from the fine, thoughtful contribution made by Roseanna Cunningham. I hope that the Executive considers carefully some  of the points made in her speech. In their amendment, the Conservatives yet again, and unsurprisingly, show that they are out of touch with just about everybody, including members of the many victim support groups who commented this week on the Executive's strategy. It is taken as read that more needs to be done to help the victims of crime, and we recognise their suffering and the trauma. Roseanna Cunningham touched on some important issues, including the need for us to be extremely careful, when trying to help and protect victims, not to cause further injustice. We have had some high-profile cases—many of which have been in England, although some have been in Scotland—in which innocent people have been wrongly convicted. In some of the best-known cases, such as the Birmingham six and the Guildford four, if we had taken statements from the victims at the time, it would have compounded further some of the injustice had it not been handled properly. We should realise that, in many such cases, the people who are sent to jail are also victims. I am about to write to the Minister for Justice about a case from my constituency. A constituent of mine was falsely accused of abusing a member of his family. His children were taken from him, he and his wife were locked up and the case was eventually dropped because there was no evidence whatever. That constituent felt that he was a victim because there were no apologies from the social work department or from the police. All he got, all the way through, was aggression. It nearly destroyed that man's marriage and caused a rift in his family, which will never be healed. We must consider what happens to such victims. Having said all that, it is fundamentally true that not enough has been done over the years to help victims. Aside from the three principles that Jim Wallace mentioned, the justice system must protect the innocent. It must also help the victims and punish the guilty. I am glad that the Executive's strategy is part of the broader strategy that it is developing, in which issues of justice and crime are being given far more prominence and significance than has been the case for many years. We need to recognise the feelings of powerlessness and helplessness that victims face, and the fact that their confidence is totally destroyed by the trauma that they have experienced. That means helping victims to articulate their experience, so that those in the court system and the justice system are aware of exactly what happened to them. However, we cannot leave it at that. There are many practical things that victims have to be helped with. We must help them to put their lives back together again and to deal with  members of their family, as they sometimes cannot articulate the problems that they are facing. We need to help them deal with insurance companies and glaziers, for example, in cases where doors and windows have to be replaced. We must help victims who are going through the very bureaucratic system when they are asked to give evidence. I am glad that the Executive is proceeding as it is, but I urge the Minister for Justice, in taking this positive step forward, to recognise that there are sometimes other difficulties and to be careful that we do not create further injustices and problems.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister reflect on Duncan McNeil's point that health services on the south side of Glasgow are provided for a much wider geographic area? We are suffering from a lack of strategic vision and co-ordination in the planning of health services. The reviews do not fit into the minister's aspirations because they examine health in a narrow, parochial way. We need a more strategic approach to the planning and delivery of health in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will resume the BCG vaccination programme in schools. (S1O-2595)

I am sure that the minister will share my concern that there has been an interruption to that successful programme. What steps is the Executive taking to monitor the incidence of tuberculosis in Scotland, to detail any special plans to tackle identified problems and to ensure that steps will be taken throughout the  United Kingdom to avoid shortages in future?

Is it not the case, minister, as we saw in the negotiations about the structural funds in Berlin last year and again at this year's agricultural summit, that Scotland benefits from being part of a major member state? Is it not the case that after the Nice summit the voting strength of the larger states will be further increased as a proportion?

The debate gives us a welcome opportunity to comment on the sound management of the economy. Indeed, it is heartening to hear words of praise—albeit sometimes grudging—from the Opposition parties. There is a recognition that things are moving forward. However, Presiding Officer, I crave your indulgence to mention something that I had hoped to raise during First Minister's question time. As a result of the sound management of the economy, an ex gratia payment can be made to ex-prisoners of war, such as my father, who were held by the Japanese.

As Winnie Ewing said, it is too late for many. However, I am pleased that this Government has acted where previous Governments failed to do so. I hope that, if the First Minister is talking to the Prime Minister soon, he will express the anger felt by survivors that the money has come from the UK Government, not from the Japanese Government, and that there has been no apology. Having craved the Presiding Officer's indulgence, I will now move on to the specifics of the debate. There has been substantial help for a broad range of my constituents in Paisley South. For example, 2,437 families are benefiting from a guaranteed income of at least £214 a week through the working families tax credit. Furthermore, families are also benefiting from substantial rises in child benefit.

I am aware of a number of anomalies in the benefits system. Indeed, my Westminster colleague Douglas Alexander has been pursuing that problem. I am sure that if Christine Grahame speaks to her local MP, he or she will be more than happy to pursue the issue as well. In Paisley South, I am also witnessing some of the benefits of record investment in education. Unlike George Lyon, who has had some difficulty in his area, I welcome Renfrewshire Council's commitment to ensuring that the money allocated in the next round goes to direct improvements in schools. I look forward to the same happening again. I am aware that there is an aspiration for the money to be spent on repairs and equipment. I know that schools such as Bushes primary school in Glenburn, which has suffered vandalism problems, look forward to receiving money, albeit in small amounts, the spending of which is at their discretion. Langcraigs primary has already used money imaginatively. Last week, I was at Thorn primary in Johnstone to see what investment in education means to children in that community. I ask the Scottish Executive to encourage local councils to give more discretion to head teachers to spend budgets that will allow them to tackle some of the immediate issues that confront them in their schools. Last but not least, the pre-budget statement brings substantial benefits for pensioners in my constituency, such as the pensioners from Glenburn who visited the Parliament recently, who will welcome the increase in the basic rate and the increase in the minimum income guarantee, and some of whom will benefit from the television licence. They will all benefit from the winter fuel allowance and will benefit generally from other Executive initiatives, such as the installation of central heating for people who do not have it. All in all, we are beginning to see the signs—belatedly—of long-overdue and welcome progress. Both the chancellor and the Scottish Executive are to be congratulated on measures that will have a lasting impact on our communities.

David McLetchie mentioned tax cuts, but part of that equation is the suggestion that there will be public expenditure cuts. The estimate for my constituency of Paisley South is that those cuts would come to £24 million. Can he explain to my constituents where Tory cuts will fall in Paisley South?

I am disappointed, but hardly surprised, by the opportunism of the SNP. What we have seen today is posturing in anticipation of the Anniesland by-election. Several SNP members commented on attendance being equal to concern, but we still have to get an answer from the SNP on why no SNP members turned up to discuss health and community care with the Minister for Health and Community Care and her team. I suspect that the answer is that there was no press there, so there were no opportunities for them to make political capital. That is the reality. It was hard work. It was a detailed and sensible discussion, which does not sit easily with the SNP.

If that is the case, there were other members of the Health and Community Care Committee who are members of the SNP and they failed to turn up, so Nicola Sturgeon should address that issue within her party. This issue fits with other attempts by the SNP to undermine cross-party work. I think back to the debate on Mike Tyson coming to Scotland,  when—

What has happened is a blow to the committee system and to the independent scrutiny that committees perform. This debate puts those of us who are members of the Health and Community Care Committee at a severe disadvantage in trying to have a sensible debate. I appeal to you, Presiding Officer, on behalf of Parliament and the committees, to intercede with the Parliamentary Bureau so that when business is being planned for the future, the valuable work of committees is never again undermined in this way. There is a good-news story to tell about community care but, equally, there are concerns to be expressed. Malcolm Chisholm was right to speak about the extra £44 million that is being put into the NHS this year to move matters forward. That contrasts, as Margaret Smith said, to the £30 million over three years that was promised by the SNP. [MEMBERS: "An extra £30 million."] We can clearly see the difference in priorities as far as community care is concerned.

I note Richard Simpson's point. Money is going in, but this is not just about money. There are structural and organisational issues that need to be addressed. Over the past week, I have struggled to help my mother to come out of hospital, return to her home and look for services. The problems that my family and I have faced are not specifically about money; they are about the response of the local authority, communications between the different agencies that are involved, and getting an appropriate response within a time that is suitable for my mother, my father and the  rest of the family. We have to resolve those organisational issues.

No, I am over time as it is, and I have taken three interventions. We have to resolve those problems in order to get a satisfactory service in the community. I look forward to the publication of the Health and Community Care Committee's report. It will make a contribution to taking us forward as a Parliament, but I regret that we have not had the opportunity to have a debate on community care where that report was the central focus of the Parliament. I hope that the report will help to move the Executive in the direction that the committee has been pressing for for some time.

On a point of order. Is not it a matter for the Parliament, rather than for a political party, to decide what is debated?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The member is straying into conjecture and debate about the committee's conclusions. I do not think that that is acceptable, unless all members are allowed to debate the committee's conclusions.

Nicola Sturgeon says that the issues cannot wait. I am puzzled why they could not wait two weeks for a more comprehensive debate that would allow members to reflect on the recommendations of the Health and Community Care Committee. Where were SNP members when the Minister for Health and Community Care gave committee members a briefing? The Tory, Liberal Democrat and Labour members turned up, but no SNP member came to debate the future of health and social care with the minister and her team of advisers.

rose—

Will the member give way?

That would be some promotion.

Margo MacDonald spoke about targets. Does she agree that the Executive should examine systematic monitoring and evaluation to ensure that we are not spending money frivolously and that we get some returns on it?

It is an extremely strange day: we had a constructive contribution from Nicola Sturgeon in the health debate in the morning and by the afternoon Sam Galbraith was accepting an SNP amendment. The old certainties seem to be crumbling. Several useful points have been made. Members of my family would find it strange to hear me make a speech on sport, given their despair at trying to get me to participate. However, such reluctance does not stop me, or anyone else, recognising the key part that sport plays in our society. It is true that Scotland has never recovered from the teachers' strikes of the 1980s. While we know that there were problems then and that participation in sport was not as high as it should have been, nevertheless there has been no determined effort to plug the gap that was created at that time. I welcome the debate and the initiatives that the Executive has put forward as a way of trying to address some of the problems that have existed since that time. It is right, as Irene McGugan and others have said, that we should support those who are particularly gifted, in order to develop expertise, but if we are to see the true contribution of sport to our wider society, there must be engagement across the social spectrum and across all communities in Scotland. Unfortunately, whether  we like it or not, sport still tends to be the preserve of a small minority in our country who have access to resources. While we should look at how we should encourage people who have the expertise, what are we doing for the broad mass who do not participate, particularly young people? The evidence is well documented. Sam Galbraith mentioned that in many cases, educational achievement is predicated on sporting activity, and health is improved by involvement in sporting activity, yet it is in our poorest communities where participation is lowest. I should like the Scottish Executive to examine how it can be more inclusive and holistic in its approach to sport, so that its other targets can be met. Sport, and the initiatives that have been spoken about, should be only a starting block for the regeneration of our wider community. We have to start young. I welcome some of the initiatives that have been mentioned. I do not necessarily concur with those who view golf as a good walk wasted; nevertheless, Irene McGugan was right to talk about other sports being included and encouraged. David Mundell spoke about swimming, and other areas should equally be considered. We have to look at access for ordinary people. David Mundell is right that it is not just about capital; it is about the on-going use of facilities in communities. I would also like the Executive to consider how we can instil hope in communities that have no hope. Sport is good for personal development, team development and participation, and it enables people to take control of their own lives and provide leadership. I would like schemes to help young unemployed people to obtain level 2 Scottish vocational qualifications and other qualifications, to train them in sporting activities, and to allow them to be leaders in their own communities. We should look at means of paying people who have no other means of earning income. I commend some of the initiatives in Renfrewshire by Unity Enterprise Ltd and other organisations. We should look at schools. Head teachers are worried about young people spending many hours working in supermarkets. We could look at senior pupils as peer group models and encourage them to play a role in their schools and communities. I hope that by examining all those strands, the Executive, with support across the political spectrum in Parliament, can start to see long-term benefits after the current short-term focusing.

Will the First Minister comment on the billions of pounds of extra public spending in Scotland as a result of the chancellor's stewardship of the economy? Would those funds have been available if we had followed Andrew Wilson's economic programme for the SNP? If the funds were available in those circumstances, would they be better spent on embassies and armed forces than on health and education?

I was greatly encouraged by the minister's speech. Like many members, in the coming months I will watch with keen interest what happens and how the proposals are put into practice. I was also encouraged by Nicola Sturgeon's speech, because she made a number of relevant and pertinent comments. In this debate, we are beginning to see a consistent message coming from members across the political parties that something is wrong and that something needs to be done. However, I despaired at times while listening to Mary Scanlon. She talked about patient-friendly language but then introduced us to the word "coterminosity". She also seemed conveniently to ignore the damage that the Conservative Government caused during 18 disastrous years to the health service and to the councils that she criticised. If we are to achieve anything from this debate  and in the health service more generally, we need to re-establish the simple principle that the health service should exist to help people, when ill, to get better as quickly as possible. We must reintroduce simplicity into the system. As has been said, how can people understand the system when their first point of contact with what they think of as one entity—the NHS—is a representative of the local health care co-operative? If patients from Paisley South need help out of hours, they must turn to Renfrewshire emergency medical service—another unit. If they are hospitalised, they become the responsibility of the acute hospital trust. They may then have to transfer to the primary care trust. Because of Paisley's proximity to Glasgow, there are also times when patients have to transfer to the South Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust. In the meantime, they must deal with community pharmacists and the dental services. At the end of the process, they may have to engage with social work, which in turn has to deal with the voluntary sector and nursing homes. This morning we heard in the minister's speech other examples of the complexity of the system that baffles people. We must talk in a language that people understand. The minister referred to HIPs and TIPs. When people talk about hips, they mean replacements. When they talk about tips, they mean places where they take their rubbish. This should not be a debate between politicians and professionals; it should be a debate about the public, who need a service. I am showing my age here, but the tenor of this debate sometimes reminds me of the words of a parody by the Clancy Brothers of Galway bay, who sang about people talking in a language that the clergy do not know. Politicians and professionals often talk in a language that the public do not and cannot understand. We must bring the debate back down to their level. We must ensure that consumer and staff alienation is ended. We need a system that is easily understood, transparent, accountable and effective. We need to renationalise the health service so that it achieves its aim of meeting the needs and aspirations of people who are ill and need the service immediately. This debate has signalled welcome progress, but we must work hard to achieve those aims.

I welcome the minister's comments. Can he reassure us that  terminally ill patients who go home to receive care will not have to face the trauma of being assessed for charges? Will that trauma be removed from that section of the population?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to ensure the smooth implementation of the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000. (S1O-2436)

I thank the minister for his answer. Many people with incapacity and their families and carers cannot feel the full benefit of the reforms until the act is implemented. Will the minister reassure people, such as members of the Renfrewshire Autism and Asperger Group, who are concerned that they have no say in their adult children's lives unless they have the means to go to court? Will the minister reassure me that, while the legal technicalities, draft codes for attorneys and the rest are devised, the wishes of people with incapacity, or of those who are close to them, will remain at the centre of our thinking?

This debate shows some of the best and worst features of the Parliament. The best feature is the fact that we can come together—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The best feature is that we can come together with a common purpose on an issue that is of concern throughout the country. Unfortunately, the motion and the amendments introduce an element of political self-congratulation that is as relevant to the general public as an argument among bald men over the ownership of a comb—I leave it to Bill Aitken to explain that in more detail. The general public are not interested in politicians trying to score points on such a serious issue: they are looking for a response and for effective action. I welcome the fact that we are speaking with a common purpose today. Several matters need to be considered in the overall context of the debate. I support what Iain Gray has said: we need a coherent response and a balanced strategy. He was also right to talk about strong enforcement being the key to effectiveness. We cannot allow the creation of drugs courts to give the general impression that dealers will somehow get off the hook. We need effective, hard action to tackle dealers who bring misery to our communities, and the new Drug Enforcement Agency has demonstrated, in recent months, that it can make a contribution in tackling drug crime throughout Scotland.

Absolutely. I welcome the Executive's opportunity to work on the detail of how the drugs courts will develop. Comment has also been made about the need to learn from best practice elsewhere. Euan Robson made the valid point that we need to examine rehabilitation in this debate. We must also stress the fact that the route to rehabilitation is not engaging in crime. We cannot prefer for the rehabilitation route those who have been convicted, or are involved in crime, over those who are making a determined effort.

I agree. Like other members, I have been approached in my constituency by people who are trying to deal with the tragedy of family members who are victims of a drugs habit and are looking desperately for rehabilitation. In that context, I welcome the extra £100 million that the Executive has allocated to trying to tackle the problem of drugs throughout the country. As well as rehabilitation for those who have managed to kick the drugs habit, we need to ensure that proper accommodation is available, that there is proper training and that opportunities exist for employment. We cannot view access to rehabilitation as the end of our support for drug users. We cannot and must not ignore the role that education should continue to play in tackling the scourge of drugs throughout the country. I recommend that the minister—and his colleague, Jack McConnell, who is now responsible for education—look at a project in my constituency that has become the largest youth theatre company in Scotland. Paisley Arts Centre Education has developed a theatre programme involving young people, to deliver the drug education message to other young people in a positive and interactive way that makes that message more meaningful to them. With a combination of all those factors, we can finally come together to do something.

On a point of order. On the pre-release of speeches and how you might interpret that, would your sanction extend to the pre-release of speeches to Opposition parties, prior to delivery in the chamber?

What the minister is hearing today is a plea from every section of the Scottish Parliament that she should play a part in righting a grievous injustice. However, it is important to put that injustice into its proper context. Annabel Goldie said that the situation is highly unsatisfactory. That is a huge understatement if ever there was one. Let us remember how this debate started. The 10 companies collectively known as the Scottish Bus Group were sold cheaply, allowing the buyers to make tenfold profits within a year. The decision to sell off those companies was made by a Conservative Government and was not criticised by anyone in Annabel Goldie's party at that time.

I did not say that the fault lay solely with the Conservatives; I asked for the argument to be put into a proper historical perspective. Twenty-seven former SBG executives were granted a total of almost £700,000 in tax-free payments to compensate for the loss of their private health insurance perks. It is an absolute disgrace that the Conservative Government of the time helped a handful of people—not just in the bus industry, but in a range of privatised industries—to make huge amounts of money. It is an absolute disgrace that there are pensioners who are today pleading for what is rightfully theirs. One of the things that was often said over the years was, "Look after yourself." The Conservative Government told us to take  individual responsibility. These pensioners did that. They contributed to a fund. All they are asking for now is to get back what is rightfully theirs. [Applause.]

It is to the credit of all those involved that they have persisted for so long in the face of so many obstacles. If one fact emerges from today's debate it must be that the obstacles are not insurmountable. The delay is intolerable and something must give. I ask the minister to consider a number of things when she examines this matter, which I hope she will do urgently. The union and individual pensioners have asked for a meeting with the trustees. The trustees cannot be allowed to ignore those requests. People should be given that meeting as a priority and I ask the minister to intervene to ensure that that happens. I also ask the minister to make it clear to the trustees that the surplus should not be used to cover legal or trustee costs. I ask the minister to make it clear that, if the surplus is passed to the Government, it will be passed to TOPS pensioners and deferred pensioners in increased or additional benefits. There is a fundamental point of principle: the money belongs to the pensioners and it is time to do something about that.

I am from that generation that benefited from the struggles of our elderly people in their lifetimes and from those of the generations that came before. They fought through the labour and trade union movement for a decent health service, and decent education and housing, to give opportunities in life to people who had been denied them. I firmly and fundamentally believe that we have a debt to repay to that generation. I do not disagree with some of what Nora Radcliffe said: we should examine how we provide support, including nursing and personal care, for our elderly, but I also firmly believe that there are issues that need to be addressed immediately. I want there to be a health service that is based on need—not ability to pay—and free at the point of use. I want to hear the Executive telling us again and again that that is what will happen in Scotland, because I am alarmed by some Conservative proposals. No matter what the Conservatives say here, they would be hit by the consequences of their proposals at Westminster for cutting public expenditure and introducing private insurance. As I came into the chamber, I was amused to see a Conservative member being interviewed for  television along with pensioners who were holding a placard that said, "Free care for the elderly." I believe that the cameraman was experiencing technical problems because of the light coming off the brass neck of that Conservative.

David McLetchie's press release of 21 September said that "a lot can be done to repair the damage that has been caused to date." I agree—it is time to undo the damage that was done by 18 years of Conservative government, which drove many of our pensioners into abject poverty. I am glad that David McLetchie is admitting the consequences of the Tories being in power.

No thanks. We should give the Tories credit: they are at least consistent in wanting the process of undoing that damage to start with the better-off in society. That has always been a Tory aspiration.

No thank you. They would start with the 7,000 who, in the long term, need support.

That pathetic comment is in keeping with some of the other comments that we have heard from the Conservatives. We will have to start the process of undoing the damage somewhere. I agree with Nora Radcliffe that we should help those who are paying for care, but thousands of pensioners are living in poverty. The Tories have told us what they would do. Sutherland made a contribution to the debate and most of the commission's reports are being implemented by the Scottish Executive, so it is unclear what the Tories are talking about. John Scott said that they would solve the problem by reducing bedblocking, but Mary Scanlon failed to reply to the question, put to her by Iain Gray, about bedblocking meaning the removal of beds. The Tories have still not come up with an answer to that.

No thanks.  John Scott also failed to take up David McLetchie's point about the Tories taking the money from the funding that is allocated to the health service this year. Perhaps John Scott was singing slightly off key, as he spoke about savings coming from a reduction of the bureaucracy that was created by the Conservatives, whereas David McLetchie said that they would take it from the money that has been allocated—from the £173 million—including the £8.3 million for doctors and nurses; the £30 million for cancer treatment and medical equipment; the £60 million for shortening waiting times and tackling bedblocking; the £12 million for the implementation of Arbuthnott's recommendations and to help Scotland's poorest areas; and the £26 million for the biggest ever drive to implement public health initiatives. That is where the Tories say the money would come from. I ask the minister for assurances that there will be free home care for pensioners on discharge from hospital, including those who do not pay for home care because they cannot afford it, and that there will be improved adaptations for those who need work to be done in their homes. I also want a rationalisation of services. I do not want Parliament to undermine the principle of subsidiarity by taking power away from local authorities, but we must enter the debate over different levels of charging across Scotland. We should engage with directors of social work, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and others to ensure that there is fairness and consistency throughout Scotland. Let us start with the poorest pensioners and move on to repay the debt that we owe to their generation.

Can the First Minister obtain for the Parliament a list of those companies in the haulage industry that are involved in the dispute—pleading a threat to jobs—that were also active participants in the miners' strike in 1984 and went through picket lines then?

I share the minister's comments about the sterling work that has been done by teachers in the process. The minister is right to indicate that the inquiries that will be carried out are the proper place to consider what went wrong in the administration. Tavish Scott made the point, which other members have echoed, that we have a problem for the coming year that we must consider. Notwithstanding the proper distinction that the minister makes between the issues relating to higher still and the shambles in the SQA, is he aware of concerns over higher still's assessment requirements? Can he advise Parliament of any measures that will be taken to review the higher still assessment arrangements to reduce pressure on the system and to avoid an overload in the coming year?

rose—

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will Mrs Scanlon give way?

Will Mrs Scanlon give way?

I am grateful to Mary Scanlon; she is always the lady. Mary Scanlon mentioned paying for the service. Does she agree with Ann Widdecombe, who stated that, if someone wants to pay to see their GP, they should be encouraged to do so? If she agrees, what advice does she have for those who  cannot pay?

Will the member give way?

rose—

Will the member give way?

I agree with Kay Ullrich that one could not imagine this debate taking place at Westminster. Kay Ullrich and I, and other members, campaigned for a devolved Parliament, within the United Kingdom, so that we could debate such issues here. However, when Allan Wilson listed all the attributes of West Kilbride—its proximity to the Clyde and to Muirshiel park—he inadvertently forgot to mention that one of its strengths was its proximity to Renfrewshire, and all the benefits that that brings. Although Allan Wilson, as the local member for Cunninghame North, is right to  advance the claims of West Kilbride and the wider area, he does the Parliament a service by raising the fundamental issue of the contribution that craft makes to the Scottish economy and to tourism. We often undervalue individual craft and artistic skills—Allan Wilson has described their value to West Kilbride and the surrounding communities. As Jamie Stone said, craft makes a contribution to Scotland's standing abroad and shows the wider diaspora that there is still something with which it can identify. That interest encourages local people to develop craft skills. Although there are several places in Scotland that might claim to be Scotland's craft town or village, Allan Wilson has said to the Scottish Executive and the Parliament that we need to take the matter seriously. I hope that what will come from the debate is a recognition that we need to be more strategic in our work. Over the coming years, I hope that we will be able to say that the Parliament has contributed to Scotland's craft industries, which in turn contribute to Scotland's economy, artistic image and tourist reputation.

Will the minister seek to involve organisations such as the excellent Mark Scott Foundation—a foundation  born from past tragedy that attempts to give hope for the future? As well as providing young people with the opportunity to volunteer it seeks to develop their leadership potential.

I regret the fact that, so far in the debate, there has been, in a sense, a wasted opportunity. We have heard so much about what the Scottish Parliament might enable us to do, and quite rightly. There has been progress in the work of committees, with thorough,  genuine and vigorous debate. It is extremely disappointing that, when we return to meetings of the Parliament, that spirit of thoroughness and vigour is lost in pettiness, mean-mindedness and negativity.

Some people start to howl even before I identify the culprits. They are obviously resting uneasy in their seats. It was unfortunate that Kay Ullrich, in her extremely disappointing speech, failed to take the opportunity to tell us how much she would spend and where the money would come from. The same Kay Ullrich said that the debate was a matter of priorities. Matters of priority mean making difficult decisions sometimes. If money is to be found for one area, it has to come from somewhere else—she cannot have it both ways and needs to come up front at some point. Mary Scanlon demonstrated some of the difficulties that the Conservatives continue to face. On the one hand, she was completely detached from reality in conveniently forgetting the Conservatives' history and experience. At the same time, she made some useful points, some of which were lost in the negativity. She said that we need to consider unified budgets and more efficient resources. The debate should be about building on practical experience and trying to take the Parliament and society forward. Whether we like it or not, there are financial difficulties, but Cathy Jamieson and others have been quite right to say that the culture and climate have changed, and that carers and people who depend on community care services want to go forward in a positive spirit and to see real, lasting improvements. From my experience in Renfrewshire, I know about some of the changes and about the new moneys that have been allocated, including £161,000 to deliver the action plan there. When I hear the stories about cuts, cuts, cuts, I have to say that, over the past two to three years, Renfrewshire Council's social work budget has consistently been increased, increased and increased. Every penny received from the Government to that department is spent on social work, not directed to other services.

I am sorry, but I shall not give way. I do not recognise—

No, thank you. I will extend Tricia Marwick the same courtesy that I was given  earlier—so perhaps she could just sit down. There are opportunities in the learning disability strategy. We should welcome improved joint working and partnership in practice. We should welcome the work of the local area co-ordinators. We should welcome the fact that we are closing hospital beds and moving care back to the community. That is not to say that there are not problems that need to be addressed. I welcome the carers strategy and I would always say that more money could and should be spent. Equally, I welcome the positive response that we get from carers who see real improvements in what is happening in local communities. For example, Carers Action Renfrew District runs the CARD centre, which is performing a magnificent job in the local community in improving the quality of life for carers. We would like community care implementation to be incorporated into one reporting process. The minister needs to think about that, because there are inefficiencies in the service. We have seen huge improvements in work done by social work services, health boards and housing providers, but it is still not enough: we need to shake out the structure and ensure that money is being used properly.  I welcome, as do the social work providers in my area, the principle of a change fund. We think that it would help to implement the national learning disability strategy. We need new money in real terms, subject to a fair distribution rather than an annual bidding process. Welcome as the funding for the initiatives is, I ask the minister to ensure that we do not fund the initiatives through a bidding process, which involves a huge amount of work and often sets unrealistic deadlines. Resources spent on the bidding process would be better spent on care in the community.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

This afternoon's debate is a good example of why people voted for the Scottish Parliament. We can contrast that with yesterday's debate, which was an example of what people in Scotland are not looking for. Today we have an example of a committee of the Parliament and the Executive working together to promote a better quality of education for a section of our community that in the past has often been overlooked. We are all aware not only of the needs of children with special needs, but the anxieties and frustrations that are faced by parents in seeking to do the right thing for their children. I know that that sometimes causes problems in education, when parents will not take no for an answer and refuse to face up to the difficulty facing their child. However, I have come across cases in which, if it had not been for the persistence of parents in promoting their child's interests, that child would not have received the education that they needed. Too often I have seen cases of children suffering all the way through their education because time and again they and their parents were told that they did not have dyslexia, only for them to find out in adolescence, and perhaps even later, that they did. I know of a couple of children who have managed to get to university and to overcome a handicap that was not recognised in school. We need to ensure that children do not suffer that terrible disadvantage and that parents do not suffer the frustration of trying to do their best for their children without the support of people who should know better. I should like the Executive to dwell on a couple of points. The first concerns the involvement of therapists in mainstream schools. The money given to local authorities to buy speech and language services is most welcome, but local authorities are experiencing problems in finding speech and language therapists to employ. There are also problems in bringing other therapists into schools—local authorities are not given money to buy physiotherapy and occupational therapy services. We need to consider a range of services for children with special needs. We also need to consider the training of teachers. The Executive is to be congratulated on providing on-going training to teachers in the area of special needs through the SEN-specific grant, but we need to increase provision in pre-service training. Too often teachers arrive at schools unaware of the complexities of dealing with children with special needs. The record of needs should also be re-examined. It might be redundant, given the move towards individual educational programmes that  the manual of good practice has led to. However, as local authorities develop services based on examples of good practice, we must have a debate on the record of needs to ensure that we do not make the wrong decision. We need to examine why parents are increasingly choosing to send children to specialist schools, which contradicts much of what we have heard today about involving children in the community in an inclusive way. Why is the number of children attending specialist schools rising when we are trying to promote social inclusion? In Renfrewshire, three schools this year—one secondary school and two primary schools—and a further secondary school next year are looking to take children with severe visual impairment and physical disability, thereby extending choice and inclusion. I know that this is not an easy debate, given the anxieties of parents, but I fully support the Executive in its community schools initiative. We are right to extend opportunity and to ensure that children develop to their full potential when they are in school, but we should not forget that we are educating them for a purpose: to prepare them for life. When these children leave school, they should not be abandoned. There must be proper provision of careers services and education, to ensure a smooth path into employment.

Will the Deputy First Minister assure me that when he next speaks to the Prime Minister he will draw his attention to the fact that yesterday, for the first time in many hundreds of years, a democratically  elected Scottish Parliament discussed independence and rejected comprehensively Alex Salmond's views?

I am slightly disappointed that David McLetchie has left the chamber: I had hoped to ask him whether he had described Alex Salmond as a "potato president" or a "putative president". Much of what Alex Salmond said today could be described as being the words of a potato president. He spoke for 25 minutes and barely mentioned independence; in effect, he said nothing. I understand what Robert Brown meant when he said that he welcomed the debate as an opportunity to discuss independence. However, we have not had the opportunity to discuss independence. The Scottish National party is willing to talk about everything except independence. It is disappointing that, instead of focusing on some of the real opportunities that the Parliament presents, we are having a sterile and very puerile debate that is leading nowhere in particular. Fiona Hyslop exemplified the contradictions in the SNP. She said that the Parliament was not using its powers properly. What was her conclusion? Not that we should use the powers properly, but that we should break away from the United Kingdom. That was completely and utterly illogical.

No, I will not give way. Today's debate is, in a sense, a political expedient to protect Alex Salmond. We know that he is under threat from his fundamentalists, who are unhappy that Alex will not put independence back at the top of the agenda. In the language of SNP members, we hear what they really think about this Parliament. They call it a "pretend Parliament", not a real Parliament. It is a difficult situation for Alex Salmond; I sympathise with him. He tries to talk about the achievements of the Parliament, but he is dragged back by people who say that it is a pretend Parliament that is doing nothing. There is another contradiction. The SNP has told us, during this first year, that it wants the Parliament to work. Let us think about that logically. If the SNP wants the Parliament to work, it should want to make happen what the people of Scotland voted for, and they voted for a devolved Parliament within the United Kingdom.

The SNP has no interest in making this Parliament work, which explains some of the SNP's pettiness during the past year. The party has not wasted any opportunities to denigrate and to make facile comments about many of the things that have happened. We need consider only one example. Mike Russell launched himself into condemning the Parliament for awarding medals, saying, "This is a disgrace—you're just in and you've voted to award yourselves medals. What have you done to deserve it?" He said that, irrespective of the fact that that decision had not been taken by the Parliament, and was made before the election. Is that the same Mike Russell who, shortly thereafter, took £2,800—the equivalent of the cost of 56 medals—from the Parliament to go on a trip to India? Where is Mike Russell's consistency in those circumstances? As was said earlier, the SNP has been hypocritical in not allowing George Reid to try to manage the Holyrood project; the party does not want the Parliament to work. We have seen motion after motion on reserved matters, on which we can do nothing. The SNP does not want the Parliament to work. As Allan Wilson and others said, people in Scotland reject independence, time and again. In opinion polls, they have indicated that their support for independence is falling.

Alex Salmond faces within his party the dilemma that, if the Parliament works, people might start to vote for the SNP as an alternative to other parties but, at the same time, they will say quite clearly that they want to stay within the United Kingdom. That is the dilemma at the heart of the SNP, and it is why Alex is worried about trying to keep his fundamentalists in order. People want the Parliament to work, but the SNP does not.

Will the member give way?

rose—

It is unfortunate that we have to have this type of debate in the Parliament. In a sense, it is a recognition of the fact that, in their 18 years in office, Conservative Governments destroyed the social infrastructure that had been built up by successive Governments in the post-war period. They managed to undermine our health service, our public sector housing, our education system and every important part of the social fabric that the people of this country took for granted.

Give me a minute; I have just started. It is also unfortunate that this debate is a wasted opportunity. Instead of talking about what we are doing to improve the legacy that was inherited by the Labour Government three years ago or about new investment in health and education and the radical improvements suggested for housing, the SNP's contribution could be described in a number of ways. Some people have said that it is a whinge and a whine; others have said that it is fundamentally dishonest. Andrew Wilson has admitted that he thinks that devolution cannot deliver. That admission comes from the same people who say that they want this Parliament to work. Fiona Hyslop started off by saying that devolution was about home rule, but she went on to say that investment could be delivered only if the Scottish Parliament was a real Parliament. That is an admission that, for SNP members, this Parliament and Scotland's devolved settlement are not something to be taken for granted; they are something to be dismissed. That is the reality of today's debate; the SNP is dismissing this Parliament and the devolved settlement. Despite persistent questioning, today and on other occasions, we have had no admission from the SNP that its promises cannot be delivered within the Scottish block by the Scottish Parliament. The SNP's arguments are pie in the sky and fundamentally dishonest, and they mislead the people of this country. The SNP motion "calls upon the Scottish Executive to consider ways to increase the scope and powers of the Scottish Executive and the Parliament to provide necessary funding." That is exactly what the Executive is doing, but instead of giving the Executive credit for doing that, Fiona Hyslop and Andrew Wilson have talked about everything but their motion. They still have to address the basic tenets of the motion. They are ignoring it and dodging it.

Fiona Hyslop has admitted that  she only glanced over those suggestions in her concluding remarks. She threw away some basic and brief suggestions, but she did not flesh out Alex Salmond's flagship proposals on the trusts or how the SNP intends to deliver its promises. We were supposed to be focusing today on how we would improve our housing and build new schools. The SNP motion calls for "quality affordable homes, a high standard learning environment for children". We should have been talking about finding ways of financing homes with better heating, double glazing and a more secure environment for our families—the things that the Executive is doing.

None of those things is being addressed by the SNP. This motion is fundamentally dishonest. The SNP has not offered a way out, within the constraints of our powers, for this Parliament to consider. SNP members are saying that this Parliament cannot work for them, and only independence is on offer as far as they are concerned. The Scottish people have rejected independence. They have made it clear time and time again that the SNP has nothing to offer. We should be looking for some honesty from the SNP with regard to what it would deliver in a Scottish budget in a Scottish Parliament.

Will the member give way?

Fiona Hyslop said that devolution was meant to be about home rule. Can she confirm that all the spending promises made by SNP spokespeople over the past few months will be delivered in the event of an SNP Administration, in a devolved Scottish Parliament with a devolved budget?

Does the First Minister agree that, in many cases, educational attainment and some of the other issues that have been raised have little to do with geography but everything to do with class and income, and that even in communities such as Barrhead, or Johnstone in my constituency, there are huge differentials in the same towns—and sometimes in the same villages—caused by social status?

The minister's comments are welcome, but will he accept that there are still grounds for concern? For example, I heard a representative of the health council in Glasgow saying recently on the radio that it had no knowledge of the plans for health in Glasgow. Will he accept that there are areas where consultation and communication are just not happening?

I was fascinated to gain an insight into Roseanna Cunningham's surgeries—surgeries in rural Scotland are clearly very different from those in urban Scotland. Like Lyndsay McIntosh, I think that it will be useful to move discussion away from it being a legal debate. I do not underestimate the job that lawyers and those with legal training do when considering a motion such as this, but it is important to point out, from a lay perspective, that this is a fundamental issue, which goes beyond lawyers and is about giving rights to individuals in our society. We should not be ashamed of incorporating the ECHR or of the consequences and problems of incorporation. It is apposite that we are debating the issue on the day on which—shamefully—the Home  Secretary has allowed General Pinochet to return to Chile to escape the consequences of his actions in denying others their human rights. It is important that we put what has happened today in the context of the denial of human rights. The debate is about ensuring that people in our country are given rights that people in Chile were denied by people such as General Pinochet. I hope that the incorporation of the ECHR means that Scotland and the rest of the UK are prepared to say that such behaviour is unacceptable and that our people should have those rights enshrined in law. I also take pride in saying that the problems that we face in Scotland, which will soon be repeated in the rest of the UK, are a consequence of devolution. I take pride in the fact that, yet again, we are leading the way and that we are prepared to face up to the consequences of devolution. Although we have taken pride in our legal system and in the way in which people in this country have been able to exercise rights that others have not been able to, we should also admit that we are not immune to change or beyond reproach. Today we have heard speakers from various quarters admit that there is room for improvement. Although David McLetchie's tone was negative and grudging, he made some suggestions that are worthy of more detailed consideration. Gordon Jackson and Roseanna Cunningham also identified areas where they believe improvements could be made. Let us take some pride in the fact that we are facing up to our responsibilities. Like other members, I have an open mind on whether there should be a human rights commission, but I want to be persuaded not only of the value of such a commission, but of whether it can make a valid contribution. We should not underestimate the role of this Parliament in carrying out some of the work that has been suggested. I know that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee has a heavy work load, but I do not underestimate the role that it could play in ensuring that human rights are not just embedded in our Parliament and legal system, but promoted beyond them. The Justice and Home Affairs Committee has shown what a good, hard-working committee can do, and it could do much of the work that has been suggested for a human rights commission.

No, I am about to finish. I want to echo Jim Wallace's point that the promotion of a human rights culture in Scotland is fundamental. We must respect human rights and ensure that they become part of the fabric of life here. If we do not take them seriously, people such as Pinochet will be able to get away with what they have done.

Does the member accept that, when he criticises the Executive, he criticises members of his own party? Furthermore, if the Liberal Democrats want additional expenditure for local government, where will the money come from? Does Mr Gorrie accept that Scottish local government does not want the order to be voted down, because authorities would face financial penalties if that happened?

Will Mr Gibson give a commitment that the SNP would restore expenditure to the level that he has spoken about? Will he give a commitment that the other expenditure statements from SNP spokespeople will also be met in full? Will he tell us how, within a devolved budget, the SNP will pay for all that?

Does the minister accept that when local authorities take on responsibilities such as providing assistance under section 12 of the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968, they should have the flexibility to provide such assistance in the way they think best for the individual concerned? Do we not need Scottish solutions to Scottish problems?

My question has already been asked.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will welcome the recent release of a toxicology report in relation to fatal drug misuse-related overdoses in greater Glasgow and encourage the continued and extended release of this type of information across Scotland. (S1O-1060)

Will the minister join me in welcoming to the gallery the Reverend Canon Kenyon Wright, who has a long history of supporting many community-based projects and disadvantaged groups across Scotland? Does the minister recognise that many drug users in the greater Glasgow area have died as a result of injecting heroin, either by itself or in combination with other drugs? Given that in 55 per cent of the recorded deaths in the report, more than one drug was implicated, does he agree that it is vital to the development of our drug prevention and education services that we have access to such information?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will Mr Swinney give way?

I congratulate Annabel Goldie on yet again plugging the M74. Duncan McNeil said that, in the recent floods, Greenock became an island, cut off from the rest of Renfrewshire. He will know—although other members will not—just how devastated people in Renfrewshire feel about being cut off from Greenock. Although Duncan McNeil described the economic consequences of the flooding, we should not underestimate the personal tragedy that the flooding brought to householders, whose homes were in some cases destroyed. My constituency, which is near Duncan's, also suffered badly. I saw, and continue to see, the problems caused by the flooding. Duncan is right to say that we need a multi-agency approach. As Colin Campbell said, flood plans have been prepared in the Renfrewshire Council area. The Scottish Office and then the Scottish Executive have financially supported such work, but more needs to be done. Areas such as Paisley and Greenock require financial assistance to ensure that flooding does not cause personal and economic devastation. Duncan is equally right to say that a range of other agencies must consider their responsibilities and make plans. Annabel Goldie made a good point about the responsibilities of others. We should require local authorities to plan for flood emergencies, as we do for civil emergencies, and ask them to tackle and eradicate the problems of flooding in areas that we know are particularly affected. We should not leave the matter to chance or to good will. Duncan discussed some of the bigger infrastructure issues, but some small things can be done to help. In one place in my constituency, the Scottish Executive and the council are prepared to implement flood prevention measures but,  because of objections by some householders, the matter has to go to appeal. The appeal will not be heard for five or six months, but the work to solve problems for next winter needs to start in the next couple of months. In such situations, the Scottish Executive should consider giving priority to appeals that could help to eradicate damage that will affect people. There would be no financial burdens associated with such a step. I congratulate Duncan, who has eloquently identified the problems in Inverclyde. However, we must all work together on this issue.

On a point of order. Some of us would quite like to hear what the minister is saying— [Interruption.]

I regret the comment that was made about me by Shona Robison. The question that I asked Alex Neil was whether the SNP would take action on the incidents that were mentioned by Mary Mulligan in the way that the Labour party took action on the specific incident to which she referred. I hope that there would be consistency in the SNP's approach. Colin Campbell said that, at one point, Edinburgh was the Athens of the north. Lloyd Quinan later talked in general terms about the darker times in our history. It is apposite that we are having this debate in this chamber, as it is less than 80 years since my Irish Catholic grandparents were told by people in this chamber that they should be deported from this country. It is to the credit of this Parliament that we have moved on.

I hope that allowance will be made in my speaking time for the time that has been taken up by Kenny Gibson's speech.

The Labour party has acted on that issue, and I leave it at that. We are now able to conduct a mature and responsible debate. However, I say to the SNP that many of my friends and family are quizzical about why we are spending three hours talking about the Act of Settlement—about whether or not Catholics are able to marry into what is increasingly becoming an irrelevant institution in this country—instead of talking about some of the fundamental issues that affect Catholics in this country.

I am sorry, but I have already  taken an intervention. Recent reports indicate that people from an Irish Catholic background are more likely to die early, end up in prison or live in poverty. Behind all this is a history of discrimination and sectarianism, as John McAllion indicated. However, the legacy of that, as Scottish society begins to move on, is that such people are unable to play a full part in many areas of life because of their class and their position in society. Why do people from working-class backgrounds, as well as Catholics, not get into veterinary schools? Why are Catholics still under-represented in certain professions in this country? Equally, however, working-class Protestants are under-represented in many of those professions. Why are the top civil servants in this country mainly products of private schools reflecting a certain class background? We need to have a mature debate about how our society should move forward. It would be far more relevant to Catholics and many other sections of our society if, in these three hours, we were to address some of the fundamental problems that affect people living in poverty throughout Scotland, whether they be Catholic, Jewish, Protestant or Muslim.

Sorry. I am about to finish. It is a credit to the Labour and trade union movement that we have put discrimination at the forefront of our agenda. Many of the gains that we have made are the result of the struggles of men and women over many years. One of the things that I am most proud of is that women—who, like Catholics, still cannot get into many golf or bowling clubs—are now better represented in this chamber because of the efforts of the Labour party in tackling discrimination.

Having listened to Alex Neil's fine words and strong statement against sectarianism and discrimination, I ask him whether he will, on behalf of the SNP, assure Mary Mulligan that the people whom she identified as being responsible for sectarian politics in her area will be dealt with very firmly by the SNP.

Will it deal with them?

Was there anything that precluded the Conservative party from making progress on any of those issues, or on this specific issue, during its term in office?

Will the member give way?

Mr Russell said that he hopes the amendment is not simply an attempt to put responsibility on to somebody else, yet in the e-mail he sent on 16 August, he said: "The Parliament itself cannot change the Act of  Settlement . . . This is not a challenge to Westminster".

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to establish a centre of excellence to provide health care and therapies to people with polio. (S1O-825)

Is the minister aware of the problems faced by older people who suffered polio as children? Is she aware of the concern that support and expertise is not being provided throughout Scotland and of the demands for a concentration of specialists services?

Irene Oldfather is to be congratulated on introducing the motion. It identifies a serious problem and makes positive and succinct suggestions about how to  tackle the problem. That is often lacking in our debates. It is appalling to find people who are prepared to sell cigarettes to under-age children simply to make a profit. It would be remiss of us to allow such a practice to continue in what we hope is a civilised and progressive society. We must protect our children from themselves and from people who are more interested in money.

Absolutely, there is a range of outlets that we have to consider. We in this Parliament are proud of the fact that we have the opportunity to initiate legislation ahead of other parts of the United Kingdom, but this debate identifies an area in which we are behind other parts of the country. I hope that, following this debate, we can persuade the relevant committees, or the Scottish Executive, to take seriously the suggestions that Irene Oldfather and Richard Simpson have made and to propose changes. I have been impressed by the range of the Scottish Executive's proposals. It has shown its determination to improve the quality of life for people in Scotland. I am disturbed, however, that tobacco consumption and health is probably the one area of weakness in what has been considered. Irene Oldfather has suggested proposals that the Scottish Executive could take up to remedy that one weakness in the armour.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive, given current planning presumptions against major out-of-town retail developments, whether any further major out-of-town retail developments will be permitted in, or in proximity to, the Renfrewshire Council area. (S1O-454)

I thank the minister for that reply. She is no doubt aware of the new Braehead development. The developers have been trying to  work closely with local councils to revitalise the local economy, but PPG8, to which she referred, on town centres and retailing states: "The Government is committed to protecting and enhancing the vitality and viability of town centres." Will the minister confirm that this policy will be strictly adhered to in dealing with any major retail developments proposed for sites outwith town centres and shown to have a detrimental effect on existing town centres?

Sir David—

I am sorry that Dr Ewing did not feel able to take my intervention earlier; I would have asked her to confirm that when the original proposals for the Highlands and Islands were drawn up, it was recognised that the Highlands and Islands were not included in objective 1. The only reason the Highlands and Islands have been included in the financial assistance is the work carried out by the United Kingdom Government. Scotland's local authorities undertook part of the lobbying to influence the UK Government. Earlier, the positive role that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities played was mentioned. It was because of the work carried out by COSLA that the United Kingdom Government came to recognise the case for the special deal that was done. In general, the minister was right to say that this is a good deal for Scotland. He has described the coverage that the Scottish population has in comparison with the rest of Europe or the United Kingdom.

No, I am sorry. I will extend to Mr Neil the same courtesy that Dr Ewing extended to me—I will take his intervention after I have made my points. The minister mentioned the significant gains that Scotland has made. One of the things we need to emphasise is that although we have benefited, which is a good outcome, reductions in European funding are based on success. The reductions are based on the fact that, relative to the rest of the UK economy, the Scottish economy is growing. In the past, European funding was based on our relative backwardness compared with many other parts of Europe. We are gaining because the UK Government has argued a good deal for Scotland. We are also starting to gain from some of the benefits of European investment. A number of noticeable improvements have been made in the current round. A new seven-year programme is replacing two three-year programmes, which will help many of the agencies involved. However, we must emphasise to all the partners involved that they need to prepare exit strategies for European funding: they cannot keep thinking that more of the same will come. The vexed question of the maps has been raised. The advice from the European Commission was that maps should be grouped together. Again, we gained from the lobbying that was done in Scotland's local authorities that there should be maps based on wards. That has been built in, but certain clear anomalies have resulted.  Given that the European Commission has three months to agree the list, I hope that the Scottish Executive's actions will reflect what it said to the European Committee—that representations can be made to the Executive that will then be taken back to the Commission for it to consider. I hope that that will be done in a way that reflects the debate. There were some serious concerns about the way in which negotiations and consultation were carried out, especially with regard to objective 1. We must address some of those concerns. The minister has already given some indication on that. The thrust that we now have means that, for the first time, we have a serious opportunity to ensure that different funding streams from European Union sources and Scottish and UK sources are brought together. Where there are gaps caused by a reduction in European funding, I am convinced that the Scottish Executive will, in the years to come, step in with imaginative programmes, using the money that we gain as part of the Barnett formula.

Will the member give way?

Does Mr Crawford recognise that one of the reasons that the Highlands and Islands lost out was its growing prosperity and that under the rules it would not have qualified for anything, so the UK Government negotiated an allocation despite the Highlands and Islands not meeting the criteria?

Will the First Minister confirm what he alluded to, which continued the point that Jack McConnell made to the European Committee: irrespective of any cut in objective 2 funding, there will be no reduction in overall expenditure in Scotland? Can he also confirm, for our friends in the SNP, that that has always been the case with European funding and the block budget?

Surely the product of ministerial deliberations is evident in the legislation and policies that are put before the Parliament. Our committees can scrutinise those deliberations in a way in which elements of the UK Administration cannot. I would argue that we are in advance of other parts of the United Kingdom.

Murray Tosh and John McAllion were quite right to try to bring this debate back to what is before us this morning. It is unfortunate that the SNP has missed an opportunity to discuss and debate what is in the concordats. Instead, SNP members have tried to take the debate on to its wish list for independence. Murray Tosh was right to remind Margaret Ewing of the bizarre situation in which she finds herself—fulminating at great length about some of the comments in the document, even though she campaigned for the Scotland Act 1998 and for this Parliament. If she did not like the devolution proposals, it would have been more honourable to reject them at the time, instead of coming back now and using the concordats as a pretext for her opposition.

Alex Neil started off by saying that he was going to talk about the concordats and not about other issues. Very quickly, however, his mask slipped, along with that of others. Today we have heard a rant against the English, against Westminster and against everybody who does not share the Scottish National party's narrow perspective. It would have been more honourable for the SNP to propose a debate on independence, to take place in its allotted time. Let us have that debate on our differences, rather than use the concordats as an excuse for it.

I will give way to Dorothy-Grace Elder.

No, it is not what I, the Labour group in this Parliament or the Labour party believe.

Tony Blair does not believe that. If Alex Neil had something constructive to say, why this morning did he join the rant against the UK Government and the English, and why have  we been subjected to paranoia and abuse that has nothing to do with this debate? Alex Neil talked dismissively of these concordats being prepared—

I will give way to Sandra White.

I find Sandra White's comments bizarre. All morning, the point has been made to members of the SNP that the Scottish people rejected independence and indicated that they wanted to remain part of the UK. We have an Executive that is charged with taking forward government and, whether Sandra likes it or not, we are part of the United Kingdom and we have a United Kingdom Government. This is an agreement between the United Kingdom Government and the devolved Administrations. In a sense, we have something that the English do not have: we have the United Kingdom Government negotiating with the devolved Administrations. That is an advantage that we have over our compatriots in England.

I will not take an intervention because I have already taken two. The concordat is an agreement between the Administrations. This Parliament will hold the Executive to account and will scrutinise closely the work of Jack McConnell, Donald Dewar and others.

No, John. I have taken two interventions and I hope I get some credit for that. We will hold ministers to account. The concordat says that the role of ministers and officials from the devolved Administrations will be to support and advance the single UK negotiating line. The emphasis in negotiations has to be on working as a UK team. That is what the SNP does not like. It does not like the fact that we are still part of the United Kingdom. [Applause.]  I am glad that the SNP has acknowledged that. This morning, Alex Neil said that he was not going to concentrate on that and that he would concentrate on the concordats, but the SNP has gone back to its fundamental argument about divorce from the UK. Someone had to prepare the document. The UK Government prepared it and passed it to the Administrations to allow comments to be made. The Parliament now has the opportunity to comment on it. The proper process has been followed but the SNP does not like the fundamental premise on which the document is based.

It is the excitement.

Alex Neil has said that the concordats are heavily weighted towards London's interests—I presume that he means the UK Government's interests. Will he say whether the SNP believes that there are instances where London's interests would coincide with Scotland's, and, if so, will he specify those instances?

That was not the question. I asked whether Mr Neil could envisage a situation in which the UK Government's interests—which he described as London's interests—coincided with Scotland's interests.

Will the First Minister give way?

Alex Neil commented that the concordats are defective because they have been drafted in secret in London, and that they are heavily weighted towards London's interest. He has now listened to what the First Minister has said. Will the First Minister confirm that the Scottish Executive and the other partners have been fully involved in the discussions on the concordat?

Like other members, I congratulate Pauline McNeill on her initiative in securing this debate and on her work. I am aware of some of the issues surrounding breast cancer through the lobbying—if we can still use that word—done by Nancy Allison, the past provost of Renfrewshire Council. A member of Nancy's family suffered from breast cancer. Nancy became an advocate of some of the issues involved. She raised funds and took part in awareness-raising. Her experience was first hand—and I knew the family member who  suffered—and she felt the suffering personally. It was harrowing to listen to the ups and downs—the emotional rollercoaster ride—that she and her family went through. No one should have to face that, at least not without full support and attention. I am also aware of other issues, through my experience as a family member. While it was right for Pauline McNeill and others to say that breast cancer is not a class issue, because it affects women of every class—Christine Grahame said that sometimes women from professional backgrounds are as guilty of ignoring the signs and procedures—there is still a class issue that we should not ignore. In poorer communities, women are more likely to suffer the adverse consequences for whatever reason. I am worried that, when women discover a lump, they are sometimes constrained by their circumstances—I saw that at first hand. I do not know what the situation is now—the minister could perhaps bring me up to date—but I know from first-hand experience the worry that a woman experiences when the lump is discovered, and when she has to wait to have the test done. I saw someone who is fundamentally opposed to private medicine not only having to suffer the fear and anxiety caused by discovering the lump, but having to put herself through the torture of saying, "Should I go to private medicine in order to get the test done? I cannot wait the time that it takes for the test to be done." No woman should have to wait that length of time. Every woman, after a lump is discovered, should have the right to immediate access to tests, whether they have the financial wherewithal to have that done or not. Therefore, there is still a class issue: some women in impoverished circumstances do not have the immediate access that other women who can afford it have. By all means, we could have an awareness programme and start to examine some of the broader issues, but, for God's sake, we must not let any woman go through one day of anxiety more than she has to.

Given that the people of Scotland rejected independence at the election and are therefore committed to the need for a link with Westminster through the Scotland Office, can the member explain how much it would cost to provide the massive network of embassies that his party advocated? Can he tell us how much it would cost to divorce Scotland from the rest of the United Kingdom?

Will the minister confirm that there will be no changes to the expenditure plans as a result of any decision that is made on European funding?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will back the campaign organised by the Paisley Daily Express , "It pays to be in Paisley". (S1O-408)

While the minister acknowledges the contribution made by the Paisley Daily Express  campaign in promoting Paisley and its economy, does he agree that traffic access to Paisley is critical for the survival of its economy? If so, does he agree that urgent action is necessary to tackle traffic congestion on the M8? Otherwise, not only Paisley's economy will be prejudiced—so will the future of Glasgow airport.

rose—

Will Ms Sturgeon tell us whether the SNP recommends paying in full the demand from the teachers' unions for an 8 per cent pay rise this year? Is the SNP prepared to support collective bargaining between employers and employees, or does Ms Sturgeon believe that the Scottish Parliament should interfere in that process?

I have worked in the private, public and voluntary sectors and that experience has shown me that the voluntary sector—which has also been described  as the third sector or the social economy—is innovative, imaginative, dynamic and flexible. The voluntary sector is also democratic and accountable in a way that many organisations in other sectors are not. As well as sometimes being a weakness, that is also one of its underlying strengths, because it brings the sector close to the community and to the people who rely on its services. It is significant that, in this debate, many speakers have taken the time to praise the efforts of the countless volunteers throughout Scotland who make such a significant contribution to the quality of life not just of communities but, as important, of individuals. Without those volunteers many people's lives would be severely blighted. It is important that we begin to talk about the social economy, because the sector is no longer just about volunteering. It is tremendously dynamic and has made a huge economic contribution in countless communities. For example, credit unions—I am a member of one—have made a significant economic contribution. Housing associations have also made a difference in many communities—we can see the effect that they have had on people's quality of life. Many housing associations have developed beyond being simply housing providers and now provide social care and employment opportunities. I would argue that housing associations have the potential to make a greater contribution to Scottish society than we are asking them to make. I hope that the Executive will look into that closely. If we are talking about added responsibility, we must also begin to talk about greater accountability. When the social economy and the voluntary sector are asked to take on greater responsibilities and receive more funding, they will have to be accountable, just as local authorities must be accountable. I hope that the Scottish Executive will examine ways of addressing that, not punitively, but positively.

That question would be more appropriately addressed to the Executive. I cannot speak on behalf of the Executive. I was making the point that the issue of accountability must be seen in a positive light. Accountability will strengthen the role of the voluntary sector and enable it to perform its duties with greater security. I have a warning for those colleagues who raised issues to do with the funding of certain  organisations. We talk about involving the voluntary sector and the social economy in policy making. By all means let us examine how we can do that, but we must remember that we cannot say that this Parliament should not interfere with the rights of local authorities while telling those local authorities how they should engage with voluntary organisations in their areas. Rather than be entirely prescriptive, we should be involved in providing a strategic framework within which local authorities can operate. Similarly, we cannot come to this Parliament with tales of problems in individual organisations that are funded by local authorities and at the same time say that this Parliament should not interfere with the rights of local authorities—we cannot have it both ways. I have had experience of a range of excellent organisations in my area, such as Renfrewshire Association for Mental Health, One Plus, Unity Enterprise Ltd and various housing associations. Cathy Jamieson is right to raise the issue of Scottish Criminal Record Office checks and vetting. We cannot expect people to perform checks and then ask them to fund those checks. We must do something about that. I want to know whether the Scottish Executive, through the Minister for Finance, will consider some of the difficulties associated with European funding. We will threaten many organisations if we do not sort that out. Finally, will the minister consider the gaps in funding that may arise between current programmes and subsequent programmes? If we do not deal with that problem, many voluntary organisations will go to the wall.

Will the minister ensure that he gives the best wishes of this Parliament to Senator George Mitchell, Mo Mowlam and the members of the Northern Ireland Assembly, who are trying to make progress in a difficult situation? When he transmits our best wishes to them, will he ensure that they know that we—not just the Scottish Executive, but the Scottish Parliament—are keen to play our part in the council of the isles and that we look forward to  a close working relationship with them in future years?

I wish to endorse the minister's hope that there will be a settlement this year, to avoid any disruption to our children's education. Does the minister agree that  any settlement under the present system is likely to leave teachers in Scotland worse off than their counterparts elsewhere, and that some method is needed to ensure that the worth of Scottish teachers in our society is properly recognised? Will the minister, in his deliberations on the negotiating committee's eventual recommendations, consider a future for collective bargaining—albeit, as he has said, without a statutory basis—that is available to workers in the public sector?

Far from what Nicola Sturgeon says is a lack of aspirational Government, what we are witnessing today is a lack of inspirational opposition. She neglected to answer, or deliberately avoided, the question put by the First Minister: how will she pay for all the things that she wants to be done? If we had an inspirational Opposition that was genuinely concerned about trying to improve the lot of people in this country, perhaps we would have had something other than the facile amendment lodged in the name of Mr Salmond. What does the Opposition intend to do about poverty? We have heard a lot, but there is no substance. What does it intend to do about lack of opportunity? Absolutely no substance has been forthcoming. What does it intend to do about unemployment? No substance. What does it intend to do to raise ambition? Again, no substance. If the Opposition's idea of raising ambition is anything like the ambition shown in that amendment, we will wait a long time before anything comes from the Opposition that improves  the quality of life of people in Scotland. I would have more faith and confidence in, and more respect for, an Opposition that tried to—

I will return to some of the issues dealing with rural areas, but once again the Conservatives are asking questions of back benchers that are better addressed to those members of the Executive who are dealing with the issues. However, I will respond to some of the comments about rural areas. The Opposition is not showing any concern for raising the standard of living in Scotland: it is attempting to score cheap points. Certain aspects of this document could be questioned. Perhaps some things need to be addressed in a different way. I welcome the opportunity that this document provides to ask about the number of students who are going into higher education, and to ask whether modern apprenticeships may, for some people, provide a better route to improving their life chances than a meaningless university course. We must have debates on the best way to improve the lifestyle, ambition and education of our young people. I would like to have a debate on nursery provision for three-year-olds. Is it always best to provide that care in the current kind of facilities, such as nursery schools and nursery centres, or are there other flexible ways of supporting families in Scotland? The great thing about this document is that, for the first time, the targets and ambitions on which we will deliver are set out. We will provide facilities for three-year-olds, and we will provide facilities for the 16 and 17-year-olds who have been denied them. We need to articulate the needs of rural communities, but when I hear rural issues being peddled in this chamber by people who show no concern at times for the poverty and deprivation in many of our urban centres, I am disturbed, and I begin to wonder what their agenda is. Is it about an inclusive Scotland, working together, and examining every area in Scotland? For the first time in Scotland, this document begins to show some way forward for communities like those that I represent, for example, Johnstone, Glenburn and Foxbar. There, young people have been denied opportunities for many years, and people have been forced to live in intolerable conditions. Whether it is with regard to health, education, public transport or a whole range of matters, this document starts to address the  specific things that need to be done. I welcome the opportunity to hold the Executive to account over its targets and progress in the coming years. I will hold it to account so that people like me can intervene in the debate to ensure that the measures in this document have an impact on the communities that we represent. If the Opposition has any faith in the people of Scotland and any confidence in this Parliament, it should stop doing the people a disservice by being a cheap Opposition that lacks ambition, inspiration and detail.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I participated in the vote yesterday on the motion on public health, but my vote was not recorded.

On a point of order, Mr Presiding Officer.

Is it that only machines in a certain part of the chamber are not working? There has been an imbalance of party in the speakers who were called this morning and yesterday.

Will Mary Scanlon give way?

I would like to correct some of the inaccuracies in Mary Scanlon's statement.

I would like to see the evidence for Mary Scanlon's statement that I am calling for a ban on public smoking. I have made no such call, and I am unaware that there has been one. The proposals that I will introduce will not be on that basis. Can Mary Scanlon provide clarification?

I do not have a question.

A contribution?

No.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will make a statement on how it intends to improve the standard of early-years provision in Scotland. (S1O-110)

As well as providing resources for the training of staff in the early-years sector, will the minister consider some of the models of provision that are currently available, such as the excellent Foxlea centre in my constituency, which was inspected recently? Those centres are flexible models of provision that are open much longer than traditional nurseries and in which nursery nurses play a fundamental and responsible role. Will he encourage that type of provision?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it believes that the Scottish representative office will open in Brussels. (S1O-32)

Will the Scottish representative office advance Scotland's case in Europe? The minister may know that there has been much excitement among many European institutions at the formation of this Parliament, and that a very strong Scottish partnership is already in evidence in Brussels. Scotland Europa represents the private, local government, voluntary, academic and other sectors. Will the Scottish Representative Office be available to support that strong, effective partnership?

Mr Gibson mentioned sleaze in Labour councils. Will he comment on reported sleaze among SNP councillors in recent years?

If you wish there to be a tit-for-tat exchange across the chamber, Deputy Presiding Officer, I am more than happy to engage in one.

A number of examples of sleaze have been reported up and down the country in councils that are controlled by the SNP. I recall that one of the few councillors to have been jailed for misdemeanours in recent years was an SNP councillor.

We were told when this new Parliament was created that it would be an opportunity to do things differently, and that it would be a forum for positive debate to represent civic Scotland in a change for the better. However, in a sense, at the first test we have failed, because the first major debate of this Parliament is not about policies that will improve the lot of ordinary people in Scotland; it is an attack on a number of individuals in this Parliament and on the roles which they are hoping to play. We should be debating social inclusion and the damage that has been done in Scotland during 18 years of Tory neglect. Those are the things that matter to the people of Scotland. We have an opportunity in this Parliament to rebuild our civic society.

When I look at the agreement, I see an opportunity for the Labour party not only to fulfil its manifesto commitments, but to take account of some of the positive things that people from other parties in this Parliament bring to the debate. Yes, we have been elected on a strong manifesto, but we have also been elected on a commitment to listen to other people in this Parliament and to listen to people throughout  Scotland. That is how we should proceed.  We should be examining ways in which to involve those who have been socially excluded-those who have been neglected and do not have the opportunity to play their full part in our society. We were told by our opponents that they would make this Parliament work, but all we get is a mean-spirited attack on, for example, Henry McLeish, a man who spent countless hours helping to drive through the legislation that created this Parliament, which is attempting to represent civic Scotland. We do not get a debate on the positive virtues of this Parliament, but an attack on Henry McLeish and other individuals. Clearly, there are those who would rather be negative, destructive and spiteful.

We should be looking to debate a more positive way forward in a new Parliament. [Interruption.]

For too long we have neglected many in our society who have not had the opportunity to fulfil their true potential. This debate should be about giving those people that opportunity, creating a new Scotland, creating new debate and creating new policies.

Mr Swinney says that the people of Scotland voted overwhelmingly for the abolition of tuition fees and that that was what they were voting for when they voted for the SNP. Will he now accept that, in voting for the SNP, people were voting only for the abolition of tuition fees and not for independence?