3. To ask the Scottish Government what estimate it has made of how much it would cost an independent Scotland to establish overseas representation. (S4O-02879)

As the cabinet secretary’s answer made clear, any estimate that she has—and she did not appear to have one—assumes an actual share of overseas assets and properties, not co-location. As she admitted in her answer to Michael McMahon, the question of whether that would be the case is neither clear nor settled. The white paper says that the Scottish Government intends that Scotland will have an overseas network in place from day 1. Will the cabinet secretary acknowledge that that is highly unlikely if there is a legal dispute over the ownership of overseas property? What is her plan B for those living and working overseas who depend on consular assistance?

When we last debated the budget, the cabinet secretary, in an exchange with Patrick Harvie, said that “a judgment has to be made as to whether the elements of the budget can be sufficiently considered by individual members and parties to be in the correct balance and therefore worthy of support, despite the fact that not all provisions within the budget may be to their liking.”—[Official Report, 22 January 2014; c 26905.] It is certainly the case that there are many provisions in this budget that are not to our liking. For a start, it fails to properly fund the Government’s council tax freeze, meaning that, yet again, the freeze will be paid for through increased charges and reduced services for those who need them most and through the loss of thousands of local government jobs. The budget does not reinstate the disproportionate cuts in the further education budget. The 3,500 college places that were announced yesterday, however welcome, hardly compensate for the 140,000 fewer college students in our colleges today. The budget, wrongly in our view, prioritises the extension of free school meals to better-off—not well-off, but better-off—families over accelerating the provision of childcare to half of Scotland’s two-year-olds. Then there is the £1 billion-worth of anti-poverty programmes that have disappeared since 2007. It is good, then, that the cabinet secretary is not tempted by the rather juvenile argument that to support a budget is to support its every measure and that to reject it is to reject everything in it. In that spirit, we have seen the budget this year as an opportunity to achieve something that both we and the SNP and, I think, others such as Green colleagues believe to be desirable, and that is simply an end to the impact of the bedroom tax on council and housing association tenants in Scotland. That would be the effect of the Parliament agreeing to the amendment in my name today. It is worth reflecting on how far we have already come. In September, the draft budget contained no money to alleviate the bedroom tax. The cabinet secretary was adamant that it was a UK Government measure, which it is, and he would not let it off the hook. Of course, it was the 80,000 affected households that were left on the hook of the bedroom tax; in fairness, by October, the Scottish Government had relented and found £20 million in the budget, although that was still short of what is required. In December, the cabinet secretary argued that social security legislation meant that the sum could not be further increased. When I argued otherwise, I recall the Deputy First Minister heckling me from a sedentary position with the cry, “Where is the money coming from?” The fact is that I always had confidence—more than his Cabinet colleague, it would seem—that Mr Swinney could find the funds to complete the total £50 million package that is required to match the cost of the bedroom tax to Scottish tenants. This week, the same Deputy First Minister popped up in the Daily Record to say that the money was there after all, as Mr Swinney confirmed today, but that the DWP cap must be lifted. We have always said that there are other legal and legitimate ways to use the money to help the victims of the bedroom tax, so last week we presented to the cabinet secretary a proposal for an additional tenant assistance scheme with two elements, one for local authorities and one for housing associations. The proof that it can work is that it already does, in Renfrewshire Council and East Lothian Housing Association. Both have been checked, either by Audit Scotland or by lawyers, and both, in essence, do the same thing—they write off small amounts of arrears rather than paying tenants, so they do not fall foul of benefits legislation.

It is clear that it is always better to avoid debt, but the important thing here is that, come what may, we do the thing that we want to do. The cabinet secretary considered the scheme that was presented to him with understandable caution but with a commendably open mind, and our amendment reflects the discussions that we have had. With thanks to Renfrewshire Council and East Lothian Housing Association for their help, we are almost there. The full £50 million funding is in place, and if the DWP restriction remains, a workable alternative exists. Our amendment endorses that position. Like Mr Swinney, I want the abolition of the policy rather than the mitigation of its effects. I want the tax to be abolished by a Labour Government next year. I understand that Mr Swinney and his colleagues want it to be abolished in 2016, in an independent Scotland. I think that my way is better, because it will lift the yoke from tenants in London, Manchester, Birmingham and Newcastle, as well as those in Scotland. However, to be honest, those who are affected are not too worried about who abolishes the tax. We can decide today that no household in Scotland need pay the bedroom tax and that none should face eviction solely because of it, and we should make that decision. To achieve that, we must—in the words of the prophet—act justly, love kindness and walk humbly, and we must support the amendment. We should act justly because most victims of the bedroom tax cannot choose to move to a smaller house, as no such houses are available to them. We would act justly because, with full funding, a choice will not need to be made about who to help and who not to help. We would act justly because the protection from eviction will extend to all tenants and not just tenants of councils that have no-evictions policies. As for kindness, to support the amendment is to reject explicitly the cruelty of an all-too-common rhetoric that suggests that those who are affected by welfare reforms are feckless benefit scroungers who live in palatial accommodation. The truth is that most families who are affected by the bedroom tax are working, that 80 per cent have a family member with a disability and that the spare rooms are needed for carers, medical equipment or children who are spending time with an estranged parent. I acknowledge that we and the Government will have to walk humbly. The Government will have to set aside the constitutional argument and accept that getting tenants off the hook is more important than leaving Whitehall on it, while we must acknowledge that, in this at least, the Government has not left Scotland on pause but acted and done the right thing. Even greater humility will be required if the Tories or Liberal Democrats are to support our amendment, given that it is needed only because of the wrong-headed policy of their Westminster colleagues, but I hope that they will consider it. Yesterday was a good day for the Parliament. In passing the equal marriage bill, we rose to the singular historic moment and we were the Parliament that we were meant to be—we were shaping a more modern and inclusive Scotland. Today, we can rise above party differences again and do the right thing again—this time, in response not to the historic moment but to the daily, relentless and unfair difficulties and challenges of life that far too many of our fellow citizens face. We can be the Parliament that we were set up to be again today, by exercising our power to protect our people. To paraphrase Donald Dewar, who is the nearest thing that this place has to a prophet—although I can hear him snorting with derision at the description—we can carry ourselves well again today. When the budget was introduced, I called it a “don’t rock the boat, do nothing and get through the referendum” budget. If we agree to my amendment, we will have turned it into a “sink the bedroom tax boat to the bottom of the sea” budget. That is something that is worth doing. I move amendment S4M-08914.1, to insert at end: “but, in so doing, considers that funds be allocated in the total amount needed to fully mitigate the so-called bedroom tax in Scotland through discretionary housing payments and, if necessary, other schemes administered by local authorities and housing associations to ensure that no tenant need face eviction as a result of the bedroom tax.”

In part I agree with Mr Brown. For example, the Deputy First Minister could have written to the DWP much earlier to ask for the cap to be lifted. The point is that she has done that now and an alternative scheme is being agreed between Labour and the SNP. Given that we have reached that stage, should not Mr Brown simply support the amendment and let us progress?

What action has Mr Fraser taken with Perth and Kinross Council to ensure that it is doing everything in its power to ensure that everyone who needs and is entitled to DHP support receives it?

The estimated 1.9GW of potential in the Pentland Firth is impressive enough, although the technological challenges remain significant. However, in 2008, the First Minister confidently told the world of the Pentland Firth: “The sort of power that potentially could come from this area is not some hundreds of megawatts, it’s not just like one conventional power station, it’s 20 gigawatts and more than that, that’s like 20 conventional power stations.” When will the First Minister realise that Scotland’s renewables potential will in the end be delivered by serious science and not by hysterical hyperbole?

Our criticism of the budget that is before us, ever since it was published in draft, has been consistently less about what can be seen in it and more about what cannot. Our criticism is simply that, when the budget is compared with the Government’s stated objectives—many of which are very creditable and many of which are inarguable—at best, no connection can be found between them and, at worst, budget decisions seem to reflect different priorities altogether. There is no discernible long-term plan or strategy in the budget to create jobs and growth, reduce inequality, eradicate poverty, address climate change, or move definitively to preventative spending. That was the theme of almost every committee report on the budget this year, and it was reiterated by almost every expert witness whom those committees heard. The Finance Committee report summed it up bluntly. It said that there is “no link between the Government’s spending plans ... and the intended impact”. The Health and Sport Committee, the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, and the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee all echoed that. When we last debated the budget, just before Christmas, Mr Swinney suggested that when indicators move in the right direction, that in and of itself is the proof that he has a plan and it is working. To a degree, he did that again today with regard to the employment figures, which is not surprising following today’s welcome improvement in the unemployment and employment figures. However, I presume that, when we see more families resorting to food banks, falling into fuel poverty or rent arrears, more in homeless accommodation, increasing numbers of our young people not in employment, education or training, a 37 per cent drop in college admissions, or our carbon emission indicators going in the wrong direction, that means that he has no plan or that the plan is not working. That is not a new feature of this year’s budget; rather, it is a pattern over time. Take the challenge of eradicating poverty. What could be more important or desirable? In 2007, Mr Swinney inherited a budget in which £1.5 billion-worth of anti-poverty spending could be readily identified; indeed, he badged £160 million of it as the fairer Scotland fund. Seven years on, £1 billion of that, including the fairer Scotland fund, has disappeared. The budget fails to rise to the challenges that Scotland faces. It is a steady-as-she-goes budget that changes little and risks less to get the Government past its only real objective: the referendum in September. Indeed, when the draft budget did change with a consequential increase from the autumn statement, the Government could have brought forward much more of its own childcare plan and started it now to help many families—especially women—back into work right now, but it chose instead to continue with the argument that it first needs independence to deliver that.

We certainly argued that, given the choice between two good things—the free school meals and the increase in childcare—we would have preferred to prioritise childcare. However, there is one improvement to the budget that we have consistently advocated since its introduction, which is to fully mitigate the impact of the bedroom tax, thus to all intents and purposes abolishing it in Scotland. We should not kid ourselves, because that tax is not the biggest coalition welfare cut. However, it is big enough, with 80,000 households affected, and it is one of the most iniquitous, because it cannot work. Even if tenants could move to smaller houses, there are none for them to go to. The alternative that they face is debt and possibly losing their home. The tax is iniquitous because most households affected include someone living with a disability. The tax is iniquitous because it attacks those who need space for the equipment that they need to live, carers who need the respite of a spare room and divorcees trying to be, usually, a father to their children.

Let me come to agreement and disagreement across the chamber on that. Protecting tenants would be a start, which is why Jackie Baillie has a bill before the Parliament to stop them being evicted. However, it would be so much better to find the resource so that they can avoid arrears in the first place. The bedroom tax does wider damage, too.

No, I am sorry. Local authorities have seen rent arrears soar, which means cuts elsewhere in already stretched services. The consequences for housing associations are worse, because soaring arrears compromise their income steam and undermine their ability to borrow, and they cannot build new houses. Indeed, the Scottish Government’s housing budget—the welcome increase from the massive cuts in this budget—will mean little if housing associations cannot borrow the balance of funding that they need to use the housing grant to build. It is no wonder that housing associations asked this morning that the Scottish Government amend its budget to fully mitigate the impact of the bedroom tax. They calculate that that needs around £25 million more per year. We have consistently suggested a figure of £50 million a year, based on research that was commissioned by the Welfare Reform Committee. We acknowledge that the cabinet secretary has found £20 million.

No, I am sorry. I need to get on to the point that Mr Swinney raised. I will get to it. However, at least half of the households affected are getting no help and arrears are rising. The figure of £30 million is not a trivial amount, but it is a small fraction of 1 per cent of the Scottish Government’s budget. It is well within the margins of end-year flexibility, even in Mr Swinney’s tightly managed budget.

I will come to that. We believe that Mr Swinney could do more. In December and again today Mr Swinney argued that he has gone as far as he can under UK legislation to provide for payments to tenants, but we believe that he could do more to mitigate the impact of the bedroom tax, perhaps through his responsibilities to prevent homelessness and to support housing associations and perhaps through local authorities’ power of general wellbeing. On this matter we believe that where there is a will, we can find a way—and we should.

No, I am sorry. We even have the Under-Secretary of State for Scotland assuring us publicly that the Scottish Government can fully mitigate the impact of the bedroom tax if it wishes—[Interruption.]

We should do that, because the truth is that the Labour benches and the Government benches agree on the matter. We agree that the bedroom tax is iniquitous. Albeit for different reasons, we even agree that it is temporary. We expect to see the bedroom tax abolished next year by a Labour Government; the Scottish National Party says that it will abolish it in an independent Scotland in 2016. Either way, its days are numbered, but those days will be dark for the tenants affected by the tax. Mr Swinney was courteous enough to invite us to meet him to discuss the budget and we were clear that we want to see that change. He agreed to work with us to find a legal way to do it, and those meetings have started. I believe that they have been constructive and I hope that he does, too. I want them to bear fruit. We can set our differences aside and do this thing on which we agree. On that basis, we are willing to support the budget bill this evening, in spite of the weaknesses that we believe it embodies, so that it can come back at stage 3 enhanced by measures and funds that in effect consign the bedroom tax to history in Scotland right here and right now.

Will the member give way?

Malcolm Chisholm was making a perfectly valid point in response to fatuous points that were made about the motion that we voted against two weeks ago, which was a motion supporting the equally fatuous argument that childcare can be improved only with independence. We do not support that.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

The improvements in the employment and economic positions and the signs of economic recovery outlined by the cabinet secretary are very welcome. He wisely described them as “relatively positive”, because to understand the fragility of the economic position we have to look behind the headline figures, welcome as they might be, at the reality of the recovery for many Scots and their families. The truth is that almost 75,000 more Scots are unemployed than when the cabinet secretary took office. There is a long way to go yet. It is true, too, that too many of the jobs that have been created are insecure, temporary, part-time, zero-hours contracts or simply poorly paid. There are around 250,000 underemployed workers in Scotland, which is about 10 per cent of the workforce, which is an increase of 76,000 since 2008. Those are Scots who are in work but without enough work or enough of a wage to meet their families’ needs, far less their aspirations. Meanwhile, recent analysis has shown that the proportion of the Scottish workforce earning less than the living wage has steadily increased since 2000; 820,000 Scots are stuck in low pay. Across the piece, the workforce has seen wages fall in real terms in every single month since 2010, with the exception of one. When we welcome the signs of recovery, therefore, many Scots will be left puzzled because, in insecure, underpaid jobs, with wages buying less every month, it hardly feels like a recovery to them. We know that an economy built on insecure, low-paid, low-skilled jobs is not a sustainable 21st century economy. The Government’s motion implies that it understands that but it also implies—and the cabinet secretary reiterated this—that as a devolved Government it can do little to address that. That is not true. The cabinet secretary and I agree that Government spending is a key lever to stimulate the economy. I certainly agree with him when he says that the UK Government has failed to use those levers as it should have done. However, Government spending in Scotland is still billions of pounds a year. There is spending on capital projects, but there are also contracts for goods and services and support for economic development. The Government could do much more to ensure that that spending underpins high-quality, properly paid employment. All Government contracts should support jobs that pay the living wage, insist on the creation of local employment opportunities, create training and apprenticeship places and avoid exploitative zero-hours contracts.

They did nothing of the kind. It is an interesting point, though, because our position has consistently been that the small business bonus is a missed opportunity. It could have been used to incentivise exactly those issues of employment, training and investment in energy efficiency. It is a missed opportunity by a Government that misses so many opportunities.

No, I am sorry. Let me make progress. [Interruption.]

It is not enough for the Government itself to pay the living wage and avoid zero-hours contracts. It cannot be right that employers working on a contract such as the Borders railway, which is fully funded by the Scottish taxpayer, use zero-hours contracts, or that universities—recipients of millions of pounds of Government funding—are among the worst offenders when it comes to those exploitative terms of employment. On the other side of the employment equation, the Scottish Government is, as the cabinet secretary said, responsible for skills and training. There, too, we need to look behind the headlines. We have an apprenticeship programme of 25,000 places, all work based, which is good, but is the balance right? More than half of those are short term level 2 places. Meanwhile, industries such as engineering, construction and oil and gas continually complain that they do not have enough apprenticeship places. Behind the top-line number, we could and should be rebalancing the programme to match skills to jobs in those sectors with the greatest potential to grow our economy. The Government motion, however, speaks to none of that. Rather, it rehearses the Scottish Government’s single transferable excuse, which is that it cannot do anything until we are independent. It even hints at the argument that the cabinet secretary made, which was that, somehow, there is no real purpose in investing in the major increases in childcare that will help women back to work, because their tax pounds will not come to us. Presumably, that is why the Government does not think that it is worth investing in our colleges either, because young people will only go out and get jobs and send their taxes down to the Treasury in London.

No, and nobody has said that they should. [Interruption.]

From a sedentary position, someone asks where the money is coming from. I am looking at the analysis of the Barnett consequentials. That was the sum of money that we were discussing yesterday, and it is clear to me that, if the Government had chosen not to prioritise free school meals and had instead prioritised its own childcare policy, that would have been achievable.

No. [Interruption.]

The white paper argues that, with independence, the economy will inevitably flourish and, in fairness, it sets out the platform for that boom. It will build on a currency union with the UK; an open border and free movement of people and goods with the rest of the UK; a single UK-wide energy market, with consumers across the UK subsidising Scottish renewable energy; UK-wide research funding, from which we can win more than our fair share; and a single financial services sector, so that Scottish banks can access a home market of 60 million consumers, and a single central bank that will bail them out if needed. We are also told that the rest of the UK will even break the habit of all history and provide us with defence contracts for planes and ships. That is a great platform on which to build economic growth, fairness and prosperity, and it is the one that we have today in the United Kingdom and on which we have built prosperity under devolution, as the cabinet secretary outlined.

No, I need to carry on. On Monday, the Deputy First Minister demanded to know what would happen after a no vote. Here is what will happen. We will keep the pound, the UK financial services sector, the energy market, the Bank of England, open borders across the UK and our defence contracts, including shipbuilding on the Clyde.

No. We will keep all those things that the white paper says are central to our economic prospects. It is a yes vote that would leave us negotiating to get back all those things that nobody except the independence campaign wanted us to give up in the first place. As an argument, the Government’s position is pretty surreal, but the threat to our economy is genuine—at least, that is what economists say. Late last year, the Financial Times asked 31 economists what the impact of independence would be on the Scottish economy. Twenty-seven said that it would damage our economy. That is what I saw reported over Christmas but, since then, I have read what they actually said. It is worth reading. I thought that I was dubious about the benefits of independence, but look at what those economic experts say: “inevitable uncertainty”; “huge uncertainty”; “massive uncertainty”; “stagnation”; “damaging”; “disastrous”; “unmitigated disaster”; “a catastrophe”. That is not my assessment; it is the assessment of leading economists with no axe to grind. What does the white paper propose that an SNP Government would do? What is the big economic decision that it would take to change that? It would present big business with a corporation tax cut and leave the people of Scotland to find another £400 million a year in cuts or increased taxes. As an argument for economic growth, that is absurd. As an argument for fairness, it is utterly ridiculous. As a reason for failure to take the actions that we need right now on the living wage, skills, job creation, childcare and better procurement, it is only an excuse and a poor one at that. I move amendment S4M-08714.3, to leave out from “welcomes” to end and insert: “believes that the Scottish Government must act now to secure what is a fragile economic recovery and ensure a secure, sustainable future in which all can share fairly; notes the importance that the Scottish Government’s Fiscal Commission Working Group and Scotland’s Future: Your Guide to an Independent Scotland place on retaining key elements of the social and economic union, including sterling and a single central bank, as well as the ‘significant and complex linkages between households, businesses and financial services operating across the UK’, and recognises that the greatest economic potential for Scotland and its people lies with a strong, devolved parliament using every power at its disposal, including new tax and borrowing powers and maximising the opportunity of shared risk and reward in the United Kingdom.”

8. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide support for the proposed centre for innovation that is to be based in Edinburgh and named after the Nobel laureate, Professor Peter Higgs. (S4O-02744)

Those are welcome announcements in recognition of Professor Higgs’s marvellous achievement, but they are leveraged, of course, by the funding of £11 million through the Science and Technology Facilities Council, which allows for the centre for innovation to be set up. Will the cabinet secretary not agree with me that it is that combination of devolved and reserved funding and effort that makes us strongest—something that it would be foolish to jeopardise by removing Scotland from the United Kingdom? [Applause.]

The Finance Committee is to be congratulated on the approach that it has taken to the budget this year. Mr Gibson took us through that extremely eloquently at the start. Not only did the committee, as it has sometimes only done, scrutinise what is up and what is down in the budget, but it took a longer-term, more strategic look at how the budget underpins the Government’s objectives. After all, it is now six years ago that the Scottish Government unveiled its purpose— “a more successful country, with opportunities for all of Scotland to flourish, through increasing sustainable economic growth”— along with five objectives, 16 national outcomes and no fewer than 50 national indicators, all woven together into a purpose framework and tracked in a national performance framework. In the course of his evidence, the cabinet secretary told the committee, “I am not sure that it is vital that it is understood by members of the public”,—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 4 November 2013; c 3242.] which may be just as well, but made much—fairly—of the complements that many witnesses paid to the national performance framework as an approach. However, he cannot then simply ignore the fact that, one after another, those expert witnesses told the committee members of their concern that they could find no connection between the Government’s purpose and its spending decisions. Mr Gibson quoted his committee’s adviser, who said: “There is … no link between the Government’s spending plans … and the intended impact”. However, not only the Finance Committee found that. The Health and Sport Committee also reported on the “lack of clear links … between the information in the Draft Budget and the indicators”, and the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee concluded: “There is no attempt to link spend to specific Targets or Indicators.” The fact that no committee could find any link between the budget and what it is supposed to be for cannot simply be dismissed. Whether it was making Scotland wealthier, fairer, healthier or greener, our committees could see no plan, strategy or targeting of resources. Mr Swinney says that we should not worry about that because we should test against outcomes, so let us do that. Unemployment figures may be improving, but there are still 75,000 more Scots on the dole than when the Scottish National Party came to power. More and more Scots who are in work earn less than the living wage, more are in part-time work and more are on zero-hours contracts. Those are not outcomes with which we can be satisfied. Let us look at the health service. The budget claims to protect the health service—the First Minister made much of that earlier today—but a recent survey showed us that less than one third of NHS staff think that we have enough doctors and nurses, and marginally over half think that the NHS puts patients first. That is in a week when what must be one of the most damning reports into any hospital that the Parliament has ever seen was published. Those are not outcomes with which we can be satisfied. When the cabinet secretary published his budget, he made much of an increase in the housing line, but the truth is that he is simply restoring cuts that, at one point, cut the housing budget in half. Every year, he tells us that he intends to build his way out of recession but, last year, fewer houses were built than at any time since 1946, 20 per cent fewer social rented houses were completed than in the year before and waiting lists spiralled. As for the future lifeblood of the country, Mr Gibson is right that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee was concerned to find than the number of 16 to 19-year-olds not in employment, education or training is not reducing. In fact, it increased last year. As for creating a fairer Scotland, the SNP inherited £1.5 billion of anti-poverty programmes and £1 billion of those programmes has disappeared. Is it any wonder that we still have 200,000 children living in poverty? The connection between those decisions and the outcomes does not seem too complex to me. The Government’s spin doctors rather let the cat out of the bag when the budget was published, because they briefed that it was a budget for independence. Of course, that is the Government’s actual and only objective. It is a budget to get through the referendum, so steady as she goes. Difficult decisions are dodged, responsibility is refused and no horses are frightened. That is not good enough. If the cabinet secretary wants us to believe that the budget is about more than that, he should start by making two changes. First, he should use the consequentials from the autumn statement to extend 600 hours of nursery provision to 50 per cent of two-year-olds right now. Secondly, he should identify the money and the means to mitigate the whole impact of the bedroom tax; £20 million is less than half of what is needed.

I am sorry, but I am in my final minute. I believe that such a spending decision would have the clear outcome of immediately reducing the suffering that is faced by tens of thousands of Scottish households. If the Scottish Government fails to act, that implies that it would rather keep issues such as childcare and the bedroom tax as referendum issues in order to leave Westminster on the hook, and that is not good enough.

The Government should accept the obligation to use the powers that it has now, take the decisions that are necessary and inject some purpose into the budget, which it seems to singularly lack.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The argument that the consequentials cannot be used for childcare because they are available for only two years is, frankly, ludicrous. We are considering a budget that is for only one year, and even I am not cynical enough to think that Mr Swinney is not going to fund schools or hospitals after next year because he has given us a budget for only one year. All Governments budget for one, two or, at most, three years. It is a ridiculous point.

Will Linda Fabiani give way?

Mr Swinney is right in that I said that, if he wants to improve his budget, there are two things that he could do for a start. He will, however, acknowledge that I also said that, over time, our view was that the approach to many of the Government’s own stated key priorities had been flawed and without plan or strategy—and we will always criticise that. In other words, the cabinet secretary is quite clear that it is not always about spending; sometimes it is about doing things better in trying to deliver outcomes.

I support Mr McMahon’s amendment 1. Gavin Brown was right to use the word “principle”. The bill is based on the principle that polluters should pay, and behind the amendment lies the principle that the landfill communities fund should be used to benefit communities that directly suffer the impact of landfill sites. Those communities should benefit directly from the compensation or mitigation that the fund provides. In earlier debates, we established that the 10-mile limit is too limiting. In my constituency—East Lothian—there is a landfill site at Dunbar. The community there suffers the most direct effects of the site, but it is true that towns and villages throughout the county suffer a concentration of lorry traffic, for example, that brings waste to the site. It therefore makes sense that they, too, should be able to benefit from the fund. Many extremely worthwhile and important projects in my local communities have received funding in the past as a result of landfill tax credits. I simply want to ensure that that is protected, particularly as resources reduce. The fund should therefore not be opened up to projects that might be worth while and desirable but which are really national rather than local and are far from the direct impact of any landfill site. Such a principle should be in the bill. I support amendment 1.

Will the member take an intervention?

Surely that is exactly the point on which the assurances that have been given cause concern. The argument that landfill has an impact on the environment and that a project anywhere in Scotland that addresses the environment would therefore legitimately benefit from the fund is exactly what the amendment seeks to avoid.

In the stage 1 debate, I referred to the landfill tax as a new tax. In his closing speech in that debate, the cabinet secretary corrected me—it is, of course, not a new tax, although it is new to us. We should acknowledge that the landfill tax is not only a tax that already exists but one that, on the face of it, is that thing that is usually anathema to Labour members, and which is often anathema to Scottish National Party members, too—a Tory tax. It was introduced by John Selwyn Gummer back in 1996, although I fear that it is not the thing for which he will be remembered. Mr Swinney referred to the fact that the landfill tax also bears the distinction of being the first of those taxes or levies that, these days, seem to be something of a bête noire to Mr Gummer’s successors in the Tory party in Westminster—a green tax. It was an early—indeed, the first—response to the realisation that we could not continue using the resources of our planet without thought and polluting it with carbon emissions without a care. Mr Swinney eloquently explained why that imperative should exercise us no less today than it did 20 years ago. Indeed, all the evidence indicates that we have been too slow to respond and that the consequences have been ever quicker to emerge. The most recent Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report was the most urgent and damning yet on how our climate and our planet are changing. We in Holyrood cannot be complacent about our own part in the problem and the obligation to find a solution. For example, we have set ourselves demanding targets for reducing carbon emissions, but we have repeatedly failed to achieve them, and we have not always proven ourselves willing to take the actions that are needed to match our rhetoric.

I think that the minister has more confidence in RPP2 than I do, but let us see what happens as time unfolds. That said, on diversion from landfill and increases in recycling, there has been tangible progress, to which the cabinet secretary referred. To that degree, we can claim that the landfill tax has been a success. At the time of its introduction, 54 million tonnes of municipal waste were sent to landfill per annum UK wide. By 2012, the figure had fallen to 19 million tonnes. Therefore, the tax that we inherit is a successful one, which is why it has support from across the chamber and those of all shades of political view. In legislating to pursue landfill tax as a devolved tax, the most important thing must be to create a framework that ensures that the tax continues that success. After all, by the Scottish Government’s own calculation, landfill still emitted in 2011 the equivalent of 600,000 tonnes of CO2 into our atmosphere. What the devolution of landfill tax does then is to give us the opportunity to consider how it operates and how we might use and change it so that it even more effectively and further reduces waste. It seems common sense that there is a law of diminishing returns here, with the gains made from a serious effort at recycling and reusing being easy progress to secure in the early years, and as time goes on there being a necessity to try harder and be smarter about how we deploy measures such as the landfill tax to get further gains. Therefore, it is a pity that about something as basic as the rate itself and how many rates there might be, we still know very little. The cabinet secretary has said at every stage that he is minded to set a rate that is no lower than the one that he will inherit in April 2015, although he will not confirm that for us until September next year. At stage 1, there was considerable debate around waste tourism and whether differential rates would lead to reduced income as landfill was exported to England or, conversely, whether waste would be imported to landfill in Scotland. I do not think that we ever really got to the bottom of that, with the cabinet secretary expressing a view that it becomes an issue only if there is a differential of £15 per tonne, although committee witnesses suggested that £10 per tonne would provoke such an effect. That issue matters because it implies a rather limited capacity for us to use the new powers to choose our own rates and it seems to me to reflect a rather cautious approach by the cabinet secretary. Perhaps it is for the same reasons that we still do not have an indication of whether the Government favours an escalator in rates. That has been significant in the landfill tax’s success in the past, as there is surely a connection between its effectiveness in reducing waste and the fact that we are heading for a rate 10 times the original one introduced. For the moment, we remain in the dark on whether the Government has any plans to introduce new rates to differentiate further between types of waste or, indeed, move any categories of waste between existing bands. The landfill tax is a fairly blunt instrument and an opportunity seems to have been missed to explore properly whether and how we could sharpen it. However, as regulations follow the legislation, we will no doubt return to those issues because there is a pressing need for action on waste and carbon, and we must do more than simply frame the bill. On the positive side, I am pleased that if and when the changes are made, they will now be subject to the affirmative procedure. I am glad that the cabinet secretary listened to representations to that end. I regret that he did not find a way to meet on the face of the bill Michael McMahon’s concerns about the danger that the landfill communities fund might be diverted from the communities that are most affected by landfill. However, overall, the landfill tax is useful. It will now be appropriately devolved and it is potentially a powerful tool for the Parliament in pursuit of our environmental agenda. We shall certainly give the bill our whole-hearted support at decision time this evening.

This has been a short but interesting debate. It has also been a bit of a Donald Rumsfeld debate because a lot of known unknowns have been discussed. We do not know the rate at which the tax will come in. We do not know whether there will be an escalator or new rate bands. We do not know whether there will be any recategorisation of any type of waste. We do not know what the constraints are under which we will have to work to avoid waste tourism. We also do not know the administrative arrangements for collecting the tax. We know that SEPA will be part of the system and responsible for it, but the cabinet secretary has made it clear that the way in which it does that will be down to revenue Scotland, a body that does not yet formally exist. As Michael McMahon’s amendment was rejected, we do not know how the landfill communities fund will be distributed. The cabinet secretary has also made it clear that we do not how the block grant adjustment will work, although in all fairness that is not something he can decide by himself—I understand that. I was quite taken aback by Mr Mason’s apparent categorisation of the cabinet secretary as boring. I would certainly never—

The degree to which we have to put faith in Mr Swinney is exactly the point to which I am coming. I thought that Mr Mason was rising to apologise to the cabinet secretary, but perhaps he will do that privately. Because of all the things that we do not know, I think that the cabinet secretary has been intriguingly enigmatic about the detail of the bill. I say to Mr Mason that it is true that we will have to take a lot of the cabinet secretary’s reassurances on trust. For example, throughout the bill process, he has insisted that the Scottish Government will be able to levy the tax more efficiently than has previously been the case. That would be extremely welcome, but I am not sure that the cabinet secretary has demonstrated why or how it will be possible, particularly because we do not yet know what the administrative arrangements for raising the tax will be. That is something that we have to take on faith. We also have to take on faith that the cabinet secretary believes in the principle that communities that are most directly affected by landfill sites will be the ones that benefit directly from the tax credits, as they do at the moment. That is important because, as I have said already, the fund is likely to reduce. Communities such as mine in East Lothian have benefited significantly in the past from those tax credits. Although I would be the last not to have faith in the cabinet secretary, he said that he wants to ensure that the communities that suffer get the benefit of the fund and then he said that he also wants to take account of the wider impact on the environment. That seems to be a complete contradiction. It is the former that we need to secure, and Mr McMahon’s amendment would have done that. I still regret that the cabinet secretary did not feel able to support it. In closing, I return to a point that I made at stage 1. A particularly welcome aspect of the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill is that it has its origins in the Calman commission and the Scotland Act 2012 that followed. It is therefore a significant demonstration of the fact that devolution is a flexible and dynamic constitutional arrangement. During stage 1, I pointed out that it was the latest in a long line of changes to devolution, from the devolution of rail infrastructure through to the devolution of the Scottish welfare fund. On that occasion, I could hardly believe it but the cabinet secretary wilfully misrepresented my argument by suggesting that I was arguing that devolution was now complete and could never develop. That was not my point. My point was that the bill demonstrates that devolution is the kind of dynamic and flexible settlement that the people of Scotland want: it allows us to sustain the benefits of shared risk and opportunity by being part of the bigger United Kingdom while making Scottish decisions—both administrative and fiscal, where that is appropriate—that enable us to be most effective, for example in reducing waste and landfill. We will support the bill at decision time. We look forward to working with the Scottish Government as it develops the detail of secondary legislation on guidance and as we debate further how we deploy this new power most effectively for the benefit of Scotland.

Today’s debate is an attempt by the Tories to bask in the glory and success of George Osborne’s autumn statement a week ago, when the chancellor declared that the economy has recovered and that his austerity plans are bearing fruit. It is a pity for the Tories that the rosy glow did not last very long during the week and that the chancellor’s statement was pretty much unravelling before he even sat down. In fact, given the level of pre-statement briefing, some of it was unravelling before he had even stood up in the House of Commons. Mr Swinney says that he always looks for the opportunity to agree across the chamber, and I like to think—although others might not—that I try to do that, too. I cannot quite achieve Mr Swinney’s practised tone of incredulity, which he does so well, but he is right that, over the current Westminster Parliament, the UK Government’s borrowing will be almost £200 billion more than George Osborne had planned. As for growth, it is good that there is some, but the chancellor’s plans in 2010 promised that the economy would grow by 7.7 per cent by now. In fact, it has grown by just 2.5 per cent, which is far less than the economies of the United States or Germany.

Chancellors of all political stripes have been cancelling fuel duty increases for some time now, so it is not something that we find particularly surprising. To give credit where it is due, we must acknowledge that Mr Osborne’s recovery is a record of sorts—it is the slowest economic recovery that the country has seen in 100 years. If a group of people is even more incredulous than Mr Swinney, it is the British public. After three years of damaging austerity and a flatlining economy, working people are on average £1,600 a year worse off than they were when George Osborne came to power. Prices have risen faster than wages in 40 of the past 41 months. It is no wonder that the polls that followed the autumn statement showed that 70 per cent of the public believe that there is no recovery at all and that 51 per cent believe that they are worse off. I say to Mr Brown that perhaps they, too, have failed to read the green book, but they can read their own bank account statements and they know what the effect of the UK Government’s policies has been. Last week’s statement posed challenges for the Scottish Government. For example, the much-trailed shift of so-called green levies from energy companies to the taxpayer is exactly the same as the plan that the Deputy First Minister announced with great fanfare at the Scottish National Party conference, although the idea comes from the energy companies, as it serves their interests rather than those of consumers. Not only is that a flagship white paper policy being delivered by the Tories but it has also fallen flat. The public understand the meaning of a £50 cut in bills as they see bills rise by £120 a year: they understand that the market must be controlled so that such unfair price rises cannot happen.

The companies certainly do not want to carry the burden of what have become known as green levies, which are partly designed to reduce the requirement for the product that they provide. I see the contradiction in that for companies but, like Mr Harvie, I also see the benefit for the country’s future. I do not see the benefit of shifting the burden from the consumer to the taxpayer if there is no control on prices. The greatest challenge for the Scottish Government that arises from the autumn statement is that the resulting consequentials of £308 million for the Scottish block leave the Scottish Government with no excuse for not pressing forward with its declared priority of increased childcare provision. That is the flagship of the flagship—the transformation that the white paper on independence promised when it was launched. It is true that the process is staged, as described in the white paper.

I am sorry. Stage 1 is the extension to half of two-year-olds of the 600 hours of childcare that is being delivered for three and four-year-olds. When it was pointed out to the Scottish Government that it has the power to do that now, it said that it does not have the money. However, the consequentials give it the money next year and the year after if such an extension is really the Government’s priority. The Government also said that it would not extend provision because, when women went back to work, the tax that they paid would not help John Swinney’s budget. Is it not more important that the wages that those women would earn would help their families’ budgets? Are many working women not struggling with childcare costs? Do they not need help with their budgets now? The extension of childcare could provide that.

The Scottish Government has the power and the money to deliver the childcare extension. The only question is whether it has the will to begin to transform the lives involved. Will it really tell 30,000 Scottish families that they must vote yes in the referendum before their children can get a nursery place?

Alternatively, will the Scottish Government seize the opportunity and do the right thing now? I move amendment S4M-08551.1, to leave out from “welcomes” to end and insert: “notes the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s Autumn Statement 2013; further notes the Barnett consequentials for the Scottish budget, and calls on the Scottish Government to take this opportunity to extend early learning and childcare to 50% of two-year-olds by using these funds to deliver this ambition for families in Scotland.”

Will the member take an intervention?

In this afternoon’s debate there has been some sympathy for the Tories who are arguing their case today. Michael McMahon made that explicit when he spoke about how hard it must be to be a Tory and have to defend the indefensible in the form of George Osborne’s autumn statement. I would like to say that the Tories have made a fair attempt at it, but it is fairer to say that they have really struggled to do so. They have, of course, had some support—[Interruption.] I can hear Alex Johnstone—I will come to his contribution in a minute. The Tories have had some support from Willie Rennie, which we would expect as his party is in coalition with Mr Osborne’s party. Mr Rennie has intervened on members on a number of occasions today to pose the question, “Will you admit that there is growth and there will be more, and that that is a good thing?” A number of us—Mr Swinney and I, for example—acknowledged that it was good to see some growth, but the point is that there is rather less than was predicted or planned for. I ask members to stop and think about it: if a Government’s economic policy is that there will be growth, that is quite limited in vision. It is a bit like saying that the coalition Government’s housing policy is that there will be houses, or that its school policy is that there will be schools, although it does not appear to take that approach to the NHS, which I am not entirely sure is going to survive in any form that we know it. If that is the scope of the vision that we are supposed to celebrate today—that there is some growth—it is pretty minimal. With regard to the quality of that growth, it is worth looking at the OBR’s analysis.

I do not accept that, and the OBR points out just how the growth that Mr Rennie celebrates has been achieved. It states in its analysis that the growth is driven by increases in house prices and consumer spending from savings, and that that is not sustainable. The alternatives for which we—and my colleagues in Westminster—have argued were aimed at creating sustainable growth in the economy. The Conservative members opposite me have sometimes struggled with justifying some of their positions. I was particularly struck by a couple of exchanges on the welfare budget—to which significant reductions were proposed in the autumn statement—which strike at the core of the fallacy of success. Gavin Brown said that the welfare budget is going up but is not rising as much as it would have without the austerity programme. That is not the case. The budget for employment support allowance alone has gone up by almost £3 billion, which is more than Mr Osborne predicted, and housing benefit has increased by £2.7 billion more than was predicted. That is because of the austerity programme, the fact that so many people have been thrown out of work and the squeeze on wages, which has led to people qualifying for and claiming more housing benefit. The Tories’ desperation in attempting to justify their position reached its nadir when Alex Johnstone called out from a sedentary position while John Swinney was talking about borrowing, “We are borrowing less.” The fact of the matter is that George Osborne has borrowed more in the past three years than the Labour Governments did during 13 years of government. He is not borrowing less—he is borrowing £200 billion more than he planned to. The OBR has featured heavily in the debate today. Mr Swinney was almost waxing lyrical about the OBR at one stage, which surprised me a bit, because the OBR papers that accompanied the autumn statement included a downward revision of its own estimates of oil revenues. That poses some problems for Mr Swinney’s economic forecasts for independence, as oil revenue would be £1.7 billion less than was suggested by the OBR’s previous forecast, which in itself was significantly lower than Mr Swinney’s own forecasts. I was even more surprised when Kenny Gibson went further and quoted the IFS. Some weeks ago, when the IFS published its report on Scotland, I did the rounds of the television studios with some of Mr Gibson’s colleagues, who came close to painting the IFS as some kind of satanic cult. If SNP members want to quote the IFS, they must accept that it says not only that there is a bleak picture for the UK but that the picture for Scotland is bleaker still and an independent Scotland would require tax rises or significant cuts simply to stand still.

I am in my final minute.

The most striking thing about the debate was that almost no SNP member mentioned the SNP’s key policy on childcare, even in the passing. There could be no greater demonstration of the truth.

The truth is that a desirable policy is being held hostage to a yes vote. That is no way for a responsible Government to act on the future of the young children of our country. The Government has the opportunity to extend childcare now and it has the resources to do so. It should take that decision.

Whatever level of inherited debt is agreed or negotiated, the white paper proposes that the Government of an independent Scotland would not take on that debt but would, rather, pay the Treasury to service it. Is that not an admission that the Scottish Government knows that a separate Scotland will face far higher interest rates for Government borrowing than the UK currently does?

The 1.9 per cent figure in Dr Murray’s first question refers to the IFS’s most optimistic scenario, which assumes 2.2 per cent productivity growth and three times the expected net migration, and uses Mr Swinney’s own best-case predictions for oil revenues.

However, the IFS still finds that we would have to make a choice between tax rises or cuts in public expenditure. Which would it be?

Scotland’s finances and the economy are central to this debate, and we have heard a lot about them in the opening remarks. The white paper makes much of figures that show that tax receipts in Scotland are higher than they are in the UK as a whole, which is true. However, rather less is made of the equally important fact that public spending is also higher. Last week, the Institute for Fiscal Studies showed that those figures mean than an independent Scotland would face higher tax increases or greater cuts in public spending than the UK. Even in the SNP’s most heroically optimistic case, using its lowest estimate of our share of UK debt and its highest oil projections, the calculation shows that the cost would still be £1,000 for every Scottish taxpayers. The white paper has the numbers but it refuses to face the arithmetic of independence. I understand that the Scottish Government dismisses the figures because it argues that a separate Scotland will suddenly grow stratospherically, and the First Minister asserted that again today. However, the white paper is disturbingly vague on why that should happen. It suggests a corporation tax that no one but the SNP believes in, a small business national insurance scheme that already exists and has not worked, and a childcare pledge that the SNP could deliver today if it really cared. The First Minister had to take 10 minutes today to justify and apologise for his failure to do so.

Let us start by finding the resources to deliver the 2007 childcare pledge that the First Minister has not managed to deliver in six years. The document is clear about the platform that our future requires. It says that we will retain the pound, and the Bank of England will be our “lender of last resort” if the banks fail again. On the financial sector, which is still so important to Scotland’s economy, the white paper says that we will “retain a broadly integrated market”. On energy, the white paper says that “Scotland will continue to participate in the GB-wide market for electricity and gas”, which is just as well because we succeed in attracting a third of the subsidies that are paid for by consumers across the UK. We will also have a single transmission operator, which will be paid for by consumers across the UK, and, for good measure, the Green Investment Bank will continue. Scotland’s universities are engines of economic growth. They win up to 15 per cent of available research funding, which is way above our share, so it is just as well that the white paper says that those UK-wide funding arrangements will continue after independence. Why? Just because it says so in the white paper. A modern workforce needs the ability to move freely across borders, so of course we will continue with the common travel area. However, all the evidence says that even when borders remain open, cross-border flows of people and trade plummet when countries separate. They fell by as much as two thirds in the case of Czechoslovakia. Last week, we debated the importance of UK defence contracts, not least to shipbuilding. It is no surprise that the white paper says that those contracts will continue, but we know that the workers whose jobs depend on them say clearly that they will not. The white paper offers no evidence that those things will continue after independence; it asserts that simply because the SNP argument needs it, and it wishes it to be so. Indeed, if wishes were horses, the First Minister would be riding at the head of a cavalry regiment in the new Scottish defence force. There is no reason to believe and no guarantee that the rest of the UK will tailor its currency to our needs, subsidise our renewables industry, or fund our research rather than its own, far less that it will build warships in a separate country for the first time in the navy’s peacetime history just because it suits us. To pretend otherwise is simply dishonest.

I am sorry, but the First Minister took about a minute with his intervention. The SNP says that those who reject separatism should describe our vision for Scotland’s future. However, the argument that we are better together runs through its own white paper: a single currency; risk shared; free trade; free movement; an energy market of £60 million for our renewables; access to 10 times the research contract funding that we could command; and defence contracts that run into billions of pounds. Those are the foundation of our prosperity, and what happens if we vote no? We keep those things—not maybe, not perhaps, not subject to negotiation, but guaranteed. The white paper is the better together case.

No.

It is the SNP that thinks that we are too small, too weak and too oppressed to seize the opportunities of the United Kingdom and the world beyond in order to thrive. However, the truth is that Scotland has always been smart enough, skilled enough, imaginative enough and brave enough to stand tall in the UK—not just to survive but to lead and to prosper, as we do today in renewables, defence, universities and much more. If all the UK markets and institutions in the white paper are vital to our prosperity, is it not just common sense to stay in the United Kingdom and seize the opportunity that they give us?

Will the member give way?

The member makes an interesting point. The principle that, where we increase tax receipts, we should get the benefit of that was one of the fundamental principles behind the Calman proposals, which we had the guts to propose and which are being legislated for. I think that Mr Stewart opposed them up to the last.

On page 305, the white paper says that the Scottish Government would look to establish an oil fund immediately upon independence to stabilise the economy, but it does not say where the money for that fund will come from. Members: Oil! [Laughter.]

I think that members will find that it does not say where the money for the fund will come from. The question is: will it come from increased taxation or cuts in public spending? Alternatively, does the SNP seriously propose, as is rather implied, to borrow the money to save in an oil fund, in the world’s biggest payday loan? Surely that is not the common sense that is so beloved of the Deputy First Minister.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

Am I right in understanding that Stuart McMillan is saying that the trade union conveners whom Johann Lamont quoted are not representing the views of the workforce? If that is what he is saying, he should say it explicitly.

Will the member give way?

In closing the debate, I start by putting on the record again our concern, which has been expressed by members in every part of the chamber, for those workers who face redundancy in BAE shipyards and their families, for whom this will be a difficult time. I welcome the measures that the Scottish Government has taken in Glasgow and Rosyth to help with that. I give the workers in Portsmouth a particular mention since, for them, this is more than the ebb and flow of contracts but rather the end of a shipbuilding era. We all, I think, regret that. Yet this debate is about opportunity and the potential of a bright future for our defence industries, and rightly so, because they demonstrate what is possible if we seize the opportunities that the United Kingdom gives us. Contrary to the hand wringing that we have heard from SNP members, the UK defence sector is the second largest in Europe and Scotland’s skills, ingenuity and reliability have always ensured that we punch above our weight in claiming a share of that. We have 10 per cent of the defence jobs. That equates to almost 12,600 people and is way above our population share. We have one third of the UK’s shipbuilding, which is several times our population share. The industry is not just involved in shipbuilding and is not just on the Clyde, as we have Rosyth, too, and the largest defence electronics site in the UK just down the road at Selex Galileo. Indeed, a third of all MOD sites are right here in Scotland and an estimated 50,000 jobs depend on the sector. Just as our electricity industry benefits from the single British energy market and our universities benefit from access to UK-scale research funds, so our defence industry can make the most of a UK defence budget of £34 billion. By the way, the cost of Trident—the centrepiece of the Government amendment—is included in that defence budget, so an independent Scotland’s share of that would already be in the £3 billion Scottish defence budget. It is not some extra lottery win to get us out of any fiscal hole that the Government finds itself in on any given day. As for using it for diversification, as the Government amendment suggests, many speakers spoke about the difficulty over decades of finding ways of diversifying in the defence industry. It is not enough just to say the word. We have to hear the actual plans and suggestions. The one SNP idea for defence in the future that we know about is the plan to divert half a billion pounds out of the defence budget and put it straight into the coffers of the banks and the energy companies, by cutting their corporation tax. The SNP will replace 11,000 Faslane jobs with bigger bonuses for bankers and bigger profits for the energy companies. Wide as our defence sector is, much of the debate has focused on shipbuilding, where the issues are starkest. That is no wonder. The industry’s heritage looms large in our collective story, and not just for Clydesiders. I am not from Glasgow, as anyone who hears me can tell, but there was a shipyard at the bottom of my granny’s street in Leith and I remember being shepherded into the hall at primary school to watch the launch of the QE2 on the Clyde on television. Four years ago, I was privileged to attend the launch of HMS Defender—a type 45 frigate—at Scotstoun. I defy anyone who has a soul not to shed a tear when they watch the chains slip away and 8,500 tonnes of steel slip away with them. The ships are a living testament to and symbol of our capacity to shape not just steel but our world and our destiny. For that reason, the industry’s story echoes through our story, in prose, poetry and song, and in politics and this Parliament, as Johann Lamont illustrated when she quoted Donald Dewar’s great speech on the day when the Parliament opened. Our ships are more than artefacts of steel. They are packed with the most sophisticated technology ever devised. They are the pinnacle of human ingenuity. The industry therefore deserves rigorous and honest arguments, but it has not heard such arguments from the SNP benches today. We heard tankers being misrepresented as warships that have been built elsewhere. We heard the argument—absurd, in the 21st century—that a global corporation such as BAE could not recruit or transfer skills to build ships elsewhere in the United Kingdom. Of course it could. We heard design partnerships being misrepresented as agreements to build abroad. We even heard the argument that, because there have not been as many defence contracts in the past as we would have liked there to be, we should turn our backs on the contracts that are available today. What kind of argument is that? Every SNP speaker has quoted Jamie Webster, who said: “If the situation is that Scottish people by democratic vote, vote Yes, I would expect, no sorry, demand, that every single politician of every section supports us to hell and back”. Let us be clear about this—and this is Mr Brown’s answer, on Johann Lamont’s behalf. I have fought for shipbuilding jobs before. I did it in Whitehall when I worked for the Secretary of State for Scotland and, when I was Labour leader here in Holyrood and the carrier contracts were under threat, I suggested to Alex Salmond that we go together to fight for shipbuilding jobs. We did that, going all the way—not quite to hell but to Liam Fox’s office, where we made the case and we won. If by some chance there is a yes vote next year, I promise that I will stand shoulder to shoulder with Alex Salmond, Nicola Sturgeon or whoever—even Alex Johnstone—and argue that the type 26 contracts should stay on the Clyde. So will Johann Lamont and so will Mr Drew Smith.

No, minister. You would not give way to me. Members should understand that, at the moment when we must make that case, we will be arguing against the whole peacetime history of naval construction in this country, which has never built a warship abroad. At that moment, we will be arguing against a Government that has a multibillion pound contract to award and the choice of spending it on jobs for its citizens or jobs for ours. We will be arguing against EU law, which says that a defence contract awarded externally must be awarded in open competition. We will be arguing with a Westminster Parliament whose Scottish representatives have lost all authority—[Interruption.]

We will make those arguments, to hell and back, but by then those arguments will have all the staying power of the proverbial snowball in that place.

No—I am sorry. We accept Jamie Webster’s comments. Why is it, then, that when his fellow conveners’ views are quoted in the chamber, in comments such as “If Scotland was independent, no one could bid to build type 26”, “there is no way on God’s earth” that shipbuilding can survive in an independent Scotland, and “no UK Ministry of Defence means no more shipbuilding jobs in Scotland”, they are dismissed by the likes of Stuart McMillan and Sandra White? Why are those TU conveners told to grow up and stop scaremongering?

No.

No—I have said no.

We will make the case for the Clyde in any constitutional circumstance, but the tragedy is that this case is already won. The fight is over, and the type 26 contracts are heading for Scotland. The workforce on the Clyde have earned the right to these jobs, and the only thing that can threaten that—the only reason why we will have to go to hell and back and win the argument again—is the SNP’s independence project. The problem is not Labour’s motion but the SNP’s referendum. I am not suggesting that colleagues on the SNP side of the chamber do not care about those jobs. I am sure—

No—I have said no. I am sure that those nationalist MSPs are sincere in their wish to keep these contracts on the Clyde, and that those slipway chains tug at their heartstrings just as they did at mine. However, the trouble is that, whatever their hearts are saying, their souls belong to separatism. That is the reality that they cannot acknowledge; that is the credo that dare not speak its name. That is the inconvenient truth that they have tried to shout down all afternoon because they cannot face up to it. No matter how important shipbuilding might be and how much these jobs matter to the SNP, independence matters more to it.

Their ideology is wrong and damaging, but I would respect it more if just one of them had the guts to stand up and say that they believe that placing Scotland’s shipbuilding industry at risk is a price worth paying for independence. That is the logic of their position, and if they really wish to transcend it, they should vote for the motion tonight and back those shipbuilding workers.

I thank the minister for his statement and for advance sight of it. The minister is absolutely right to emphasise the importance to Scotland of electricity market reform, which relates to the crucial importance of a single integrated British electricity market to this country and its future. Although Scotland has less than a tenth of the population of the UK, its renewables industry benefits from more than a third of the subsidies for renewable energy, which are paid for by consumers throughout the UK. For the sake of security of supply and our capacity to continue to export power—both of which have been mentioned by the minister—as well as the development of an industry on which the Scottish Government has largely bet our industrial future, we cannot afford to jeopardise that single integrated market. The minister is right that the UK Government must ensure that EMR takes account of Scotland’s role in providing secure electricity supplies and I believe that he is also right to say that this last-minute Lords amendment was no way to go about doing that. However, I am not sure that a public and parliamentary row between the two Governments is all that helpful either. I am extremely glad to hear that Mr Ewing and Mr Davey are talking again, and I ask the minister to explain to the chamber the action that he plans to take following that contact to get past this situation, reach an agreement on EMR and protect the single electricity market that the industry wants and which this country needs.

Surely the message of the figures is that more than 80,000 Scottish families are struggling to pay their rent due to the effect of this iniquitous tax and that the half measures of mitigation, both from the DWP and from the Scottish Government, are not doing enough to relieve them. The Scottish Government is not doing all that it can to mitigate the effects of the bedroom tax. It could find the full £50 million that is needed to banish the effects altogether, so that all families would know that that support was available to them. That is exactly what the Northern Ireland Executive has done, with the agreement of the Treasury and the DWP. Will the minister reconsider the position and banish the bedroom tax from Scotland?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what assessment it has made of the costs and processes involved in renationalising the Royal Mail in an independent Scotland and with whom it has consulted. (S4O-02527)

The day after the First Minister made his surprise commitment—by which I mean that it was a surprise to the cabinet secretary—I heard Mr Swinney explain on the radio that he would achieve that promise by using Scotland’s share of the proceeds of the Royal Mail sale to buy back Royal Mail assets in Scotland. The problem with that, of course, is that because Royal Mail was so foolishly sold off at a bargain-basement price, those assets are worth at least 70 per cent more than when the First Minister made the promise. How does he now plan to pay for it?

I draw members’ attention to my entry in the register of members’ interests, which shows that I am a member of Unite the union. I thank the cabinet secretary for early sight of his statement. To secure what we all hope is a bright future for the Grangemouth plant and refinery, from a point at which closure and the loss of thousands of jobs looked inevitable, was a great result. The Scottish ministers, not least the cabinet secretary, and their UK Government colleagues deserve much credit for working together, refusing to accept the closure and shepherding the negotiations to a positive outcome. Above all, we must recognise the painful sacrifices that the workforce made, in reductions in terms and conditions, to save not just their jobs but many thousands of jobs in the supply chain and to secure the value of the plant to the Scottish economy and the local economy in the Falkirk area. There is now an obligation on the company to deliver the survival plan. The Scottish and UK Governments are—not for the first time—providing significant investment in the plant, in the form of grants and loan guarantees. What assurances has the company given the Scottish and UK Governments? As the investment unfolds, what can be done to avoid the lack of transparency about this vital strategic operation’s finances that dogged negotiations about its future?

I support the general principles of the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill. Those who consider it to be a rather dry and dull piece of revenue legislation, perhaps of more interest to accountants than to agitators, miss the point on several counts because it is, of course, the latest instalment in the greatest devolution of power to the Parliament since it was created in 1999. As the cabinet secretary briefly mentioned, the bill comes before us as a direct result of the Scotland Act 2012, which itself is the legacy of the Calman commission. That was an agitation worthy of the name: the Parliament audaciously seized power from the then minority Administration and simply bypassed the executive arm of the Scottish Government to deliver the commission and its wide-ranging recommendations and then successfully negotiate their implementation with the UK Government and the Westminster Parliament. We should remember that that was not the first shift in power between the Parliaments. Indeed, that process has been a constant feature of devolution, with the most significant example prior to 2012 perhaps being the shifting of responsibility for rail infrastructure along with several hundreds of millions of pounds every year—I think that it was £300 million at the time.

Actually, I do not. Indeed, my next point rather contradicts Mr Mason’s point. An examination of the years of devolution would show that powers have shifted almost daily. One example is responsibility for regulation of offshore wind as that industry developed and became more mature. The most recent example is the devolution of council tax benefit and crisis loans—parts of the benefits system—within the past year or so. Devolution of powers has happened as and when the circumstances have demanded it. That flexibility is what Rhodri Morgan—for it was he—meant when he called devolution a process not an event. However, the Calman changes are qualitatively different, in that they begin substantially to address what the commission identified as the greatest weakness of the Scotland Act 1998: the fact that, by international comparisons, that act devolved a remarkable degree of legislative power to the Parliament but much less fiscal power than in other examples of devolution around the world. The changes in the Scotland Act 2012 are intended to redress that imbalance. That is a shift of principle, not just a shift of administrative convenience. The commission identified landfill tax as ripe for devolution for two reasons. First, it is a tax based on place—specifically, where the landfill is sited—and, therefore, it is immobile and defined by geography. Secondly, it is a tax the purpose of which is fundamentally related to policy areas that were already within the purview of the Parliament, in the form of pursuing sustainability, reducing environmental damage, achieving greater efficiency in the management of waste and playing our part in addressing climate change—a global challenge, as the cabinet secretary observed in his opening speech. The tax is a crucial lever in the drive to increase recycling and the reuse of our resources and to cut the emissions that damage the planet on which we live. The bill may read like something less than epic verse, but it nonetheless exemplifies a powerful argument that we should exercise this power and that our devolution settlement is flexible enough to ensure that we do so. That is of course an argument that the Scottish Government sometimes finds inconvenient for its ambitions and thus it resisted it to the last gasp. However, in the spirit of working on common ground, I will say that I am happy that it has embraced it and that we have reached this landmark today. I commend the Government’s efforts to get the bill in place so that we are ready for April 2015, when the UK landfill tax will be switched off. The bill leaves many questions begged. It is framework legislation, with little or no detail as to how ministers plan to deploy the new tax. Most obviously, beyond indicating, as he did again today, that the rates will be set at levels no lower than the UK rates at the time of transfer, the cabinet secretary has said only that September 2014 is the earliest that we will know what the opening rate for the tax will be. Both business and local government have sought an earlier indication and, given that this is a new tax—a change—that would seem to me not unreasonable and could help significantly by providing some reassurance. I understand that taxes can change at any time in the future, but perhaps given the circumstances the cabinet secretary might reconsider whether an earlier indication would be possible. This is one of those curious taxes that if successful will deliver less and less income to Government. The Government’s forecasts reflect that properly. However, we have seen figures today that show that only nine councils have met their recycling targets and that some recycled less last year than the year before, not more. We have to consider how the tax will work. The tax is our key lever to transform that situation, so it would be a little more convincing if ministers were a little less cautious and more imaginative in explaining now how they intend to use their new power to use the tax differently, and to set new and different rates, to do exactly that. After all, that would be no more than the cabinet secretary did in introducing the land and buildings transaction tax, when he took the opportunity to create a more progressive regime than the one that he inherited, which is something that we supported. One very welcome change to the landfill tax is the power referred to by the cabinet secretary to tax as well as fine illegal landfill sites. Once again, there is a lot of detail still to hear about how that will be enforced and what additional resources SEPA might have at its disposal to pursue that additional revenue. We look forward to hearing more about that during the passage of the bill. There are many outstanding questions about the landfill community fund, too. I welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary today indicated an open-mindedness about how we might change and reform that aspect of landfill taxation. Certainly, the increase to 7.34 per cent of tax liability for the fund is welcome. For constituencies such as mine where landfill takes place, those credits can be a very important source of support for local communities. In East Lothian, they fund very diverse activities from the Hi His at Haddington Athletic Football Club to the probably higher-flying puffins of the Scottish Seabird Centre, which is fighting back against tree mallow on the islands of Craigleith and Fidra. The 10-mile limit is just that—a limit. Kenny Gibson was right to say that, particularly in rural Scotland, 10 miles is not really a very great distance. It seems to me that we could relax the limit without losing altogether the principle that the communities affected are the ones that benefit. For example, we could extend eligibility to the whole of the local authority area where landfill takes place, which would take some account of transportation of the waste to the landfill site. We are very pleased to see the bill move forward, although we have some concerns about the many questions that its drafting still begs. I accept that primary legislation can suffer from too much as well as too little detail. The Finance Committee made a point about that, too. The committee’s resolution was the right one, which was to say that in its view changes in the orders regarding new rates, for example, should be subject to the affirmative procedure, which would ensure proper and appropriate scrutiny when they come forward. The Finance Committee made that point effectively during the passage of the Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill. Ministers accepted the point in that case and agreed with the argument, and they should do so in this case, as well. As with much of our legislation, the dullness is in the detail, but in agreeing to the principles of the bill—I am sure that we shall do so—we should not lose sight of the fact that it is but the latest indication that our devolution settlement is a powerful, flexible and dynamic democratic model that is worth fighting to keep.

The cabinet secretary makes a fair point in saying that there is no certainty about future tax rates, which will be set within the process of setting the budget. That is how things are, and that is right. However, the point here is that this is a new tax. There is a shift or a change from this being controlled by the Treasury to it being controlled by the Scottish Government. If the indication that the cabinet secretary has given is that, in 2015, he will set a rate that is pretty much the same as the UK rate that he inherits, why does he not just say that? That would put an end to that degree of uncertainty, at least.

I, too, welcome the opportunity to debate the potential that exists for carbon capture technology to be used here in Scotland. I am surprised that this is the first time that the subject has been debated in the chamber. Last week—both inside and outside the chamber—we spent some time exploring our differences with the Scottish Government on aspects of energy policy but, as other members have said, today’s debate takes place in one of those crucial areas in which we find ourselves largely in agreement with the Government and, indeed, other parties that are represented in the Parliament. We agree on the potential of carbon capture and storage technology, on the urgency of progressing that potential and on the opportunity that it provides. I think that it is worth going back to first principles—as Patrick Harvie did—and reminding ourselves that the greatest driver for progressing CCS is the imperative of addressing the global issue of climate change. As Patrick Harvie pointed out, in recent weeks we have had the IPCC’s latest and, I think, strongest ever assertion that global warming is real, and that it is very likely that more than half of recent temperature rises are directly caused by human activity. Earlier this week, delegates at the climate justice conference here in Scotland heard powerful direct testimony of the impact that global warming is already having on the world’s poorest and most vulnerable citizens, who are, of course, the least culpable in creating the problem. Therefore, we are right—indeed, we are obliged—to pursue dramatic reductions in carbon emissions. However, the populations that we represent oblige us to ensure that we continue to provide electricity production for the economy and for personal use. To square that circle, we simply have to find ways of generating electricity without releasing millions of tonnes of carbon into the biosphere. We believe that the Scottish Government is right to commit itself to the decarbonisation of the power industry by 2030. Indeed, we believe that the whole of the UK should make that commitment, too, as Labour has said that it will, should it win the next general election. That is an issue on which the industry needs clarity, so that it is clear what is required of it. I will digress briefly into an area of disagreement, which is also one of constituency interest to me. It seems perverse that we should discount as a way of achieving the objective of decarbonising the power industry the expansion of non-carbon-emitting consistent base-load produced by nuclear power, especially as any chance that we have of reaching the decarbonisation target is based on extending the life of Scotland’s two existing nuclear stations. One of them—Torness, which is in my constituency—not only continues to provide a significant proportion of our electricity but recently passed the landmark of producing 200TWh since 1988. That has avoided 130 million tonnes of carbon—the equivalent of removing all cars from the whole UK for two years.

Up to a point, but we restrict ourselves if we veto expanding into new nuclear generation. However, I accept that what has been stated is the Government’s position. That throws even greater urgency on the development of CCS, which is also urgent because of the Government’s target of producing the equivalent of 100 per cent of our electricity from renewable sources by 2020. As the minister acknowledged, that will have to be backed by about 2.5GW of conventional thermal generation. We agree with the Scottish Government that we need to move forward on the demonstration of CCS on a commercial scale. We also agree that that means that the UK Government must make significant support available, particularly for the Peterhead proposal, which would demonstrate how the technology could work with Scotland’s geography and our history of North Sea oil production. It is regrettable that such support has been reduced to £1 billion from the £2 billion that the previous Government planned. I have concerns about the consistent uncertainty over the availability of the cash in the comprehensive spending review period. We need to see the cash with certainty and we need tangible momentum. The captain clean energy project holds out enormous potential, although—perhaps importantly—it involves a different technology: a new build rather than a retrofit. I understand that the project does not depend on Government capital investment, which is always helpful, but that a decision is needed on the contract for difference price. We are happy to echo and support the minister’s representations to the UK Government for that decision to be expedited. We have some concerns about the Government’s motion, but they relate to clarity rather than substance. We do not want the UK Government’s support to be spread more thinly among projects, but we assume that the motion calls for more Government investment overall, and we are happy to agree with that. We feel that the reference to the captain project is a little ambiguous, as it suggests that capital investment is being sought, which I understand is not the case. However, the minister made it clear that in this case he means incentivisation through the contract for difference system. We might have some differences with or criticisms of the Scottish Government’s approach to cutting carbon emissions, and I have no doubt that some of them will be explored this afternoon. However, there is no doubt that we agree with the principal proposition that we must pursue carbon capture technology if we are ever to meet our obligations to address climate change. On that basis, we will happily support the motion this evening.

The debate has been interesting and wide-ranging. It has ranged from the depleted reservoirs and saline aquifers of the North Sea to the algal feedstock plants in Australia, via China, Germany, Poland and one or two other places in between. That has been an interesting aspect of the debate because it reflects the global importance of the technology, and shows that we are not the only ones who are debating what needs to be done to turn the technology into something that is commercially available and viable. The issue is being considered right across the world. Many members reflected correctly on Scotland’s particular potential for developing carbon capture and storage technology with our depleted reservoirs and the pipelines that are already in place. Others referred to the potential that is connected to that for using fossil fuels because of our coal and, potentially, our gas reserves. We have been discussing a global issue, but it is right that a lot of the debate has focused on Scotland’s particular place in that. Other members used the opportunity to give us a lesson in chemistry. Mr Don’s lesson was certainly chemistry and not physics. Ms McAlpine also gave us a short lesson in the history of chemistry, which was of some interest. A number of members, particularly Lewis Macdonald and Kenneth Gibson, quite rightly went into some detail about the extremely important proposal in Peterhead. One of the key points that they both mentioned was that success in Peterhead would mean that it would be the first example of carbon capture retrofitted to a gas-fired power station. That is important for Scotland. I have a constituency interest in that because my constituency includes the power station at Cockenzie, which closed earlier this year with existing consent for it to be replaced with a combined cycle gas power station. Unlike at Hunterston, there is widespread local support for the project. The community at Cockenzie has produced electricity and power for Scotland for more than 40 years and those who have been involved with that—some of them for the whole 40 years—would very much like to see their sons and daughters involved in doing so again in the future. If they are to do so without damaging the environment, we need investment in the new plant and carbon capture technology that will be applicable to that kind of power generation. I am therefore interested in seeing Peterhead demonstrate that that is possible. There has been some discussion about whether this is the first debate that we have had on CCS. Whether it is the first debate or not, it is good that we had it today because, to paraphrase the title of the book and film, we need to talk about CCS. This is a critical point for the technology. Patrick Harvie has made the point strongly on a number of occasions that it is a technology that has not yet been demonstrated at a viable commercial level. That is a statement of fact. The projects that have been mentioned—there are others closer to home, for example in Wales—that have demonstrated that bits of the technology work, have been small scale. If we look at bigger projects, we see that there is a mixed picture. Margaret McDougall referred to the decision in Norway to close down the project at Mongstad. Quite an interesting aside to that—given an intervention that was made in the debate—was that the previous Prime Minister of Norway described getting Mongstad working as being Norway’s equivalent of performing a moon landing. However, Norway has now pulled back from that project. Mr Stevenson gave us working examples of China pushing forward with the technology. There are examples from Canada, too; the Boundary Dam power station is a significant project that is already under construction. The truth is that what is needed is the will to push forward and support the technology. That is why the importance of the current competition in the UK and the contract for difference with reference to the captain clean energy project have featured in the debate. I will just say in passing that there were a couple of references to the first Peterhead project. We should be clear that the first Peterhead project was of course a pre-ignition gasification proposal—not a retrofit, but an experimental project, which never met the parameters of the competition that existed at that time. What is interesting, however, is that it bore similarities to the captain clean energy project, which I think shows how things have moved on in the intervening years. We need to talk about CCS because this is a critical point for our targets. A number of members referred to our Climate Change Act targets and the 2030 decarbonisation target for the power industry. It is absolutely true that any examination of the RPP2, which describes how the Government believes we will move towards the targets, shows that it is highly dependent on significant and rapid progress on CCS technology. In fact, it requires us to have 500MW in operation by 2020 and another 500MW in operation by 2025, and it assumes over 1.5GW of gas-generation carbon capture being operational by 2027. Those are extremely challenging targets. In all honesty, from where we stand now, it is quite difficult to see how we are going to achieve them. Mr Allard said that we have set the bar high; we have set the bar high on decarbonisation and on climate change targets, and the Government has set the bar high on renewable energy targets. The danger is that we will end up celebrating the height of the bar while ignoring our failure to reach it. That is what Mr Harvie has said we must try to avoid. Mr MacKenzie was eloquent in saying that we have the skills, the academics and the infrastructure. I think we have to ask ourselves why, therefore, we are not further ahead. That is a serious conversation that we need to have. That does not mean that I think we should turn our backs on CCS, but that we should redouble our efforts. I have a lot of sympathy for some of the arguments that Mr Harvie has made, but I have to say that I believe that oil and gas are assets and resources. They are not intrinsically bad; it is down to how we use them. Therefore, we support the possibility of enhanced recovery of oil using CCS technology. For that reason, we will not be able to support the Green amendment. As for the Tory amendment, I understand Mr Fraser’s caution about picking out one project, but given that the captain project was mentioned in the motion, to remove it might look a little strange and could be misinterpreted. I have also expressed—quite gently, I think—concerns about the timescale of the current competition. For those reasons, we will not support the Tory amendment tonight, either.

I draw the chamber’s attention to my entry in the register of members’ interests, which shows that I am a member of Unite. It is clear that the current dispute is both holding up and potentially prejudicing the important and potentially difficult discussions that must take place about the long-term future of the INEOS plant. It is also clear that those discussions cannot take place until two things happen. First, the union must end its industrial action and, secondly, the company must end the disciplinary action that is currently under way against a trade union convener at the plant. I realise that this is an unusual intervention to ask for but, in the light of the far bigger issues at stake, will the cabinet secretary use his good offices to achieve both those things?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what its plans are for the regulation of energy markets should Scotland become independent. (S4O-02467)

By continuing as part of the United Kingdom, Scottish consumers stand to benefit from Labour’s commitment to freeze energy prices for two years while a new regulator with the power to control energy prices is created. Will the minister simply match that commitment for his preferred separate Scotland and new regulator?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

The point is clear. We believe that the use of scarce public money should be targeted. As for energy companies that are making outrageous profits, we believe that we should target all of them.

I would like to ask what the SNP’s policy on local taxation is. I believe that it is still to introduce the local income tax. Can the member confirm that for me?

For Patrick Harvie’s information, I say that it would be a retail freeze, but included in the proposal is major reform of the wholesale market, too. It is, indeed, a temporary measure that will allow time to legislate to replace Ofgem with a regulator that has the power to regulate prices. It is a short-term measure until we can introduce a long-term policy.

Will the member give way?

On the theme of being all over the place, I understood that the SNP was against evictions on the basis of arrears arising from the bedroom tax. That was last week. This week, Jackie Baillie has lodged a proposal for a member’s bill that would prevent such evictions. Will he sign it this week, or is he in fact all over the place?

Two weeks ago, when we debated the Scottish economy, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth painted a rosy picture of recovery, with GDP and employment up over the year, and surveys showing that purchasing managers, the Bank of Scotland and small businesses are more confident than they were. Today’s debate is deliberately designed to look beyond those carefully selected headlines of recovery to the hard, sometimes even harsh, world of reality, and generally that is what members on all sides of the chamber have done. The exceptions, perhaps, were the final contributions from Alex Johnstone and Alex Neil, which had a passing relationship with reality and, indeed, with the truth. Most Scots would not recognise the recovery that Mr Swinney was at such pains to describe a couple of weeks ago any more than they would recognise the recovery described by George Osborne this week. Jackie Baillie made clear our view that responsibility for the structural weakness in the recovery lies with George Osborne and the coalition Government, because a recovery that is built on jobs that are increasingly part time or temporary, and on zero-hour contracts without job security or even a guarantee of work, feels like no recovery at all. A recovery that is built on declining wages that no longer stretch to pay the gas and electricity bills or cover childcare costs, with welfare changes that are already leaving 80,000 Scottish households struggling to pay rent that has been augmented by the bedroom tax, is a recovery for the rich, while most face a struggle to survive. It is not getting better. In fact, it is getting worse, as many speakers on all sides of the chamber have demonstrated, using sources as diverse as the IFS and Asda’s mumdex to show that the real value of wages is falling. The proportion of Scottish families earning below the living wage is rising. Zero-hour contracts have soared in Britain; there are 1 million in Britain, so there must be perhaps 100,000 in Scotland. Energy Action Scotland tells us that 900,000 Scottish households live in fuel poverty. Two hundred and twenty thousand Scottish children live in absolute poverty—and the figure is not improving. Kezia Dugdale and Jackie Baillie are right to point out that, when we had a Labour Government in Westminster and a Labour-led Government here, the child poverty figure plummeted, but that progress has stopped. Twice as many Scots are now resorting to food banks, many more are resorting to payday loans, and one in three council tenants affected by the bedroom tax is already in arrears. That is not recovery; it is a reversal of living standards, and it demands urgent action now. In response, the SNP amendment and most SNP speakers have gloriously missed the point. The fact is that if someone is struggling in a minimum wage job on a zero-hours contract in a property deemed too big for them, they do not pay council tax. The chances are that their children will not go to university, given the Government’s woeful record on widening access. They cannot afford a car to cross the Forth bridge for free, and if they can still find a bus service running, the fare that they pay will have been pushed up by the cut in concessionary travel recompense to the bus companies, so although it will be free when they are 60, right now they cannot afford it. The truth is that people in those circumstances worry about getting through to the end of the week—not about getting to 65, when they will get free personal care.

I am sorry; my time has been cut. As for extended childcare, Kezia Dugdale has made it clear that we have waited seven years on that promise and it still falls short of what is proposed everywhere else in the country. Whatever the merit or otherwise of those policies—and we introduced several of them and supported others—they do not add up to a strategy to raise living standards or eradicate poverty; quite the reverse. Annabelle Ewing said that her Government was “straining every sinew” to help hard-pressed families. Why, then, does it refuse to find the full £50 million this year and next year to banish the effects of the bedroom tax from Scotland?

No, I am sorry. John Wilson made an eloquent case that the national minimum wage is not enough. Why, then, does the Government that he supports refuse to use its own procurement contracts to demand that companies pay the living wage? Whatever else it might be guilty of, last week, Scotland’s biggest company, SSE, announced that it will become a living-wage employer. That will apply not only to direct employees but to the whole supply chain of subcontractors. If it can do that, why can the Scottish Government not follow its example? Why does the Scottish Government refuse to use its contracts to outlaw exploitative zero-hours jobs? We agree that a contract such as the one for the Borders railway should boost jobs and the economy, but it should not give succour to firms that leave workers sitting at home on zero-hours contracts. How can it be that universities—recipients of all that taxpayer funding for tuition fees—are the worst offenders when it comes to zero-hours contracts and the Government just shrugs its shoulders? Those are all things that the Government could do but chooses not to because the SNP’s core argument is that if people want it to help and support them, they must first vote for separation. What does the SNP promise to do if it gets independence? Will it match Labour’s energy price freeze commitment and introduce a regulator to control energy prices in future? No. I tell members what it will do instead: it will give those energy companies a huge corporation tax windfall paid for by service cuts and taxes for the people who are paying through the nose for those companies’ bills. Will the SNP match Labour’s promise to end exploitative zero-hours contracts? No. An independent Scotland will be a zero-hours haven as well as a tax haven. Will the SNP match Labour’s commitment on nurseries for three and four-year-olds and wraparound childcare for all primary pupils? It does not even need a yes vote for that. It could do it right now. [Interruption.]

I know that most members were not here when Angela Constance spoke, but she said—I think that she was sincere—that she was “determined” to tackle “the root causes of poverty.” The best way to find out what really matters to a Government is to follow the money, so let us look at poverty. Back in 2007, the SNP had £1.5 billion-worth of programmes that were easily identifiable and clearly designed to address poverty, such as the community regeneration fund, the fairer Scotland fund and the supporting people fund. Now, six years on, how is that going? What do we have in this year’s budget? The community regeneration fund was £132 million; now, it is nothing. The antisocial behaviour fund was £37 million; now, it is nothing. The fairer Scotland fund—how many SNP members said that they wanted a fairer Scotland?—was £163 million in 2007. How much is it now? It is nothing—zero, zilch.

I know what Mr Mackay will say. He will say—[Interruption.] He was not here.

He will say that it has all been rolled into the local authorities’ money. Here is the truth: those poverty programmes are how the Government paid for the council tax freeze and getting rid of the tolls on the Forth bridge. Kenny Gibson said that we had to understand that the SNP had 10 per cent less resource to fight poverty. No—I say to him that it has 75 per cent less resource, which the Government he supports cut out of poverty programmes in the past six years.

No. I am finishing up. I am over time.

Has that happened because poverty has gone? No. Is it because Scotland is already a paragon of fairness? No. Those programmes have gone because that is the cost of living in a country with a Government that puts party first and the people of Scotland second. That is the price of a Scotland on pause.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what progress the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has made on implementing plans for the introduction of videolink facilities and family hearings in those towns where courts are to close. (S4O-02402)

The cabinet secretary’s answer reveals that the words that were given to those courts that are closing in 2015—for example, the one in my home town of Haddington—were indeed just warm words to take the sting out of an unpalatable decision. Indeed, the Crown Office has recently confirmed that the fiscal office in Haddington will also close as a result of the decision, which will mean another huge vacant site in the middle of my home town’s high street. I thought that the cabinet secretary believed in community payback by vandals, so when is he going to start paying Haddington back for his vandalism in closing the town’s courts?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. What could be more timely than a debate on the economy? After all, a recent opinion poll told us that the majority of Scots think that the economy should be the Scottish National Party Government’s top priority. Alas, those of us who know this Government well always knew that in fact this would be another debate on independence, because that is easier for the Government than facing up to the real challenges of a fragile recovery that is built on too many jobs that are part time, temporary or zero hours and paid for by more and more families struggling on wages that are already below the living wage and falling, and easier than facing up to the challenges of globalisation, demographic change or pension liabilities. However, those are the real economic challenges that every developed country faces. They are the challenges that Alex Salmond’s adviser Alex Bell told us this week he could not get the SNP to acknowledge—and then he was replaced by someone who would advise a little less and do what he was told a little more. So what makes a successful economy in the 21st century? A combination, surely, of skills, knowledge and a workforce that is valued and respected; the encouragement of entrepreneurism and innovation; access to the greatest possible capital, both financial and intellectual; free access to the widest possible markets; a stable currency; and the ability to survive economic shocks through scale and by avoiding dependence on a single market or commodity. Scotland stands then as a small country but one with a big tradition in intellect, innovation and invention, with world-class universities and power over our own training, skills and education. In addition, we have unfettered access to a market that is 10 times the size of our own; a stable currency that is backed by the resources of the Bank of England; and access to research funds, technology strategy funding, green technology investment, a defence procurement budget, and pension funds and investment funds far greater than those that we might command ourselves. Moreover, although it was far from painless, we survived the greatest global crisis in the history of banking, even though two Scottish banks were at the very centre of it.

Mr Harvie’s question is really a question about political will. [Interruption.]

If Mr Harvie looks at the poverty statistics, he will see that the gap reduced between 1997 and 2007 but has now stopped reducing. It is political will that matters. Mr Swinney referred to 2008, which is when the First Minister, surfing the arc of prosperity, fetched up in Dublin and told the Irish Government: “I am sure that most of Europe’s Finance Ministers would give at least one limb ... to have Ireland’s policy problems, rather than their own!” And yet Mr Swinney criticises the OBR’s predictions. A year after the First Minister’s comment, some of those finance ministers would have given a limb for the strength that we gained from access to UK resources during the banking crisis, and perhaps they would give another limb now for the opportunities that social, political and economic union with the rest of the United Kingdom gives us. This is the best of both worlds, so why jeopardise it? The SNP asserts that we would lose none of those advantages through independence, but the evidence says otherwise. When Czechoslovakia broke up, it had a currency union that lasted six weeks before it was destroyed by capital flight from Slovakia. The Czech Republic and Slovakia kept an open border, but they still saw cross-border trade plummet. It is just common sense to avoid any barrier between our economy and its customers. Last week, research warned us that the cost of borrowing would rise in an independent Scotland, and today the IFS tells us what John Swinney told his Cabinet colleagues—that a separate Scotland, overexposed to the volatility of oil price and production, would mean cuts in services and rises in taxes.

I certainly checked on the facts that I have just given. Those are the things that happened when those countries separated. Even renewable energy—the SNP’s path to the reindustrialisation of Scotland—depends entirely on the British single energy market and a customer base that is largely in England. It is a laudable aim. Why risk it? Yesterday, the First Minister talked about the confidence to make our own decisions. This is about having the self-confidence to share risk and reward and believe in our capacity to flourish. It is nationalists who argue that Scotland is somehow too small, too poor and too oppressed to succeed in the United Kingdom. They have been at it for 300 years. How about this? “We are an obscure poor people, though once of better account, removed to a remote corner of the world without name or alliance. Now we are slaves forever.” That was Lord Belhaven arguing for independence in 1707, but we can hear Belhaven’s angst channelled by Mr Swinney in his protestations of powerlessness today. I believe in Scotland. I believe in our skill and craft and knowledge. I believe in our imagination and our capacity for innovation and invention. [Interruption.]

I even believe in our capacity to listen to other people’s ideas. I believe that we are good enough and smart enough and should be determined enough to seize the opportunities that we have right now with both hands.

I am sorry; I think that I have taken enough. We have the best of both worlds, and our obligation is to make the most of it. That is what the Scottish people mean when they say that the economy should be our priority. We used to have debates on the economy in this Parliament—debates about matching skills to the needs of the new economy, about driving innovation in our universities and commercialising it out into the world of wealth creation, and about how we could create new sources of funding to unleash Scottish ingenuity on the world. Last week, Scottish Enterprise published a review of its support for growing businesses—187 pages of it—but all the support that it offers growing companies goes back to the days of “A Smart, Successful Scotland”. It was through things such as small firms merit award for research and technology—SMART—funding, support for products under research—SPUR—funding, proof of concept funding and the co-investment fund that we created companies such Wolfson Microelectronics and Touch Bionics 10 years ago. The SNP trumpets success in attracting foreign investment—the First Minister was doing it today—but that is down to Scottish Development International’s strategy, which started back in 2001. Even in renewable energy, the key facility—the European Marine Energy Centre—was launched 12 years ago. Where are the new ideas? Instead, key economic projects such as the rail links to the airports and the air route development fund have been cancelled.

No. I am sorry.

We have 25,000 apprenticeships, but we cannot match them to skills shortages in engineering, construction and the oil and gas industries. When we build schools, hospitals or bridges, we manage to exclude Scottish companies and fail to take young Scots off the dole queues. [Interruption.] Yes, we do.

I can certainly specify a school in my constituency that was built following a shortlist of five Irish companies with not a single Scottish company on the list, and business tells me that that happens everywhere. I tell the Parliament this: sending the First Minister to movie premieres and golf tournaments does not add up to a global connections strategy either. The only idea that the Government has is independence. Mr Swinney says that independence would give him economic levers, but what is the only economic lever that he would pull? It is a £400 million windfall corporation tax cut to big business. Scotland—the last redoubt of the Laffer curve, an economic theory that was actually written on the back of a paper napkin and which has been discredited in every finance ministry in the world, except for Mr Swinney’s. Even that will be a decision for someone else. First Mr Swinney will have to phone the Chancellor of the Exchequer to ask what his or her corporation tax rate is going to be and then he will subtract 3 per cent. Is that really his highest aspiration for Scotland? Is it for this that Scotland is on pause, with our economy bumping along and 200,000 Scots languishing unemployed while we wait? Norman Lamont once accused the Government he had resigned from of appearing to be in office but not in power. This SNP Government is in power, all right, but it appears that no one is in the office. It might as well have one of those annoying signs on the door of St Andrew’s house: “Off to lunch. Back after the referendum.” That is not good enough. I move amendment S4M-07734.1, to leave out from “notes” to end and insert: “believes that the Scottish Government must act now to secure what is a fragile economic recovery and ensure a secure sustainable future in which all can share fairly; notes the importance that the Scottish Government’s Fiscal Commission Working Group places on retaining key elements of the social and economic union, including sterling and a single central bank, as well as the ‘significant and complex linkages between households, businesses and financial services operating across the UK’, and recognises that the greatest economic potential for Scotland and its people lies with a strong, devolved Parliament using every power at its disposal, including new tax and borrowing powers and maximising the opportunity of shared risk and reward in the United Kingdom.”

I accept that the Government has a no compulsory redundancies policy, but it has cut some 47,000 public sector jobs, many of which would previously have been held by women. This is hardly something that women in Scotland have been protected from.

Will Jamie Hepburn give way?

My description of what happened to monetary union between the Czech Republic and Slovakia was simply about a matter of fact. However, I am fascinated by Mr Hepburn’s point, because only yesterday the Deputy First Minister told us that we should follow the example of 159 countries that have become independent since the second world war, all of which were emerging from conflict, the fall of communism or decolonialisation, or from all three. That is a ridiculous example and I am glad that Mr Hepburn agrees with me about that.

Perhaps Mr Hepburn can explain why the UK did not recapitalise the Icelandic banks, much of whose business was here in the United Kingdom? We refused to do that.

Will the member give way?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the early sight of his statement. Indeed, even earlier than that, the cabinet secretary had sent his spin doctors out to brief that the budget would be a budget for independence: honesty, at last. We then heard that an extra 10,000 Scots and an extra 32,000 young Scots have just joined the dole queues. Even the cabinet secretary realised that a budget for independence was the wrong priority, so he dropped the slogan, but it is the same budget. It is a budget for independence—a “Don’t rock the referendum boat” budget for a Scotland that is at a standstill and on pause. It is the wrong priority. Yesterday, a committee of the Parliament heard first hand about the hardship that is faced by tenants who are victims of the bedroom tax. I agree with the cabinet secretary on the iniquity of the bedroom tax, but I think that those tenants’ priority might have been a budget that would banish that tax from Scotland. Instead, Mr Swinney has found less than half the funds that are needed for the bedroom tax this year in order to hide the fact that his budget has no provision at all to help next year. That means that councils will have to prioritise between “deserving” and “undeserving” victims of the bedroom tax. Those are the wrong priorities. There is currently no promise of further help next year. This is the first draft of Mr Swinney’s budget. Will he take the budget for independence away and bring back a real budget for jobs that will banish the bedroom tax from Scotland this year, next year and the year after that, as well?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement and for early sight of it. I add our condolences to those who lost loved ones in the accident and our thanks to those who were involved in the rescue. We agree with the cabinet secretary that it is vital to restore confidence in helicopter transport for the sake of the industry but, above all, for the sake of the workforce and their families. However, as he said, the incident on 23 August was the fifth occasion in recent times on which a helicopter has ditched, with 20 lives being lost in two of those accidents. Whatever the conclusions of the Air Accidents Investigation Branch regarding the cause of the ditching on 23 August, the truth is that wider questions are being asked, to which the workforce will need answers to their strongest satisfaction if confidence is to be regained. Confidence is now so low that an industry review is not likely to be able to restore it. Only a wide-ranging and comprehensive independent inquiry like the one that Lord Cullen carried out will be able to do that, whatever the cause of the latest incident turns out to be. In our view, the process of beginning to rebuild confidence needs an early commitment, so will the cabinet secretary reconsider his position on the issue and send that important signal by supporting such an independent inquiry now?

Patrick Harvie is right, I think—the debate on the legislative programme takes a traditional form. The Government tries to talk up legislation on such prosaic topics as electronic signatures or the consolidation of bankruptcy—it happens to all Governments—and the Opposition tries to decry the programme. However, the truth is that this year, the legislative programme is so thin, so insubstantial and so timid that even the First Minister did not bother trying to talk it up. Instead, he took the time that he had for his statement to talk the Parliament down. [Interruption.] Even Mr Chisholm, a paragon of open-mindedness and giving the Government credit where it is due—a bit too much for my liking sometimes—correctly pronounced it a programme for a campaign, not for a Government. Bereft of material from this year’s programme, the First Minister chose to tell the story of the Parliament, but there are two sides to every story. He said that 16 years ago “the people of this country ... had the confidence and belief to bring this Parliament into existence.”—[Official Report, 3 September 2013; c 21871.] He omitted to mention that he fought them tooth and nail. He did not sign the claim of right, he boycotted the constitutional convention and he compared our Parliament to a pizza until the last moment, when the Parliament was imminent—then and only then did he find his confidence and jump on board. The SNP has never believed in this devolved Parliament and that is why it is a campaign trying to do away with it rather than a Government trying to do its best with it. That showed when the First Minister listed the Parliament’s achievements. Liam McArthur is right—almost none of them happened under Mr Salmond’s leadership. Land reform and the land fund, free personal care and the best homelessness legislation in the world—that was all us. The bus pass, the smoking ban, adults with incapacity legislation and free eye tests—that was Labour-led legislation. Even university tuition fees were abolished by Labour and the Liberal Democrats in this Parliament. [Interruption.] I know. Mr McArthur is right. Mr Salmond might not remember because I think that that was the time when he ran home to Westminster—was it not?—so he was not here. What did the First Minister come up with for SNP achievements? Minimum unit pricing—

Good—in a moment. The First Minister came up with minimum unit pricing, although that was mired in legal problems that we were told at the time had been resolved, and the abolition of bridge tolls. We abolished 1,000 years of the feudal system with this Parliament. The SNP abolished a pound to cross the Forth road bridge.

The SNP abolished the graduate endowment, which never funded tuition. [Interruption.]

Do SNP members know what it funded? It funded support for students from low-income families. That is what the SNP abolished, so it is no wonder that we have heard today and yesterday speech after speech from Government back benchers dripping with despair and angst. Christina McKelvie told us that she sits in the Parliament and looks on “virtually helpless”. I think that that is a comment on Ms McKelvie, not on the Parliament. Christine Grahame wailed, “We cannot do anything real”—what ambition, aspiration and determination! SNP members queued up to tell us how this Parliament—of which some of us are so proud—is too small, poor and powerless to make any difference at all. Meanwhile, Labour members suggested ways in which we could and should be promoting a living wage, ending zero-hours contracts, improving buses, battling the human traffickers and the legal loan sharks and protecting people from the bedroom tax.

No—I am sorry. To be fair, some SNP members found glimmers of light in the darkness. Mark McDonald and Sandra White welcomed the airgun legislation, and Jamie Hepburn, Chic Brodie and John Mason welcomed the revenue Scotland bill and the new landfill and land and buildings transaction taxes. Many SNP members hailed the Scottish welfare fund bill, and rightly so. However, none of them acknowledged that those powers are all newly devolved as a direct result of the Calman commission and the Scotland Act 2012, with much more to flow in the form of powers to borrow and to set income tax. How did that happen? This chamber had to seize control from the SNP Government, set up the commission and deliver the biggest transfer of powers since 1999 across two Parliaments and four Administrations. Until the last moment, the SNP stood defiant against devolution yet again, because it has always been on the wrong side of the devolution story. It wants not to complete devolution, but to kill it, and it always has done. Every SNP member who spoke in the debate told us how much fairer the Scottish Government would make Scotland if it had power over benefits. Thank goodness that there is a welfare fund bill, because the Scottish welfare fund is a disaster. Eligibility rules are so botched that Scots in crisis are receiving a fraction of the help that they used to get from that great Satan, the Department for Work and Pensions. In Dundee, the amount of help is down by 70 per cent; in Edinburgh and Glasgow, it is down by 80 per cent; in Highland, it is down by 90 per cent; and in the Western Isles, people are now getting no help at all—voluntary organisations tell us that they are being sent to food banks instead.

I will tell members how valuable the commitments of Mr Hepburn’s Government are. Given power—[Interruption.]

Given power over a bit of the benefits system—the welfare fund, crisis loans and community care grants—the SNP has managed to create something that looks more like the parish and the poor law than a modern welfare system. Families are being sent to food banks because the SNP Government has failed to get support out to them, not through malice but through sheer incompetence and inattention to detail. That is what happens when we have a cabinet secretary who is more interested in the priorities of her party than the obligations of her office and the people whom she is supposed to serve. That is what happens when we have a Government that puts Scotland on pause. In this Parliament, there is only one story for the SNP, and only one bill in the programme that its members care about: the referendum. There are 384 long days to go, and it will seem like 380 years. With every day, Scotland wants separation a little less—perhaps one in four people at present, we see today—but incredibly, with every day, the SNP also seems to want independence a little less. It now proposes that we keep the British monarch and the British pound, that we let the UK run our fiscal policy, and that we keep our UK passports, the UK energy network and UK research funding. We will be in Europe, but we will be out of the euro, Schengen and the common fisheries policy, and we will ignore European pension law. Some SNP members even try to say that we can leave the United Kingdom but still be in the United Kingdom. It is, as one of the SNP’s cheerleaders in the press said today, independence “diluted to the point of meaninglessness”. The Government’s legislative programme accurately reflects the character and circumstances of this SNP Government. This SNP Government is trapped in a devolved Parliament that it has never believed in and never will believe in. It is constrained by a desire to show the Parliament’s limitations, rather than push its boundaries to help the people of Scotland. It is blinded by the pursuit of an independence cause that it no longer even believes in itself. The programme is the measure of the limitations of that Government; it is not a measure of the limitations of this Parliament. This is the dynamic, developing, devolved Parliament that the Scottish people believed in 16 years ago and still believe in. It gives us powerful, wide-ranging and growing choices over health, education, justice, jobs and, increasingly, taxation—let us use those powers—while giving us the opportunities that are provided by shared risk and rewards in the bigger social and economic union that our forefathers in the Labour movement built, supported, created and argued for. Let us make the most of that opportunity. What Scotland needs is a Government and a programme that believe in this Parliament, as we do. This programme is not that programme, and the SNP Government is not that Government.

For the avoidance of doubt, I am, along with Mr Swinney, a member of the life-after-leadership school. Leadership is not something that I aspire to any more. Of course, I cannot speak for Mr Neil; let us hear his leadership speech.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I congratulate John Wilson on getting this debate. I was keen to take part in it for the fairly obvious reason that, prior to being elected to the Scottish Parliament, I spent 12 years working for Oxfam and so have some experience of where the ideas in the “Our Economy” report have come from. In that time, the thing that I was always proudest of and which I thought was most unique about Oxfam as an organisation was just how wide and deep its reach was at both ends of the spectrum. For example, it was certainly possible to visit Oxfam programmes in many countries around the world where reaching the community involved might require travelling by small plane, then by truck and then by dugout canoe and then by walking for sometimes many hours. The community might seem remote and beyond the reach of an organisation that started in Oxford, but the truth was that, on every occasion, at the end of the trip there would be a community where Oxfam was not only known and understood but welcomed and respected. Equally, at the other end of the spectrum, Oxfam was always an organisation that could knock on doors at the highest levels of society, be that in London, Geneva or Washington and be it Government doors, those of the International Monetary Fund or the World Bank, or those of academia and the offices of the most respected economists in the world. Oxfam remains an organisation that is listened to and understood. I make that point to show that behind the “Our Economy” report is an enormous experience of community engagement and economic understanding, and a great deal of experience of using powerful tools to engage with communities and to get from them their experience and turn that into a policy agenda that can make a real difference to their lives. It is exactly that kind of approach that Oxfam has taken in Scotland in order to produce its report. Another point about that kind of work undertaken by Oxfam is that it is successful. I think that many people see agencies such as Oxfam as living in a world of permanent despair in which nothing ever gets better and it responds to ever-worsening crises, but that is not true. Over time, many of the communities with which organisations such as Oxfam work do find ways to strengthen themselves and create sustainability. I remember almost 25 years ago visiting communities facing problems in Chile, which was just emerging from the Pinochet years and the austerity programme that had been imposed on it. Those communities used the tools and possibilities presented to them and succeeded in moving forward. The Oxfam report is one that we should listen to. It has come at the right time because we have seen in recent weeks many supposed signs of recovery—for example, slightly better employment figures and some economic growth—but those of us who are prepared to look behind the headlines see that many of the jobs that have been created have zero-hours contracts and are part time and temporary; they do not provide the kind of security and confidence that people need to be able to go on and build a stable family life. Many of those jobs pay poverty wages that are less than the living wage. Today, we have seen a report from the Resolution Foundation that shows that the proportion of the workforce in Scotland being paid less than the living wage is increasing, not falling.

There are many challenges in the Oxfam report for many sectors of society, but the challenge for us is not tonight but next week when our budget comes forward; the challenge is to take on board the report’s lessons and challenges and respond to them as the budget works its way through the Parliament.

Will the member take an intervention?

Mr Hepburn must remember that we sit together on the Welfare Reform Committee. In that committee, Labour members said the Government’s guidelines for the welfare fund would mean that not enough of the money would get out to the people who need it. In the Western Isles, 90 per cent less has been spent than was spent in the same period last year. We are behind the fund, but what we said is right: it needs to be sorted.

Like Rob Gibson, I am no great supporter of tax havens. That is why I was a bit puzzled to see, early in the summer, his First Minister making a speech that seemed to imply that Scotland should be a tax haven like Guernsey and the Channel Islands.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what further support it will provide to help the regeneration of small-to-medium sized town centres. (S4O-02316)

I look forward to reading the report, but the cabinet secretary should understand that those working towards the regeneration of the largest town in my constituency, Haddington, will feel that it rings hollow, given her Government’s decision to close that town’s courts, removing £360,000 from the economy and leaving two large properties vacant in the heart of the town. What resources will the cabinet secretary commit to Haddington to mitigate that act of town centre vandalism by her Cabinet colleague?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it is making on delivering the new Haddington hospital. (S4O-02283)

The new Haddington hospital has been disappearing from in front of our eyes for some years now. In 2007, it was promised that the new hospital would open in 2012. In 2008, the business case was promised in 2010. Since 2009-10, we have heard nothing of it except that it would be delivered through the non-profit-distributing programme. If the cabinet secretary is now telling us that the new hospital will be completed in 2017, what guarantee can he give to my constituents that the project will not be pushed to the back of the queue yet again?

I wanted to speak in the debate because of two personal connections with the issue. One is old—it goes back more than 10 years—and the other is current, but both have some relevance to the Age Scotland campaign and this debate. I it was who, as the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning, introduced the national concessionary scheme all those years ago. However, it was not the scheme that we know today because, over time, the bus pass has evolved. For instance, in the early days, there was a charge for using the bus pass at peak times. The equalisation of ages was another change: when the scheme was set up, men and women had different retirement ages. Further, when the bus pass was first put in place, one of the greatest complaints about it was that it could be used only locally and that people could not cross boundaries with it, so some work had to be done before the scheme became truly national. I remember one meeting at which members of pensioners organisations complained bitterly that the bus pass could not be used on tour buses. Over time, the scheme has strengthened, although never enough to enable it to be extended to tour buses. We have come to realise that the greatest weakness of the scheme is that there is no point having a bus pass if there is no service on which it can be used. That is exactly the gap that is often covered by community transport, which provides a day-to-day link in a way that tour buses, for example, do not. It seems clear to me that, as Alison McInnes said, that aspect is unfinished business in terms of the evolution of the scheme, and that the scheme should be extended to cover community transport services. I also agree with Alison McInnes and Christine Grahame that it is entirely legitimate to debate age eligibility for the bus pass and the possibility of perhaps reducing that because of changes over time, but, at the same time, to discuss the extension of eligibility in terms of making the bus pass usable where the service is provided by community transport. The second connection that I have with the issue is that I currently have out for consultation a proposal for a member’s bill to change the regulatory framework for buses in Scotland. That is designed exactly to try to find ways of facilitating more and more accessible bus services, primarily through a new franchise power for local authorities but also through ways of allowing greater use of local authorities’ own fleets and encouraging more community transport to fill the gaps. I believe that my bill could well provide a legislative vehicle that could be used to extend the concessionary scheme to community transport. I encourage Age Scotland and any supporters of the still waiting campaign to make submissions to my consultation that make exactly that case. I say to Jim Eadie—gently, because this has been a very consensual debate—that the argument for the extension to community transport is made by those elderly and disabled passengers who currently have to pay for community transport, rather than by the community transport organisations themselves. I am sure that, if we said to commercial operators, “We’re going to put £190 million into the bus industry. Would you like us to do that through a concessionary travel scheme?” they would say, “No, that’s not our priority. Here are some other ways in which we would much rather you pursued that.” Of course, they would be wrong. We pursue that route because of the benefits that our older and disabled citizens get, and those people should get those same benefits when they use community transport, too.

16. To ask the Scottish Government how many more 16 to 24-year-olds are employed on zero-hours contracts than in 2007. (S4O-02150)

Presumably, the minister will be aware that the ONS has reported that, for the UK, the number of 16 to 24-year-olds on zero-hours contracts has doubled since the economic downturn. That increase is likely, to some degree at least, to be reflected here in Scotland. I hope that the minister agrees with me that unstable, insecure employment of that kind, especially for young people, amounts to little more than exploitation. I understand that employment law is reserved, but I am interested not in what could be done if that were to change but in what could be done now to address the position. Will the Scottish Government use its significant power as a purchaser of goods and services to turn down bids that propose to use zero-hours contracts, as was recommended last week by the Scotland Institute?

Is Ms Constance saying that the Scottish National Party’s position is that, given control over employment law, it would ban zero-hours contracts, as the Labour Party leader Mr Miliband has committed to do? [Iain Gray has corrected his contribution. See end of report.]

Iain Gray has identified an error in his contribution and provided the following correction. At col 20116, paragraph 4— Original text— Is Ms Constance saying that the Scottish National Party’s position is that, given control over employment law, it would ban zero-hours contracts, as the Labour Party leader Mr Miliband has committed to do? Corrected text— Is Ms Constance saying that the Scottish National Party’s position is that, given control over employment law, it would ban zero-hours contracts, as the UK shadow health secretary, Andy Burnham, has committed to do?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

Perhaps the moment has passed, but I wanted to point out that it is not possible to talk in a vacuum because sound does not travel in a vacuum. The advantage of that, Mr Stevenson, is that nobody would be able to hear the scream.

Nokia once ran a series of advertisements in which an overblown voice-over followed ordinary-looking people doing ordinary things quite anonymously, such as taking the bus home from work. The point was that they were the scientists behind the communication technology that was daily revolutionising our lives. They were of course not the celebrities that the narrator implied, but were completely unknown. Nokia technology might at a certain point in time have changed the world, but it did not change the public’s disengagement from the science behind it. Scotland is certainly guilty of that, too. After all, we are ranked third in the world for peer-reviewed papers, but none of those responsible for those papers would be recognised in the street. That is unlike, for example, our celebrity footballers, whose efforts—much as I support them—have left us languishing in 78th equal place in the world. Our appreciation of science tends to be of the dishcloth variety. We have an ability to recite Scottish inventors of the past but a complete unawareness of the science that is happening right here and right now. However, Scotland is still profoundly a science nation. Last year’s Institute of Physics report showed that “Physics-based businesses in Scotland, from electricity generation … to transport, contribute £8.5 bn to the national economy, and employ more than 100,000 people”. That is significantly more than, for example, the financial services sector. It would be good if science was more widely understood, and members will not find me arguing against anything that we can do to raise the level of public engagement with science. Only last week, I was delighted to be able to open a tremendous visitor centre at a major science-based enterprise in my constituency—an enterprise that provides 700 high-quality, science-based jobs, supports 33 full level 4 apprenticeships and pumps £30 million every year into the local economy. However, it was a nuclear power station—science from which the Scottish Government specifically wants us to disengage. Happily, just down the road from Torness, Dunbar primary school has created its own remarkable science event—the Dunbar science festival. It was initiated entirely by a group of parents and, this year—its third year—attracted 6,000 people to participate in a week of science-based events. That festival was timed to coincide with science and engineering week, in which I also participated by going back to my first profession and teaching a science class in Law primary school in North Berwick. In that lesson, we calculated the speed of light using chocolate buttons and the microwave oven from the staff room. I had a great time, and the pupils loved it when I set the microwave on fire. It is good that both those events were supported by the Scottish Government. Funding for science week was £23,000 split between 47 schools and 30 public science sessions. Dunbar science festival got a £6,000 share of £121,000, which was split eight ways, with half of it going to Edinburgh science festival. That is good, but it adds up to £144,000. In the same year, the Government found £7 million to promote a movie that already had the corporate power of Disney Pixar behind it, £500,000 to send the First Minister to America to promote the Ryder cup and even £250,000 to pay for a re-enactment of the battle of Bannockburn next year, but its celebration of science for science week commanded £144,000. I listened to some of the figures that the minister outlined in his opening speech and I am glad that the funding will be more this year than last year, but the additional £100,000 or so hardly constitutes a game-changing new investment in public science engagement. What does that say about the real priority that ministers give to science? Only last week, the Royal Society of Edinburgh commented on qualifications for primary teachers. The RSE is clear that the suggestion, which is current, that primary teachers should need a higher in a foreign language but not in a science sends completely the wrong signal and says absolutely the wrong thing about the real priority that we give to science. It also flies in the face of the recommendations of the Government’s own science advisory group.

I do understand that, but I think that the member will also understand, because we have debated the subject before, just how important it is to inspire young people about science at the earliest possible stage. The later we leave it, the harder it gets. In order to do that, primary teachers must have confidence in their own ability to teach science and to inspire the youngsters in their charge as early as possible. The same advisory group recommended that primary schools be properly equipped for science. After all, one can only do so much with an old microwave oven, but the Government simply rejected that idea, saying that it was a matter for councils. The group also recommended support for a science media centre in order to build public understanding and confidence in Scottish science and scientists—exactly the objectives that the minister talked about—but to that suggestion Scottish ministers responded that there is already a UK science media centre based in London, which has a list of Scottish scientists. We can pass the Government motion today—after all, what is there to object to in it? However, in doing so, we are really damning the Government with faint praise for a faint-hearted effort. Until we have a Government that really understands that this nation’s future depends more on science than it does on “Brave” and Bannockburn, until we have ministers who respect the views of the science and engineering community on issues such as energy supply, and until we have an education system that values science at least as much as languages or Scottish studies, in truth we are kidding ourselves that we are protecting this country’s legacy and securing its future as a science nation.

In looking at why Scotland has done so well in the past, it is interesting to note how many of the great figures and their discoveries and ideas came at the time of the enlightenment immediately following the union. Perhaps that is the explanation that Mr Adam is looking for.

Is Neil Findlay aware that this is just not about research funding? In Ireland, the Wellcome Trust funds at a level of 50 per cent compared with projects that it funds in the UK. That is a further disadvantage that many scientists are concerned about.

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

Perhaps the moment has passed, but I wanted to point out that it is not possible to talk in a vacuum because sound does not travel in a vacuum. The advantage of that, Mr Stevenson, is that nobody would be able to hear the scream.

Nokia once ran a series of advertisements in which an overblown voice-over followed ordinary-looking people doing ordinary things quite anonymously, such as taking the bus home from work. The point was that they were the scientists behind the communication technology that was daily revolutionising our lives. They were of course not the celebrities that the narrator implied, but were completely unknown. Nokia technology might at a certain point in time have changed the world, but it did not change the public’s disengagement from the science behind it. Scotland is certainly guilty of that, too. After all, we are ranked third in the world for peer-reviewed papers, but none of those responsible for those papers would be recognised in the street. That is unlike, for example, our celebrity footballers, whose efforts—much as I support them—have left us languishing in 78th equal place in the world. Our appreciation of science tends to be of the dishcloth variety. We have an ability to recite Scottish inventors of the past but a complete unawareness of the science that is happening right here and right now. However, Scotland is still profoundly a science nation. Last year’s Institute of Physics report showed that “Physics-based businesses in Scotland, from electricity generation … to transport, contribute £8.5 bn to the national economy, and employ more than 100,000 people”. That is significantly more than, for example, the financial services sector. It would be good if science was more widely understood, and members will not find me arguing against anything that we can do to raise the level of public engagement with science. Only last week, I was delighted to be able to open a tremendous visitor centre at a major science-based enterprise in my constituency—an enterprise that provides 700 high-quality, science-based jobs, supports 33 full level 4 apprenticeships and pumps £30 million every year into the local economy. However, it was a nuclear power station—science from which the Scottish Government specifically wants us to disengage. Happily, just down the road from Torness, Dunbar primary school has created its own remarkable science event—the Dunbar science festival. It was initiated entirely by a group of parents and, this year—its third year—attracted 6,000 people to participate in a week of science-based events. That festival was timed to coincide with science and engineering week, in which I also participated by going back to my first profession and teaching a science class in Law primary school in North Berwick. In that lesson, we calculated the speed of light using chocolate buttons and the microwave oven from the staff room. I had a great time, and the pupils loved it when I set the microwave on fire. It is good that both those events were supported by the Scottish Government. Funding for science week was £23,000 split between 47 schools and 30 public science sessions. Dunbar science festival got a £6,000 share of £121,000, which was split eight ways, with half of it going to Edinburgh science festival. That is good, but it adds up to £144,000. In the same year, the Government found £7 million to promote a movie that already had the corporate power of Disney Pixar behind it, £500,000 to send the First Minister to America to promote the Ryder cup and even £250,000 to pay for a re-enactment of the battle of Bannockburn next year, but its celebration of science for science week commanded £144,000. I listened to some of the figures that the minister outlined in his opening speech and I am glad that the funding will be more this year than last year, but the additional £100,000 or so hardly constitutes a game-changing new investment in public science engagement. What does that say about the real priority that ministers give to science? Only last week, the Royal Society of Edinburgh commented on qualifications for primary teachers. The RSE is clear that the suggestion, which is current, that primary teachers should need a higher in a foreign language but not in a science sends completely the wrong signal and says absolutely the wrong thing about the real priority that we give to science. It also flies in the face of the recommendations of the Government’s own science advisory group.

I do understand that, but I think that the member will also understand, because we have debated the subject before, just how important it is to inspire young people about science at the earliest possible stage. The later we leave it, the harder it gets. In order to do that, primary teachers must have confidence in their own ability to teach science and to inspire the youngsters in their charge as early as possible. The same advisory group recommended that primary schools be properly equipped for science. After all, one can only do so much with an old microwave oven, but the Government simply rejected that idea, saying that it was a matter for councils. The group also recommended support for a science media centre in order to build public understanding and confidence in Scottish science and scientists—exactly the objectives that the minister talked about—but to that suggestion Scottish ministers responded that there is already a UK science media centre based in London, which has a list of Scottish scientists. We can pass the Government motion today—after all, what is there to object to in it? However, in doing so, we are really damning the Government with faint praise for a faint-hearted effort. Until we have a Government that really understands that this nation’s future depends more on science than it does on “Brave” and Bannockburn, until we have ministers who respect the views of the science and engineering community on issues such as energy supply, and until we have an education system that values science at least as much as languages or Scottish studies, in truth we are kidding ourselves that we are protecting this country’s legacy and securing its future as a science nation.

In looking at why Scotland has done so well in the past, it is interesting to note how many of the great figures and their discoveries and ideas came at the time of the enlightenment immediately following the union. Perhaps that is the explanation that Mr Adam is looking for.

Is Neil Findlay aware that this is not just about research funding? In Ireland, the Wellcome Trust funds at a level of 50 per cent compared with projects that it funds in the UK. That is a further disadvantage that many scientists are concerned about.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the measures outlined in the proposed bus regulation (Scotland) bill. (S4O-02121)

I am pleased that the minister is prepared to study suggestions that are designed to provide a framework for better bus services. Would the minister be willing to meet me to discuss the proposed bill and how we can work together to improve the framework for bus services?

On that point, does the member accept that, traditionally and for as long as anybody can remember, employers have had to accept some responsibility, too, so that the young people whom they take into their employment learn what is required of them by doing the job? Does he agree that employers should still have that responsibility today?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am always grateful to have the chance to participate in debates on youth employment, as I believe that there is no issue of greater importance confronting us. I am always happy to see the Minister for Youth Employment in her place on the front bench. I feel that I deserve a little of the credit—or blame—for her being there, given that her appointment followed our demands for such a post some 18 months ago. Although I might have some concerns about some of her policies, I know that this debate on young people and supporting Scotland’s economy today and tomorrow reflects a profound belief that we share: that this country’s economic success and its capacity to drive social justice will be defined by the degree to which we ensure that the boundless potential of our young people is both understood and harnessed. Therefore, although we should acknowledge recent improvements in the youth unemployment position, we are obliged to examine rigorously the reality behind them. We must follow the advice of Jack Welch to “Face reality as it is, not as it was or as you wish it to be.” The reality is that the annual population survey, which is described in the Scottish Government’s own papers as the more reliable estimate of economic activity, shows that, for 16 to 24-year-olds, unemployment fell last year, but by less than 1 per cent, and that economic inactivity in that age group rose by 2.5 per cent. Some 33,000 16 to 19-year-olds were not in employment, education or training last year. That figure is an increase from the year before. Ken Macintosh was right to point out that the labour force survey, from which the figures in the Government motion are drawn, shows unemployment in the 16 and 17-year-old age group at 38 per cent. For young men, the figure was 46 per cent last year, which is massively high.

The converse of that, of course, is that the annual population surveys allow for blips in short-term figures to be evened out and therefore give more accurate figures over the longer term. However, my point was that the figures for 16 and 17-year-olds are from the labour force survey that the minister extols, and that reflects the reality in my constituency. The 2012 unemployment rate for 16 to 19-year-olds was still twice the figure in 2008. Between 2007 and 2012, long-term youth unemployment in East Lothian increased by an unbelievable fifteenfold. That is the reality. That means that we must redouble our efforts and re-examine the measures that we take. For example, 25,000 apprenticeship starts is great, and it is absolutely right that every one of those in Scotland is attached to work—that is a good thing. However, the programme bears a rather more rigorous critique than Mr Hepburn has previously suggested, because with 10,000 of those places going to those who are already in work, the programme’s capacity to address youth unemployment is simply undermined.

The minister really needs to investigate rebuttals when her special advisers give them to her. The figures that she has from the time when Labour was in power were based on an extremely small survey. The point is that, even if what she says were the case, long-term youth unemployment did not exist in Scotland in those days and the core purpose of the apprenticeship programme was to upskill people in the workforce. We are in a different situation now. That is why the apprenticeship starts need to be used to take young people off the unemployment register. It is true that too many of the 25,000 apprenticeships are shorter level 2 frameworks, and there is not enough of a match with long-term job opportunities. Members should consider the oil industry, which ministers say is in a boom. Mr MacKenzie said that the industry has said that it will need 100,000 young people. Last year, there were just 133 apprenticeships in the oil and gas framework. Surely that cannot be right. That, of course, is the key, as employability is probably not the biggest problem right now; rather, the biggest problem is a lack of job opportunities—or demand, not supply. That is why the Scottish Government’s new certificate worries me, although I accept that it has been introduced with the best of intentions. There is an old Springsteen line: “Is a dream a lie if it don’t come true, or is it something worse?” What is a certificate of work readiness for someone in a world in which there is no work ready for them if not a dream that is not going to come true? I do not accept that our young people are not fit for work or somehow from another planet. It is the economy and employers who are, for whatever reason, unavoidable or not, failing to provide opportunity for them. I know that the First Minister understands the importance of the job supply because he talked yesterday about opportunities for young people when he welcomed the announcement of 400 call-centre jobs. On the same day, however, the construction industry revealed that it had shed 62,500 jobs. That is why youth unemployment remains stubbornly high and why the best thing that the Scottish Government could do for our young people is to stop talking about shovel-ready projects and actually get the shovels digging. We know what works when it comes to work experience. The Government’s community jobs fund works well, with placements of reasonable length and pay, and a 40 per cent positive outcome rate. Why do we not invest more in that fund, expand it into the private sector and commit to more than one year of funding at a time? Why do we not revisit the project Scotland model, which had similar success but for which funding was abolished in 2007?

None of this is easy; nor is the situation unique to Scotland. Yesterday, the International Labour Organization reported on the global youth employment crisis and suggested that young people are giving up hope. That is all the more reason for us to redouble our efforts and re-examine every measure that we take. We must refocus programmes such as the apprenticeships for today’s reality; we must invest in demand as well as supply; and we must confront the long-term trends as well as celebrate any welcome short-term improvements.

It looks like a horse’s head. [Laughter.]

1. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment has had with the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities about action to reduce carbon emissions from transport. (S4O-02045)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary agrees that if we are ever to meet our transport carbon emissions reduction targets we need significant modal shift from the private car to public transport. Most public transport journeys, especially in rural areas, are undertaken by bus, and bus passenger numbers continue on trend to fall. If we are to achieve a significant modal shift towards buses, we need more bus services, in which passengers can have more confidence. Will the cabinet secretary consider my proposal for a bus regulation (Scotland) bill, the consultation document for which was published today? Will he support such a measure to improve our bus services?

More than a year ago, I said that a hit list of court closures was being prepared and that my local court in Haddington was on it. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice said then that I was scaremongering and that there were no such plans. Sure enough, the hit list was published, and the cabinet secretary then said that there would be no closures without local consultation. We marshalled more than 150 substantive submissions in evidence and we gathered thousands of signatures in opposition to closing Haddington’s courts. There were no submissions in favour of closure. What kind of local consultation weighs in the balance all evidence against no evidence and comes down on the side of no evidence at all? It is a sham, a deception and a disgrace. I was not scaremongering, and the cabinet secretary was dissembling. Last week, he consigned my local court to the dustbin of history. History matters. Haddington has had courts of some kind for centuries. We have had lay justice there since the time of James VI. Local justice survived the siege of Haddington, Cromwell, the reformation, the treaty of union, two world wars and Margaret Thatcher. It seems, however, that it will not survive Kenny MacAskill. Haddington court is busy, contrary to the impression that the cabinet secretary tried to create last week. It dealt with more civil cases than any of the other courts that are slated to close. More than 3,000 criminal cases were prosecuted there last year, and many community sentences and drug treatment and testing orders were monitored. Adults with incapacity applications alone soared by 70 per cent. As East Lothian has the fastest-growing population in Scotland, court work there can only increase. Victims and witnesses will face considerable inconvenience in travelling to Edinburgh. Those seeking civil redress or involved in family actions face not only their own travel costs but up to £400 more to cover additional travelling time for their agents for each court appearance. As Mr MacAskill well knows, family actions can involve as many as 12 such hearings. He might save small change in his budget, but my constituents will pay dearly. Local lawyers say that legal aid work might become financially unviable for them, which would undermine access to advice and cost local jobs. Haddington citizens advice bureau believes that its representation of clients will be compromised. Ironically, Mr MacAskill chose that very CAB to launch the first LawWorks legal advice service in Scotland. He praised the CAB’s in-court advisers, some of whom are here today because they fear that their jobs will be gone tomorrow if he persists in closing the court. As for justices of the peace, all but a handful of East Lothian JPs have made it clear that they will not be willing to serve in Edinburgh, which will have a knock-on effect for non-bench work such as signing warrants for police officers. Mind you, those police officers might not need any warrants, because they will be spending all their time travelling to and from Edinburgh or sitting around Edinburgh sheriff court instead of doing police work in East Lothian. That is what our share of those extra police officers will spend their time doing. All that is being done to save £81,000 per annum—a figure that is disputed by forensic accountancy evidence that was submitted to the consultation, and most of which will anyway be pushed on to other public sector budgets. The greatest harm in the proposals is the compromising of local access to justice and the abrogation of the principle that justice must be seen to be done and not dispensed at a distance. However, there is another kind of damage, too. Haddington is a county town with a proud history and the community is working hard to maintain its vibrancy. Only last week, the town market was successfully re-established. A trust has just been elected to regenerate the town. The county archives have come home to a magnificent new library. An employability hub has opened to boost local opportunity, and this Saturday our local radio station will take to the airwaves. Now, the dead hand of the cabinet secretary is reaching out into the heart of Haddington to snuff the life out of one of our key institutions. He is not standing up for Scotland but stamping down on one of Scotland’s oldest towns. In this context, he often falls back on the example of his home town of Linlithgow. What he omits to say is that justice was not removed from West Lothian as a county. The administrative centre of West Lothian moved to Livingston and the court went with it. There is no suggestion of the provision of a court somewhere else in my county of East Lothian. Jobs will go, local shops and businesses will suffer and civic pride will be hurt. The cabinet secretary’s amendment is as dishonest as his consultation. First, it pretends that the decision has somehow been forced on him by someone else, which is a ridiculous assertion, given the saving of £80,000. He then tries to present it as a modernisation of the court service. The amendment is false and false again. It is the cabinet secretary’s decision and it was taken solely to balance his books without regard for principle, the wider impact or indeed the evidence. It is the casual, unwitting vandalism of the bean-counting bureaucrat. It is unworthy of a minister who is entrusted with the stewardship of Scottish justice and unbecoming of a Scottish Cabinet that is charged with protecting the wellbeing of Scotland’s towns and communities, such as Haddington.

I simply ask the cabinet secretary to pause, consider and think again.

Will the member take an intervention?

I understand that the line about cuts in the Scottish budget has been handed out from somewhere central in the SNP. However, I say to Mr Keir that the saving in my local court will be £80,000 a year, whereas the cost of travel for non-legal court users will be £85,000 a year. The burden of cost is being shifted directly on to my constituents and it is making justice impossible for them to afford. That is the exact opposite of the point that he is making.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am absolutely clear that civil servants and other officials must undertake the work to produce the budgets that are demanded of them but, in the end, it is a ministerial decision. The cabinet secretary has responsibility for taking a decision based on the wider impact on justice and Scotland’s communities. That is the point that I was making, and I stand by it.

The Welfare Reform Committee hears about the impact of the reforms every week. We hear about it from academics, notably in the Sheffield Hallam University research that many speakers have referred to. We hear about it from a wide variety of agencies with an interest, such as advice agencies that tell us that they are overwhelmed by the need for advice, and from advocates of those affected, such as people with disabilities, those who suffer mental health problems or those who are poor. They tell us that they are overwhelmed by the severity of the impact of the reforms that those whom they work with tell them is happening. We hear about the impact from service providers such as local authorities and housing associations—they too are overwhelmed by the impossibility of the position that they find themselves in. However, the most powerful testimony is from the individuals and families who are affected, as we heard today in Glasgow—the convener described that. They are overwhelmed by the injustice of the reforms, by the fear that the reforms are provoking and by the cruelty that the reforms promise. It is not even a case of being cruel to be kind, because it is clear from the evidence that the committee has heard that the reforms will not have the effect that they are designed to have, whether that is moving people into work or moving them into smaller tenancies. Of course, the committee does not just collect testimony; it also seeks to look at ways to mitigate the impact of the reforms and it scrutinises the Scottish Government’s actions to that end. We have considered the Scottish welfare fund, the new passporting regulations and the council tax reduction that is replacing council tax benefit. None of those actions is perfect—Jackie Baillie mentioned the issue of appeals, for example—but in every case the Scottish Government has clearly and in good faith set out to try to create a system in which there is no significant loss to those who depend on those benefits. In two cases, the Scottish Government has identified additional resource, in that it has provided £9 million for the Scottish welfare fund and, along with councils, it has contributed to the £40 million for the council tax reduction scheme. Much current attention has been focused on the bedroom tax—and rightly so—because that is a reform that really cannot work. When the committee took evidence from housing associations, Albyn Housing Society of the Highlands and Islands explained that 75 per cent of its properties have two or three bedrooms and that more than 30 per cent of its tenants would be affected by the changes. That housing association simply does not have single-bedroom houses in the small communities that it serves, so the bedroom tax cannot work as designed to move people into smaller tenancies and free up bigger houses for others. In Glasgow this morning, we heard of the particularly pernicious effect of the tax on people with learning disabilities. Those are people whom we have worked hard to liberate from long-stay institutions so that they can live with support in their own tenancies, where they now find themselves punished by the bedroom tax. My colleague and friend Andrew Burns of the City of Edinburgh Council has said that Labour and the SNP should be able to work together on fighting the bedroom tax, and I think that he is right. There is less division between us than some portray in, for example, council policies. When the committee heard from Dundee City Council’s Councillor Black, who represents the SNP, and North Lanarkshire Council’s Councillor McCabe—a Labour councillor, of course—they talked about their attitude to eviction as a result of the bedroom tax. Councillor Black said that his council’s no-eviction policy meant that, if a tenant had arrears only because of the bedroom tax, had done everything possible to avoid that and had not been offered a smaller tenancy, the council would use all forms of debt recovery but not eviction for one year. Councillor McCabe said that his council would do everything possible short of eviction, but he could not promise that it would never come to that. I think that they were saying exactly the same thing, and to pretend otherwise is really to split hairs at the margin of the problem. Of course, the trouble with a no-eviction policy is that, first, it provides no protection for housing association tenants. Secondly, it means that, even if tenants avoid eviction, they will still carry the debt of rent arrears into the future. Thirdly, it provides no help for those who find some way—God knows how—to pay the bedroom tax, perhaps by heating less, eating less or depriving their kids more. Those people deserve help and mitigation, too. The only way to mitigate the effect of this iniquitous tax is to find some or all of the resource to offset the housing benefit reduction not just through providing advice but directly—through discretionary housing payments, payments under section 12 of the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 or otherwise. We should be nothing other than clear that the UK Government is responsible for the iniquitous bedroom tax. It is not fair that we should have to try to find additional resources from within our budgets, but then it is not fair that some of our most vulnerable citizens have to meet the bedroom tax from within their resources, too. Solidarity, rather than sympathy, demands that we do not just point a finger at the guilty but stretch out a helping hand to the victims, too. I know that something will need to be cut to do that, but that is the consensus that we must reach, and we must find a budget adjustment, which might be less than ideal, that most members of this Parliament can support.

Otherwise, we are not doing all that we can. The truth is that we must share some of the pain here in order to avoid sharing some of the guilt.

Does the minister acknowledge that this is what is wrong with the debate? We agree that we have to rob Peter to pay Paul, which is less than ideal, but it is the Scottish Government that has the budget. Let us sit down and make suggestions about where that money might be found. We have to agree that we will support painful cuts elsewhere for the greater good. That is how to move things forward—not by demanding suggestions from those of us who do not have access to the books.

Congratulations to Kezia Dugdale on securing the debate, and to one billion rising on its remarkable global mobilisation on 14 February. Any event that spans the world from Kelso to Bukavu in the Congo is something very special. I saw the chaotic, violent anarchy in Bukavu almost 20 years ago and I cannot pretend to be surprised that it has since been called the rape capital of the world. What is surprising is that the one billion rising movement has reached out to rape survivors there in eastern Congo, opened a support centre and mobilised thousands of women in its cause. However, we should not kid ourselves that violence against women is defined by war, societal breakdown or some kind of foreignness. The shame stalks Scotland, too. Only today, STV reported that a Milnathort man was convicted of assaulting his wife because she had overcooked his steak. That is not an isolated example; tomorrow morning I will buy my weekly local paper, which will have a whole page of court reports, and I am willing to bet that most of them will be similar stories of violence against women—they usually are. Of course they are. Two years ago, Edinburgh Napier University studied attitudes to gendered violence among 11 and 12-year-olds in Scotland. Nearly all those young people, boys and girls, believed that a man was justified in punching his partner because she had had an affair, and 80 per cent of them thought that he had cause to slap his partner if his tea was late. We do not need war to justify abuse—a badly cooked steak is reason enough. That man did not just throw his wife out of the house. He included his daughters, too, presumably to teach them that all women are collectively guilty, no matter whose hand was on the frying pan. His lawyer explained that consideration should be given to the fact that he had now recognised that he has a difficulty with alcohol. It is not alcohol that is his problem—it is his attitude to women. Kezia Dugdale is right. The problem begins with everyday sexism and inequality, and ends in the normalisation of violent abuse. That sexism is found in the most erudite of circles. Last year, the astrophysicist Professor Jocelyn Bell Burnell visited the Parliament and described the intimidation that she was subjected to as the only woman in her undergraduate physics class at the University of Glasgow. She stuck it out and went on to discover pulsars; then her male supervisor was awarded the Nobel prize on the back of her work. And she is not the only one to have been treated in that way. Rosalind Franklin helped to discover DNA, but it was Crick, Watson and Wilkins who got the prize. Professor Bell Burnell was here to launch a report that shows that, in Scotland, 73 per cent of women who study science never find work in science at all. Perhaps they get the message that they are not wanted. Likewise, in the Napier study, Sally says: “At the moment I want to be a dancer or a doctor. When I grow up I’m going to have two babies and work part-time in the shop down the road.” That is a waste of potential and ambition. It is something much darker, too. That is the same Sally who thinks that, in adult life, her partner will be entitled to hit her if she is late with her tea. Violence against women is not caused by war, drink or ignorance; it is caused by the attitudes of men, and one billion rising is telling us that the game is up.

Local justice has been dispensed in the town of Haddington for hundreds of years. The SCS received 150 substantial submissions and thousands of pleas from East Lothian citizens that that should continue, but it chose to ignore them. Will the cabinet secretary undertake to reconsider the submissions, pay attention to the wishes of my constituents and remove Haddington from the hit list of closures?

Mr Swinney is talking about the prospects for economic growth. A few minutes ago, the First Minister reiterated his belief that economic growth could be driven by a cut in corporation tax. Perhaps Mr Swinney could answer the question that Mr Salmond refused to answer: where would he like corporation tax to be set?

The question was straightforward: in the prospects that he describes, at what level does he see corporation tax being set?

Does the member accept that the most recent significant politician to question the affordability of pensions in a separate Scotland was Mr Swinney? Was he scaremongering?

This debate is less about the strength of Scotland’s financial position and more about the weakness of the SNP’s financial arguments. Above all, Mr Swinney’s motion seeks to discredit his own analysis of Scotland’s financial prospects post-separation as outlined to his own Cabinet colleagues in his own Cabinet paper, which was leaked two weeks ago. Truly, this Government has taken us through the looking-glass, with SNP back benchers rubbishing Mr Swinney’s private analysis on Mr Swinney’s public behalf. We have just heard Linda Fabiani lambast those who base their analysis on OBR estimates, which is exactly what Mr Swinney did in the paper that he prepared for the Scottish Cabinet. I remember the first North Sea oil boom. When I was growing up in Inverness, you could not miss it. Tens of thousands of Scots were building oil rigs at Ardersier and Nigg and the rigs were literally queued up along the Moray Firth. Every family and town had somebody working offshore with stories of unheard-of wage packets and leisure to spend them. I do not see that happening now, but what I do see is a mature, growing oil and gas industry based around Aberdeen that demonstrates daily the world’s current confidence in Scotland. There are major new headquarters for Norwegian companies such as Statoil and Aker and significant investments from Korea and Sinopec from China. Transocean is planning to base all its global training outside the US in Aberdeen. A recent Lloyd’s survey showed that four out of five companies there plan growth, but it also showed that that growth is primarily international and that, for most companies, North Sea operations constitute 20 per cent or less of their business. Those investments are happening right now in Aberdeen. They were attracted exactly by Scotland’s openness to their business, by our position as part of the English-speaking world and by our position as part of a stable United Kingdom and part of the European Union. They do not depend on Scotland’s share of the continental shelf. We can build an oil industry that will outlast North Sea oil, and we are doing it right now as part of the United Kingdom. Those companies tell us that their problem is finding the skilled workforce that they need, so they would be better served by a Scottish Government investing more in college places and less in separatist rhetoric. As for renewables, a former leader of the SNP published a document last week that says that the £2 billion subsidy required by our renewables industry is “all right if paid for by England ... but it is not clear how this could be done when Scotland is independent.” The inconvenient truth, which even lifelong nationalists cannot hide from, is that Scotland’s undoubted potential in renewable generation is strengthened by Scotland being part of a United Kingdom. We are told today that Scotland would be better off to the tune of £824 per person. That figure is explicitly designed to sound like a separation windfall. Mr Swinney has even told us how he would spend it. Earlier today, the First Minister called it a “surplus”. Ken Mackintosh is right, though. It is not a surplus. It is £4.4 billion of deficit. Mr Swinney is saying that if he inherited a deficit smaller than the UK’s, he would immediately increase it to George Osborne levels of fiscal mismanagement, which he described today as an unsustainable level of debt.

Not at all. There is nothing wrong with deficit budgeting if it is honest, transparent and invested properly. What is not acceptable is to slice and dice debt and pretend to the Scottish people that it is an asset that we can spend—not once but over and over—and to promise Scots prosperity based on sub-prime bookkeeping. The idea that we create a stabilisation fund by an unsustainable—by Mr Swinney’s own admission—level of deficit seems Orwellian. Mr Swinney had a reputation for fiscal probity. He was the one willing to force unpalatable decisions on his colleagues, telling them that they could not afford to cancel student debt and that they had to cancel rail links to airports, cut the housing budget and slash spending on colleges. He earned his characterisation as the austere bank manager of the Government. When John Swinney told the Cabinet that, within a few years, Scotland’s deficit would be worse than that of the UK and that oil would dominate a separate Scottish economy, with price volatility and declining production threatening cuts to public services and defence, that was Mr Swinney, the trustworthy bank manager. Now, Mr Swinney is lambasting George Osborne for offering him funny money to spend, but his motion proffers exactly the same currency to pay the price of separation. As for his wise words on oil, the Cabinet did not want to hear that, so he was sent out, like a poor man’s J R Ewing, to declare that he had seen the future and it was oilier than he had thought after all. Keynes said: “When the facts change, I change my mind.” Mr Swinney is saying, “The First Minister has told me to change my mind and now I’m going to change the facts.” With that, he has sacrificed his hard-won fiscal credibility.

Does Mr Mason understand that the £4.4 billion surplus that Mr Swinney and his colleagues have been referring to is included in that figure of borrowing that he has just criticised?

Last year, the then outgoing Auditor General for Scotland, Bob Black, audited the joint commissioning of social care by the NHS and local government. He called it one of the most significant performance audits that he had ever prepared, for two reasons. The first was the demographic change to which many members have referred. Bob Black pointed to a projected 147 per cent rise in the number of people aged over 85 in the next 25 years. The second reason was that it was because he had audited those services six times in 12 years and could find little evidence of any significant improvement. Of 32 councils, only 11 had any strategy at all for the joint commissioning of social care. Only four even considered demographic change and only one strategy was more than short term. Audit Scotland struggled to find any good joint planning underpinned by an understanding of the shared resources available. The report also showed that, for the first time, the majority of care at home and in residential settings is now delivered by neither the NHS nor councils but by myriad private, independent or third sector providers. So what? So, an elderly lady, struggling to stay home, has daily care assessed by the council, but delivered by an agency that sends different carers every week. Her bath is provided by an NHS service, but not the GP surgery that she knows well. Meanwhile, her shopping service comes from a different department of the council. The highlight of her week is when someone visits her to take her out for a short walk, which is the responsibility of a local voluntary organisation. When one of them fails to turn up, she does not know who to call. Whoever she does call knows nothing. When she goes into hospital, as happens every so often, all those services are removed and every one of them has to be reinstated when she comes out. Sometimes that takes weeks or months, dozens of phone calls and a bewildering array of highly paid professionals. Some basic needs, such as nail cutting, turn out to be no one’s responsibility. That is my family’s lived experience of the care system for an elderly aunt, but it is not unique and it is why we need integration. I have seen the capacity of the NHS and local councils to agree the need but resist the change. It is 13 years since, as a health minister, I got them to promise that they would pool budgets through joint future committees. Thirteen years on, the joint future committees are still there and so are the separate budgets. I hope that I can be forgiven if I am a little more sceptical than some colleagues about the willingness to change. It is informed by experience. The Government’s proposals are in danger of becoming as complex and convoluted as the care system that they seek to reform. We are to have “body corporate models of financial integration” unless there is an agreed “delegation between partners” arrangement. There will be integrated resource frameworks and a non-hierarchical relationship between community planning partnerships and HSCPs. I do not know what that means. Accountability will be to NHS boards and local authorities—because that is working really well—and we can have confidence in all that because of single outcome agreements, which is nice; most of us had assumed that they had died a death a long time ago. That adds up to a committee in which the NHS and the councils will argue forever about how much of their budgets they are willing to share. The consultation shows that they are already arguing about their voting rights and dispute resolution procedures. For all that I know, they are arguing over where they will sit and whose turn it is to bring the biscuits; they are not arguing about the care standards that we need. We are in danger of paying senior professionals serious salaries to sit in endless meetings looking after their own budgets while the looking after of people is being done by a minimum-wage workforce in 10-minute care visits, with no time allowed between clients and with orders not to waste time speaking to them. Even that parody of care will be available only to those who are assessed as being in critical need. I believe that the cabinet secretary is absolutely sincere in his desire for the integration revolution that he described. Like him, I think it is a revolution that we need. It is not too late to use this opportunity to deliver it. He can create a proper, formula-based, local, integrated budget so that the local negotiation is about delivery and not the share of budgets. He can legislate for a clear single line of accountability through democratically elected councillors who are answerable to their communities. He can insist on clear basic standards such as giving users and carers a single point of contact to manage all their care. What could be simpler? The cabinet secretary can do those things if he is willing to show the leadership that he talked about and to call time on the vested interests on all sides of this debate. He can then create a care service on which our elderly and disabled citizens can depend and of which we can all be proud. If we do not do that, our successors will be back here in 13 years’ time, doing this all over again.

Mr Neil makes a fair point. If I was asked what our key mistake was in 2000 and 2001, I would say that it was that we did not legislate. We should have done that, which is why, as I said, the proposed bill is a real opportunity. However, the legislation should sweep away the negotiation about pooling budgets, because that is the greatest barrier to moving forward.

Whatever Audit Scotland said in 2010, today it said: “there was not enough scrutiny of how NHS boards were applying waiting list codes. Available information on increasing use of social unavailability codes should have highlighted potential concerns for the Scottish Government and NHS boards to investigate further.” That information included evidence of increasing rates of social unavailability, the reported use of social unavailability codes for patient choice, and retrospective changes to waiting list data. There was not enough scrutiny. Is the truth not that, for three or four years, Scottish ministers simply turned a blind eye to the evidence in order to make claims on waiting times that they knew to be inaccurate?

There is no doubt that Scotland’s energy future is central to our economic prospects, to say nothing of the fact that it is crucial to the extent to which we can mitigate or reverse the damage that we do to our environment locally, nationally and globally. In the long run, that means delivering a shift to renewable energy technologies, so the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee should be congratulated on its important inquiry and the exhaustive range of evidence that it took from witnesses both erudite and—sometimes—colourful. However, the central conclusion in the committee’s report—that the target of 100 per cent equivalent energy consumption from renewables is achievable—hides more than it reveals. In its evidence, EDF stated that “it may be technically feasible” to achieve the target, but it went on to say that doing so would rely on subsidy levels, investment in transmission infrastructure, storage and a UK energy market, all of which are uncertain. The committee identified skills shortages, delayed grid development, intermittency and the affordability of offshore wind as genuine risks to meeting the target. The committee rightly draws attention, too, to the risk to investment that is posed by uncertainty in transmission charging and electricity market reform. All the evidence pleaded for clarity, durability and stability in the support regime for renewables. However, people cannot seriously argue, as some colleagues have tried to do this afternoon, that uncertainty over the details of EMR is damaging but uncertainty over the potential future of EMR post-2014 does no damage whatsoever. That is simply not credible.

In exactly the same way, the electricity consumers of England and Wales do not care where the electrons come from, and if they have cheaper alternatives to expensive subsidised renewable energy that is produced in Scotland, they may well choose to get their electrons from those alternatives. That is exactly the uncertainty that is affecting investments at present. My constituency of East Lothian has a key role in meeting the targets. It already has significant installed wind capacity and it is close to consented offshore sites. However, we need to look at what is happening on the ground. If we consider planning, the committee emphasises the need for local spatial plans to give a clear indication of where developments might be approved. In East Lothian, we already have a carefully constructed local capacity framework for wind turbines, but in recent months we have seen four single turbines that were deemed inappropriate by East Lothian Council simply railroaded through on appeal. In one case, the reporter explicitly says that the local spatial framework can and should be disregarded. The minister needs to understand that that contempt for local democratic decision making for the sake of relatively insignificant capacity is driving many of my constituents to oppose all wind generation.

No. I am sorry, but I do not have time. It is also undermining confidence in the planning system. In East Lothian, ministerial decisions are driving wind turbines into sensitive and inappropriate areas. Yes, that was my constituents laughing when they heard the minister’s description of how he believes his planning system is operating. The situation is not helped by ministers imposing an unwanted energy-from-waste incinerator on my constituency and then expanding its consent so that waste will be shipped in from all over Scotland. Locally, serious efforts are being made to use the opportunity of offshore developments to regenerate Dunbar harbour, exactly as the committee suggests that we should. However, any funding for that has so far had to come from hard-pressed council resources, and the dangling of the same prize in front of many competing communities is fuelling uncertainty there, too. Meanwhile, Cockenzie power station closes next month, removing 1,000MW of capacity from the Scottish grid, with no sign yet of the already consented replacement gas power station. The minister acknowledged the importance of thermal base-load to back up renewables. As well as his UK counterparts, he has a role to play in ensuring that the project is delivered in my constituency. Of course, East Lothian still provides up to a quarter of our electricity on any given day, with zero carbon emissions, 500 high-quality jobs and apprenticeships and training for the next generation. However, that is at Torness—unacknowledged, unsupported and unwanted by ministers and, indeed, the majority of the committee. My county has always provided more than its share of Scotland’s energy, from coal mines, to nuclear power, to wind farms in the Lammermuirs. Our local problems now are not unique. They reflect the weaknesses in the national energy strategy: planning issues; too narrow a focus on wind; an illogical and ideological opposition to nuclear power; a failure to develop the supply chain and grid infrastructure quickly enough; and, above all, a failure to take the public along with the energy strategy, which might yet be the biggest risk to the Government’s 2020 targets. Those risks are all to be found in the committee’s report. I sincerely hope that it is to them that the minister and the Scottish Government respond, rather than to the bland conclusion that the targets can be met.

As all things Danish seem to be the political flavour of the week, I note that Søren Kierkegaard wrote: “Life can only be understood backwards; but it must be lived forwards.” Rights are lessons that are understood from our past and through which we can better live our future. I once heard John Hume of the Social Democratic and Labour Party say: “If you want to see the foundation stones of the EU, then look at the war memorials in every town in Europe.” The politics of today might distort that European vision, but its fundamental purpose remains to develop a continent that is so bound by social and economic ties that it can never again drag itself into the abyss of total war. Post-war leaders—not least, Churchill—learned another lesson, which was that the internal legitimacy of the states of Europe, as well as the relationships between them, matters. That is why the Council of Europe was created; it was to make human rights legally enforceable through adoption of the ECHR in 1950. The European Union was created to ensure peace between nations, and the ECHR was adopted to guarantee that those nations were, and would remain, democratic. Rights fundamentally underpin our modern civilisation and do not simply reflect society as it is, but shape what it will become. That is not always comfortable or convenient, but then neither is democracy. In the same way as we may baulk sometimes at the outcome of democracy, we may baulk sometimes at the consequences of human rights. For example, I dislike the idea of prisoners having the vote, and many resent the freedoms that rights extend to some, but surely we never wish to see again the tyranny that the abrogation of human rights inevitably heralds. We are complacent about our rights at our peril. That includes those who would replace them with codified constitutions and written bills of rights. The universality of rights—their international reach—provides us with protection by dint of our common humanity rather than our common nationality and raises them to the highest importance. In the Parliament, we have deliberately and knowingly fettered our sovereign power with human rights obligations with which we must comply or see our legislative labours struck down. The First Minister made exactly that point in his recent speech on constitutions. However, the logic of the point leads us to the ECHR as the best internationally based platform for Scotland—independent or not—rather than to a national, not international, constitutional bill of rights. Annabel Goldie was right to say that most universal rights are qualified. They have proved themselves to be adaptable to changing times—far more so than the US constitution’s second amendment, on militias, which blocks gun control in the US to this day. I know that the Scottish Government likes to reference Jefferson and Lincoln, but surely the message of the current movie on Lincoln is about not how easy but how hard the Bill of Rights made it to abolish slavery. We must proactively seek to apply our human rights to the issues of our day. That is why we need a commission and why Labour’s amendment on human trafficking is right to draw attention to that concern.

I believe in the state as a place where we can organise for the common good, but the interests of the majority must not ride roughshod over the interests of the minority or the individual. Our rights must be jealously guarded and constantly implemented. That should be the task of the commission, the purpose of the action plan as it develops and the obligation of Parliament every day.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on whether local planning decisions should be made by local councillors. (S4O-01764)

Those are fine words, but our experience in East Lothian does not really match them. In recent times, decisions on the Dunbar incinerator and the demolition of the Cockenzie boat repair yard have been overturned on behalf of Scottish ministers but, more notably, wind turbines at Oldhamstocks, Innerwick and East Linton that were deemed inappropriate by the local planning authority have been railroaded through on behalf of Scottish ministers, and our local capacity strategy has been simply ignored. Does the minister understand that that contempt for local democracy is undermining confidence in the planning system and unhelpfully fuelling blanket opposition to wind power?

An American writer once said that music is the fourth great material want, after food, clothes and shelter. I think that we all have powerful memories of music in our lives. I still remember the first live gig that I went to, more than 40 years ago, when 900 people—some 300 too many—were in the Inverness Caley hotel ballroom to see Rory Gallagher. That memory has stayed with me for a long time. I remember being in the Usher hall in 1991 to hear the St Petersburg Symphony Orchestra play the Leningrad symphony on the very night that tanks were rolling towards their city. I have talked in the Parliament about the emotional impact of seeing the Simón Bolívar Symphony Orchestra play in the Raploch, in Stirling. I also remember a folk festival in Glen Nevis, which featured no one that I had ever heard of or have heard of since but somehow managed to channel the grandeur of the setting into a memory that will live with me for ever. I remember stumbling across a jazz band in a hotel bar in Inverness, which featured a guitarist who, although he was part time, was quite able to rip off John McLaughlin solos that I thought no one else on the planet could play. We all need music to enrich and punctuate out lives, and we do not just need stars. My daughter is an instrumental teacher in Haddington, the town where I live. She is part of a rich music scene in that small town. I say “rich”, but that is ironic, because none of the people who are involved is in any way rich, however talented they are. They all scrape a living, managing an ever-shifting portfolio of teaching jobs, youth work and any non-musical activity that pays—performing and recording come on top of all that. Even when they have a gig for which they are meant to be paid, they often have trouble getting the money out of the promoter or venue. I was therefore not surprised when Drew Smith said that 56 per cent of musicians earn less than £20,000 a year and two thirds of musicians have no pension. The Parliament has sometimes debated the iniquity of industries that use interns and tell young people that they must work for nothing to gain experience and show that they can do the job. That approach is endemic in the music industry—hence the 60 per cent of musicians who say that they have had to work for nothing in the past year. We should support the work not play campaign. We should support anything that increases the opportunity for paid employment for our musicians. The campaign relates, I think, to the let the children play campaign for instrumental tuition in schools in Scotland. Just as we must ensure that local authorities do not regard charges for instrumental tuition in our schools as a soft touch and put them up at budget time, we must ensure that authorities do not regard instrumental tuition itself as a soft touch and cut the number of tutors. That is the kind of work that many musicians do to get by, so that they can play the music that they want to play. Luther said: “Next to the word of God, the noble art of music is the greatest treasure in the world.” Those of us who cannot sing a note and cannot play an instrument need musicians, and not just the stars. We should welcome the work not play campaign, and we should value and invest in the treasure of music and do everything that we can to support it.

Will the member give way?

I want to help Mr Brodie, who was not here during the eight years of SNP opposition. Can he say on how many occasions the SNP suggested an amendment to the budget bill? I think that the answer is once.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what recent advice the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has given to local authorities regarding charging for instrumental music tuition. (S4O-01686)

The problem with that answer is that, while the instrumental music tuition group meets, East Ayrshire Council is planning to cut 50 per cent from its budget for instrumental music tuition and Clackmannanshire Council is considering a proposal to abolish music tuition in schools altogether. Unless ministers tell councils to sustain those services while they consider how they can be improved, surely the councils’ actions simply make a mockery of ministers’ protestations in the chamber.

The effect of amendment 14 is straightforward. It would simply extend the reach of freedom of information legislation to include Glasgow Housing Association by adding it to the schedule of Scottish public authorities that are so covered. The purpose of the amendment is, at least at the margins, to redeem the bill so that it does the thing that everyone expected that it was going to do, which is to extend FOISA into areas where pretty well everyone believes that it should go. When the SNP formed a Government in 2007, it said that it was going to extend FOISA using section 5 powers. After three years, in 2010, it finally consulted on an extension, but it failed to act on the outcome, instead deciding to bring forward primary legislation. Surely, it was thought, that would be the vehicle for the extension of FOISA cover that the SNP had demanded in opposition and promised in government, yet, notwithstanding the cabinet secretary’s announcement a few moments ago, the bill fails to do the one thing that most people believe it should do, which is to extend the 2002 act. Amendment 14 would at least allow us to claim that the bill does that, if only to include one body—GHA. I should say that I have no axe to grind with GHA. After all, as housing minister, I was instrumental in setting it up. I would rather have included all housing associations in the amendment, but the fact is that the 2010 consultation consulted only on GHA, so it is the only association that is ready for inclusion. Indeed, respondents were almost universally in favour of that extension. In any case, of the 15,000 council tenants who lost FOISA rights when council housing stock was transferred to housing associations, about 10,000 became GHA tenants, so it is well worth restoring at least their rights to information.

The stock transfer to Glasgow Housing Association brought £1 billion of investment into housing in the city that Mr Mason purports to represent. The 2010 consultation also consulted on the inclusion of other bodies, including contractors who build and maintain public facilities such as prisons, schools and hospitals. However, I did not include them in the amendment to avoid the argument that the costs involved would require a financial memorandum that is not before us. GHA argues that, in general terms, it provides information on request, so I do not believe that significant additional costs can be identified. The amendment is a worthwhile extension to FOISA, it is ready to go, it covers a body that is prepared for it, widespread support has already been demonstrated for it, and it is within the scope of even this limited bill. I cannot see how anyone who is sincere in their commitment to transparency can fail to support amendment 14. Government support for it would be a powerful signal that the cabinet secretary is sincere in the promise that she has now made of swift progress on the FOI regime. I move amendment 14.

This Government usually speaks on FOISA in the courts when it is trying to resist rulings that it should release information. If the cabinet secretary believes that her housing legislation gives GHA tenants access to the information that they could get under FOISA, what earthly reason does she have for not simply voting yes to amendment 14? Her choice is simple: she can demonstrate her sincerity and commitment to transparency, or she can choose to take the opportunity to try to refight a political fight that she lost 12 years ago. I press amendment 14.

Saul Alinsky, the campaign and community organiser in the United States, had as one of his “Rules for Radicals” to “make them live up to their own rhetoric”. The idea was that those in power should be forced to deliver on the things that they freely said that they would do. In a way, any debate among politicians about freedom of information is about making us all live up to our own rhetoric. Who would be against openness and transparency? Of course, the proof of the pudding is in the degree to which we are willing to force ourselves to do that. The cabinet secretary acknowledged that during the debate on my amendment 14 when she said that her Government should be judged by its actions on freedom of information. Members will expect me to say that such a remark does not serve the Government particularly well, when we consider the speed with which it moved in introducing the bill. Ever since the 2002 act was passed the SNP has said clearly that FOI should be extended to housing associations, arm’s-length bodies and contractors in Government contracts. That is what the SNP argued in opposition, and when it came into government it said that it would make those changes. However, it took the Government until 2010 to carry out the consultation and then it introduced a bill that did not extend FOISA at all. The Government’s action on the bill does not live up to its rhetoric. Nor do other day-to-day actions of the Government live up to its rhetoric. I am thinking about the court cases around local income tax or legal advice on the European Union, when the Government resisted the release of information despite the commissioner’s decision. I am reminded of the Professor Qvortrup controversy, when emails were released in stages so that the particularly difficult one came out just before or after Christmas. The Government’s actions are nothing to be proud of. I must be honest and say that no Government or Administration finds FOI particularly easy. I acknowledge that the previous Scottish Executive failed to use section 5 to extend FOI coverage, although we said that it would be desirable to do so. I recall much high-flown rhetoric in 2001 and 2002 about having the best FOI legislation in the world, and I am not sure that we lived up to those aspirations. I thought that we would do. A member said that, given that I was instrumental in setting up GHA, I should have noticed that people were losing their FOI rights in the transfer. I did notice that, but I assumed that my Administration would extend FOI to housing associations. I have to acknowledge that that did not happen. The point is that FOI legislation tests a Government’s moral fibre. No Government likes FOI. FOI is always inconvenient, but it is the right thing. I think that we failed the test today: we could have extended FOI but we missed the opportunity to do so. Today has also been an exercise in futility, because at some point FOI will be extended to the bodies that we have been talking about. The tide of history is running in the direction of more information being available to the public. I think that the cabinet secretary realises that, which is why she made a concession and promised to use section 5. It is a pity that it looks as if she was dragged kicking and screaming to that position, when she could have extended FOI in the first instance and correctly claimed to be living up to her own rhetoric. The jury is still out on whether, in the long run, she will live up to her rhetoric on openness and transparency.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I am interested in the prioritisation of ALEOs. I understand the principle that is behind that and I support it, but I worry that there are other significant bodies, extending coverage to which has been consulted on. Why cannot those bodies, such as contractors that are building and running prisons, be included in the early order?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to support the workforce of Montgomery Litho Ltd following its liquidation. (S4T-00198)

The management buyout to protect some of the jobs in the company is of course welcome, but it will not help in any way the 79 staff members of Montgomery Litho in my constituency in Haddington whose jobs have gone. I welcome the implementation of PACE to provide support to that workforce. However, 35 staff in the company were paid off immediately prior to Christmas, so the job loss is actually around 114. Can the minister, through his good offices, ensure that those 35 staff who were so recently made redundant can be included in the PACE approach for the 79 more recent redundancies?

I thank the minister for a constructive answer. I appreciate that the PACE process is being applied more widely than those who have lost their jobs in the past couple of days. The loss of more than 100 jobs in a small town such as Haddington is significant, but those are not the only job losses that we have seen recently in East Lothian. Lothian Fabrics and Fords Bakery have closed, there are job losses at First Bus at Musselburgh, Cockenzie power station will close within the next few weeks, and jobs are under threat at Bankton Building Services. My constituents need PACE’s help, which I appreciate, but they need jobs to apply for, too. I know of a recent case when someone applied for a job for which there were 300 applicants. What help will the Scottish Government offer to East Lothian—the council or otherwise—to see what new jobs can be created locally to provide opportunities for my constituents?

The minister mentioned that his colleague the Minister for Transport and Veterans made a welcome visit to North Berwick yesterday to see the damage to the harbour there. If Mr Wheelhouse speaks to his colleague, I think that Mr Brown will explain, having seen the emergency repairs that have been made to the damaged south-west sea wall, that the long-term solutions to the problems at North Berwick are to replace the sea defence boulders on the south-east with a proper—higher—sea wall. To do so would impose significant strain on East Lothian Council’s capital budget, so I would be grateful if the minister could confirm that the Scottish Government would look favourably on an approach by East Lothian Council for Bellwin or other funding to support the project in order to provide long-term sea defences at North Berwick.

Scotland should certainly aspire to science-based policy making, especially given our historical record in science, whether we mean Hutton working out the age of the earth for the first time, CTR Wilson—Scotland’s only science Nobel prize winner—developing the cloud chamber where the fundamental particles that make up the universe were discovered, or James Clerk Maxwell, who developed the equations that describe the underlying structure of the universe. As many members have said, we still punch well above our weight when it comes to science. We are third in the world when it comes to peer-reviewed scientific papers per head of population and, as has already been pointed out, we garner for Scottish research facilities far more than our fair share of UK research funding. I say to the minister that it is, of course, true that we do that because of the quality of our research, but we also do it because we have access to a bigger research funding pot. I recently put to a research scientist the argument that scientists all collaborate across borders and would still be able to do that if we were independent. He replied, “I can collaborate across any border if I have the funding for my research.” That is a real concern in the scientific community that should not be dismissed. Last year, the Royal Society of Edinburgh produced a report on the topic, which strongly made the point that, before we can have proper science-based policy making, we must have, among the public and politicians, better understanding of science. There are three areas in which our politics and science sometimes clash. One is to do with causality. Dr Simpson talked about the issues with the MMR vaccine, when a connection that was not a causal one between vaccination and autism led to a drop in herd immunity in Scotland—or to its disappearance. We must be honest and say that the problem was not just to do with the media; some politicians rode that bandwagon and contributed to the problem, which still has consequences today. A second issue is to do with certainty. There is a lack of understanding that uncertainty is fundamentally built into the universe and science, so the question “Are you 100 per cent sure?” can never be answered with a “Yes.” Too often, we ask that question, although there cannot be the answer that we are looking for. During the debate, we have already seen the biggest clash, which is to do with the way in which scientific consensus operates. Murdo Fraser hinted that he does not want to accept the scientific consensus on climate change. As we might expect, he was attacked by Patrick Harvie—who, of course, refuses to accept the scientific consensus on genetically modified crops, or on the safety of nuclear power and the contribution that it should make to our energy strategy.

I accept that economic arguments are made, but the fact is that, on climate change, those whom we call climate change deniers find scientists who are outriders and who are outside the consensus and then bring their arguments to the fore. I argue that some of Mr Harvie’s colleagues do exactly the same thing when it comes to GM crops. Not that long ago, in an article in Holyrood magazine, the Minister for Learning, Science and Scotland’s Languages said that, in his view, “Scotland is a science nation.” We absolutely should pursue that aspiration, but if we are serious about that we need to bring science into the strategic level of policy making. Many members have talked about the chief scientific advisers that we have had, two of whom have been good role models for women—Anne Glover and Muffy Calder. Some departments also have scientific advisers. However, it remains the case that not all departments in Scotland have scientific advisers, although all Whitehall departments do. Further, I believe that scientific advisers here do not have a strong direct line to the highest levels of Government. The cabinet secretary said that he and the science minister regularly meet Muffy Calder—which I am sure is wonderful for her. However, I would like to hear that she regularly meets the First Minister and talks to him about what science tells us about our policy. The Scottish science advisory committee has been mentioned. I set up and chaired the first meeting of that committee when I was Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning. It was correctly stated that the committee gives independent advice, but I wonder whether that independence is less valuable than a connection to the centre of Government would be. I would like the science advisory committee to be more like the financial services advisory board or the Scottish energy advisory board and to be chaired by a cabinet secretary for science, or even by the First Minister on occasion, as those other boards are. That would demonstrate exactly how important science is to policy and policy making in this nation. It is worth saying that we will never be “a science nation” if we lose 73 per cent of women graduates. I come to my final suggestion, after which I will wind up, Presiding Officer.

The First Minister is well known for collecting Nobel laureates, but they are usually Nobel laureates of “the dismal science”. My suggestion is that, as well as the Council of Economic Advisers, the First Minister should consider setting up a council of scientific advisers, so that Nobel laureates from wider fields could enjoy dinner with the First Minister and, more important, influence the policy of Scotland—this “science nation”.

Will the member give way?

I do not think that anybody has said that we would not have good science in an independent Scotland; we have said that we would have restricted access to research funds and that, consequently, science would not be funded to the extent that it is today.

I was delighted to hear Karl Popper’s name mentioned, but perhaps the member will admit that Popper would probably say that economics has still not found its paradigm and therefore is not really a science.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the recent Information Services Division “Emergency Department Activity and Waiting Times” report, which states that seven NHS boards did not meet the four-hour accident and emergency waiting times standard in any month between June and September 2012. (S4O-01583)

The Government might have thought about how challenging it was when it made the promise, to my constituents and others, of 98 per cent compliance with the four-hour standard for accident and emergency waits. When was the last time that the standard was actually met?

Most speakers have rightly referred to the importance of careers advice. As I think most of us agree, this nation’s greatest resource is its people, particularly its young people, and the careers service is right at the centre of helping them to achieve their potential. It is not only about fitting young people into the right place; it is about opening their eyes and raising their aspirations. I remember the entrepreneur Tom Hunter telling a story about the place where he grew up in Ayrshire. In his village, everybody worked in the pits. People who were working class went down the pit and those who were middle class worked in the office, but everybody worked in the pits. However, when the pits closed, the issue was not just that there were no jobs, but that people in the community could not conceive of how they could earn a living. I became a teacher for similar reasons. I was the first person in my family to go to university and join a profession. Many of us in that position became teachers, because people aspire to the things with which they are familiar. As a teacher, I found that, too. I well remember arguing with a young guy who was better at physics than I ever was and who wanted to go to college. I tried to get him to go to university, but he was adamant that he did not know anyone who went to university and he would not go. I remember trying to convince a young woman who wanted to be a nurse that she could in fact aspire to be a doctor. Sometimes, careers advice is about people turning their back on opportunities. On a later occasion, when I worked in Livingston during the previous recession, when youth unemployment was high, Ferranti suddenly took on 100 apprentices and my higher physics class disappeared in its entirety. Many of the people in that class could have aspired to highers and going to university and so on, but they felt that they had to take the chance that was presented to them. Careers advice is important in trying to ensure that we have the skills that we need in our economy. Even in these difficult times, there are skills shortages, particularly in areas such as science and engineering. There are still opportunities in those areas. The Institute of Physics recently produced a report that showed that there are 190,000 jobs in Scotland in physics-based sectors.

I find that I almost always agree with Dr Peter Hughes. I will focus on a particular issue to do with science, technology, engineering and mathematics subjects, to which no one has referred, and in relation to which I think that careers guidance has a role. I am talking about gender stereotyping and the self-limiting choices that young women often make. A group that does not access such opportunities is young women. Only 28 per cent of standard grade physics students are women and only 15 per cent of engineering undergraduates are women. There are opportunities into which careers guidance should be moving young women. In my experience, careers guidance is about opening and changing minds. That is not just necessary at school—I think that the people who went to Ferranti will have looked for careers guidance later in life—and it is not just for low achievers. However—and I think that this is what Dr Hughes was talking about—it needs to come at an early stage and it needs to be consistent and proactive, because gender stereotypes, for example, are set very early in life. Above all, careers guidance needs to be face to face. Members talked about the importance of an individualised, personalised service. There is nothing more individualised or personalised than a sensitive professional listening carefully to the person with whom they are dealing and responding in a way that is appropriate to their needs. That is individualisation and personalisation. I was astonished when the minister, without a trace of irony, told us that we should not worry about the 92 per cent of SDS staff who were cynical about the new system, because they had all had high-quality “face-to-face” interventions on the new system. That is the best way to change people’s minds. The issue is whether the new system is fit for those purposes, and members have brought to the debate a weight of evidence that it is not. The traffic-light model is excluding 100,000 higher achievers from the front-line service that they need. Sign-up rates for the my world of work website must be a cause of concern—the rate in my constituency is 15 per cent, which is even less than the average. What we have here is a trend in government. The internet-based approach to careers guidance is analogous to approaches that are developing elsewhere. Benefits applicants are expected to apply online, and in preparation for the introduction of self-directed support, local authority social work departments are planning to create web-based choices for the disabled and elderly people who are trying to create their own care packages. I think that we know what is happening. Such approaches sound plausible in an organisational change-management presentation, but they leave the people at the sharp end frustrated, ill-served or downright excluded. The careers service was not perfect before, but the evidence is that the changes that we have debated are not an enhancement. We should pause, re-examine them and get our approach right.

This evening’s debate, on the value of instrumental music tuition, is prompted by research that was undertaken by the Educational Institute of Scotland, which established that 24 out of 32 councils charge up to £340 per year for instrument tuition in schools. Five councils even charge for tuition for pupils who are required to learn an instrument as part of study for music exams. Eleven authorities have raised fees during the past year. I record my pride that my council, East Lothian Council, is one of the eight authorities that do not charge for music tuition. I congratulate Scotland on Sunday on its let the children play campaign, which calls for instrument tuition to be free, especially for those who are studying music, and calls on the Scottish Government to take a lead in making that happen. There is a precedent for that in Jack McConnell’s youth music initiative, which ensures that every pupil has the chance to try a year of instrumental tuition by primary 6. Thousands of youngsters have benefited from the scheme and the Scottish National Party Government has continued the scheme since 2007 and deserves full credit for doing so. In most of Scotland, however, pupils who are inspired by the initiative to continue with their instrument have to pay. That means, for many, that the opportunity is lost. My motion was prompted by all that, but was driven by personal experience; all three of my daughters benefited from free music tuition in schools. One learned violin, one the clarinet and one the bassoon. All of them participated in school bands or wind bands, and two of them participated in the Edinburgh secondary schools orchestra. One is now an instrument teacher herself, but all three were challenged, enriched and inspired by music. I am sure that they are better, broader-minded and happier adults for it. That view is supported by research such as that which my motion cites from Harvard medical school, which shows that pupils who play an instrument demonstrate “better motor, auditory, vocabulary and non-verbal reasoning skills”. Such evidence is part of the answer to the rather obvious criticism that, given Labour’s argument that we must debate carefully what benefits can be provided free, this is not the time to argue for free instrument tuition. That criticism misses the point, just as the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities does when it says: “let’s be clear, what we are talking about here is extracurricular music tuition.” Even if we set aside the fact that we are talking about Scottish Qualifications Authority exam courses in five council areas, the crux is that instrument tuition should be part of the core provision of our schools and should therefore be provided without charge. If we think that schools are just about getting pupils through exams, our aspiration is narrow and our ambition limited, indeed. The benefits of music participation at its most intense are seen in El Sistema, which engages a whole community. It was pioneered in Venezuela and is transforming the Raploch in Stirling. I spent midsummer’s evening watching the children of the Raploch sit in the midst of an orchestra from Venezuela, thousands of miles away, and play with it a Beethoven overture from hundreds of years ago. No one there needed to be told that music has the power to transcend distance, time and culture and to transform the lives of those whom it touches, because that truth shone transparently in the faces of the children of the big noise. We cannot have that everywhere, but we can have music tuition. We have all seen some of that when we have seen parents at school concerts watch their children conjure beauty, no matter how falteringly, from thin air. When I taught in Mozambique, my class’s timetable included mandatory singing—not from me, fortunately. In a country that was torn by war and ravaged by famine, people sang. The children sang everywhere, all the time, in heartbreakingly perfect harmonies. Just as young men tied together rags to play football, they constructed guitars from any disused boxes that they could find, so that they could make music. In Cambodia—a country rebuilding from nothing with nothing—I have seen the establishment of a school of music and dance being prioritised. That was because people there understood music’s magic in bringing people together and raising them up, and because they knew that the Khmer Rouge killed the musicians first because it, too, understood that. Nearer home, when I lived in Wester Hailes, the whole community—which had little—clubbed together to buy a saxophone for one Tommy Smith, so that he could take up his place at Berklee College of Music. He learned through the kind of tuition that we are debating, and people in that community understood that the glory of his jazz enriched them all. If people who have little can find the time and resource to sing, play and learn, why do we have to debate whether we can let our children play? A lack of money need not hold us back, but a lack of vision surely will. Nicola Benedetti told Scotland on Sunday: “Learning an instrument is ... about understanding the creative, spiritual thing that goes on inside of us. It goes to the heart of who we are as human beings. How can it possibly be separated by something as superficial as whether you can pay for your lesson or not?” I know that it is not practical to suggest that anyone can learn any instrument anywhere, on demand, but the Scottish Government can take a lead in pushing open a door that is closing in the faces of too many young Scots across our country. It goes to the heart of who we are as human beings and to the heart of what we want to be as a country.

Will the minister give way?

I am very pleased that the review of the current circumstances and discussions on how we could move forward are under way. Will the minister give us a specific date for when he might report back on the outcome of those discussions?

It is 10 years since we passed the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. That hardly made us trailblazers. After all, in the United States, Lyndon Johnson signed freedom of information into law as long ago as 1966. For us, though, it was the right act at the right time. As many members have said, 10 years on, expectations have grown, the public service landscape has changed and it is right to review the legislation and to strengthen it. The legislation was always a work in progress. Indeed, in 2002, Michael Matheson quoted the Information Commissioner of Canada’s having said that in Canada it took 10 to 15 years to break down the culture of secrecy. Mr Matheson said: “I believe that such a culture is probably even more deep-rooted in Scotland”.—[Official Report, 24 April 2002; c 8216.] We did not realise at the time that that was really a statement of profound self-criticism. The Scottish National Party Government, of which Michael Matheson is a member, has been as guilty as any Administration of resisting the spirit and the letter of the FOI legislation. Sometimes it has done so spectacularly, for example in court, most recently over legal advice on EU membership, and most gratuitously, in the middle of an election, over local income tax. Sometimes it has done it routinely, such as it did last week, when it refused to tell us whether or when ministers had met the big six energy companies, because they could not find the information in their filing system. Sometimes the Government has done it pretty sneakily, as when e-mails with referendum expert Professor Qvortrup were released, but missing the two key ones, which then slipped out two months later. I say to John Mason that the Scottish Government has also done it pretty systematically, which is why the Scottish Information Commissioner reported that only fifty per cent of requests to the Scottish Government received a full response. That is less than any local authority, some of which respond to 90 per cent of requests.

No. I am saying that we need the legislation and the culture of openness and transparency, because one will not work without the other. Of course, when it was in opposition the SNP argued exactly that—that FOI was too restricted. Roseanna Cunningham, for example, railed against class exemptions in 2002, saying that “exemptions should depend entirely on the content of the information ... being sought, rather than its broad type”—[Official Report, 17 January 2002; c 5460.] Yet here we have the Scottish Government proposing to exempt, as a class, all communications with the royal household. The Finance Committee is right—that provision will weaken the legislation and it should be dropped. I say to Bruce Crawford that when we brought in the act in 2002, we said that it was stronger than Labour’s act in Westminster and we were proud of that. We should still be proud of its being stronger than the UK legislation. I am glad that Mr Crawford has returned to the chamber because I want to agree with him too now, because in 2002 he was very concerned about private finance initiative contracts. He said: “we cannot see the names of the bidders, the full tender documents or the outline business case in which alternatives were discussed. That is not good enough.”—[Official Report, 17 January 2002; c 5486.] One of my constituents recently asked under FOI for an outline business case for the new sick kids hospital in Edinburgh—a non-profit distributing PFI project. I will show members what he received. The crucial financial information—page after page of tables—is simply blacked out. My constituent is an expert in such projects and he is clear that this is not only less information than used to be available in Scotland, it is less than he can get out of George Osborne’s Treasury regarding contracts in England. The balance between transparency and commercial confidentiality that the Deputy First Minister referred to has shifted, but in the wrong direction. The bill presents the opportunity to change that and to extend FOI to those who provide public services and public contracts, whether they are ALEOs, third sector organisations or private companies. The month before last, the First Minister said that he would be “extremely sympathetic” to such extensions “once we get the ... Bill through”.—[Official Report, 20 September 2012; c 11704.] That sounds a bit like, “Grant me openness and transparency, but not yet,” as St Augustine might have prayed.

I sincerely welcome the Deputy First Minister’s far more positive assurances today—she seems to have much more sympathy for making that extension quickly. This is our chance to strengthen FOI in Scotland and to extend its reach. Ministers should drop the royal household exemption and at the very least section 5 should be amended to place an obligation on ministers to review the act. I welcome the commitment to do something like that, but would it not be better still to use this opportunity to do so now? That would be the strongest indication that we could give that 10 years on, the culture of secrecy in Scotland is beginning to be definitively uprooted forever, which we could all welcome.

I want to return to our own shores. Does Mr Crawford think that the recent court ruling that overturns the exemption for the heir to the throne, and which is still being fought through the courts, rather indicates that exemption on a UK basis may not survive, in any case?

Does Mr Adam support my view that the outline business case for the Sick Kids hospital in Edinburgh should be released so that we can see the affordability and the basis of that project?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

As I said to John Mason, it is a simple fact that only 50 per cent of FOI requests to the Scottish Government are responded to in full, whereas some local authorities achieve 92 per cent. Surely that simple fact must say something about the culture in the Scottish Government.

Has the Scottish Government considered testing milk tankers for the virus rather than the more laborious method of testing individual farms, so as to identify potential sources more efficiently?

I add my good wishes to Kez Dugdale and I congratulate her in her absence on securing the debate. I also congratulate John Park, who has worked tirelessly on the issue for some years and, in particular, on the work on his proposed living wage bill, which we look forward to debating in the chamber. The real congratulations, when it comes to the living wage, go to campaigners outside Parliament, because this is a grass-roots campaign that was initiated by Citizens UK in London and which has been followed through by bodies in Scotland such as the Poverty Alliance. They are to be congratulated on their persistence in bringing the campaign to the stage that it has reached today. We have come a long way. Like Malcolm Chisholm, I am old enough to remember the debates about the national minimum wage. It is worth remembering that at that time some workers were paid as little as £1 an hour. I remember instances being discovered of some people working in the security industry for accommodation only and no wage whatever. There were dire predictions of job losses when the minimum wage came in, but those have been proved to be false. It is so pleasing to see that we have moved beyond the idea of the bare minimum to the idea of a decent quality of life being provided by the living wage. The policy has been public-sector led. The Scottish Government and the local authorities that have introduced the living wage and made commitments to staff are to be congratulated on that. I am delighted to add to that roll of honour: two weeks ago my council—East Lothian Council—introduced the living wage, and 145 permanent staff and 150 casual or relief staff will benefit. As with Christina McKelvie’s South Lanarkshire Council, most of those staff are women who work part-time. Those numbers might sound small but, for the people concerned, the increase in their wage—which, in some cases, will be as much as 13 per cent—is significant. However, given that they represent only a small proportion of the 500,000 Scots in the public and private sectors who are paid less than the living wage, it is clear that we must do more. As John Park said, the key task is to push out beyond the public sector and into the private sector by persuasion and procurement. The issue is not just about fairness to individuals; it is about providing a level playing field for people in the third sector. I spent some time chairing an organisation that provides support to people with learning disabilities who live in the community. I am not proud to say that we had to squeeze the conditions of our workforce, because we were bidding for tenders against other organisations that paid the minimum wage and used zero-hour contracts so that they could make lower bids. To me, that seems to be quite pernicious. In addition, we must be strong on the issue of advice from Europe. I know that the Scottish Government has asked for advice and believes that it is difficult to use procurement to promote the living wage, but I say—without being funny—that the Scottish Government can be quite bullish about European advice when it comes to matters such as minimum unit pricing or even entry to the European Union. If the Government were to be bullish about promotion of the living wage and pushed it through in the procurement bill that is to come before us, that is one area in which we would support it. The living wage matters to all of us. This week, we have seen it go up—but we have also seen top executive earnings go up by more than 25 per cent. Why do we still have so much stress, anxiety, addiction and family breakdown in our society when, in general terms, we are better off than we have ever been? I think that the reason is to do with the inequalities that we are discussing. The living wage may be only a small step in addressing those inequalities, but it is an important one, which is why I believe that this is one wheel to which, together, we should all put our shoulders, because it is an idea whose time has come.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to encourage the take-up of science subjects in secondary schools. (S4O-01419)

The work of SEEAG is indeed welcome, as is the formation of its successor body, the science, technology, engineering and maths education committee, to ensure that its work continues. However, is the minister aware that it could be undermined by an unintended consequence of curriculum for excellence? CFE allows S3 pupils to choose between five and eight subjects to study, and where education authorities have chosen the lower end of that curricular range, parents and teachers have reported to me concerns that it becomes impossible for students to pursue two sciences and very possible for them to choose none at all at an early stage in their school careers. If that happens extensively, serious consequences for Scottish science lie ahead. Will the minister investigate those concerns and either intervene or provide evidence that they are not, in fact, the case?

The member will know that the UK law officer relevant to this matter, the Advocate General, has made clear his view that the likely consequence of Scotland’s leaving the UK is that it would have to apply to join the European Union. Does the member not find it passing strange that we can know the opinion of the Advocate General but are denied the opinion of the Lord Advocate?

I, too, congratulate Mr Coffey on securing the debate. We should mark the passing of Neil Armstrong not just because of his links to Scotland, but because of the significance of the first moon landing. Like Mr Coffey, I remember getting up to watch it on television. I fear that I was 12, not 11, but anyone who is our age remembers the event. It provided a sense not just of watching history being made, but of sharing the event with the whole of humankind. Armstrong was the first of only 12 who have walked on the moon’s surface. None of them was the same when they returned. To look back at our earth and see it as it really is provides a life-changing perspective that we can only imagine. Armstrong always carried that profound knowledge with grace and humility. Armstrong gained that knowledge with courage. We should not forget that Apollo 11 travelled to the moon with a guidance system that had less processing power than the washing machine in my kitchen, never mind the smartphone in my pocket. As Mr Coffey said, Armstrong landed the lunar module manually and set it down on the Sea of Tranquillity with seconds of fuel left. We are politicians, and we should remember that Armstrong’s mission was political. When Kennedy told Congress that the US would put a man on the moon, no one knew how that could be done. That was politics, not science, and pretty venal politics at that. The task was launched by a supposedly vigorous new President who, in truth, could stand up only with the aid of a back brace and a toxic cocktail of stimulants. The challenge was to a supposedly modern nation but, in fact, tens of millions of its own people were denied the vote and even the right to sit, eat or study alongside their white compatriots in those days. The aspiration was supposedly noble but, in fact, it was driven by the basest of desires—to dominate the cold war world through barefaced bravado. Yet with the words, “one small step for man; one giant leap for mankind”, Armstrong transcended all that to make us proud. Even his fluffing of the words simply serves to remind us that we are fallible, but capable of greatness. In chambers such as this, we spend our days debating ideas of the nation state, democratic socialism or free markets whose roots lie in the 19th century or even the 18th century, but in the 21st century, somehow we can no longer raise ourselves to Armstrong’s 20th century achievement or find it within ourselves to reach for the stars. We cannot know what otherworldly landscapes Armstrong walks now or what infinite horizon he scans, if any, but we know for sure that we will follow him there one day. However, we have turned away from following that small step that he took in 1969. My head tells me that we cannot afford to push beyond the boundaries of our own world while so many in it suffer so much, but as we wrestle with issues that seem so great and intractable to us, knowing that they must have looked so much smaller and more manageable from the Sea of Tranquillity, my heart asks whether we can afford not to push the limits of our own possibility in the way that Neil Armstrong did in 1969.

Will the member take an intervention?

The moment for the intervention that I intended to make has passed, but I am prompted to ask whether, given that the SNP Government has cut 30,000 public sector workers out of the workforce in Scotland and its cuts are deeper than George Osborne’s, the SNP Government is the most ruthless cutter on these islands.

I remember that budget debate. I think that it was the Scottish Government that was in a state of complete and utter shambles at that point. I have trouble remembering further back these days, so perhaps Mr Swinney will remind me of how many budget amendment suggestions he made during eight years in opposition. I think that the answer is one.

The green bus fund is a welcome initiative. Of course, as Elaine Murray outlined, Labour initially called for it some years ago. Low-carbon buses, which the fund will help to buy, contribute in a small but welcome way to cutting carbon emissions. The minister was also right to mention the opportunity that the green bus fund provides for a great Scottish manufacturing company, Alexander Dennis Ltd, which, like him, I have visited. Not only is Alexander Dennis demonstrating how innovation can lead to success, it is demonstrating that Scotland can still build some of the best light engineering products anywhere in the world. Indeed, the Enviro400 hybrid, which is produced by Alexander Dennis, is the United Kingdom’s best-selling hybrid bus. However, the core purpose of the work in this area is as part of our response to climate change and our endeavours to meet the carbon emission reduction targets that we have set ourselves, so it was disappointing news when we discovered in the summer that Scotland had missed its emissions target by the equivalent of more than 1 million tonnes of carbon dioxide. In some ways, that is no surprise, because although emissions in general have fallen in the past 20 years, those from transport have edged up, and there are about 1 million more vehicles on Scotland’s roads than there were 20 years ago. Decarbonising our bus fleet might be desirable, but that is not the real challenge. The real challenge is to decarbonise transport, which means getting people out of cars and on to those buses. Given that there were 438 million bus journeys in Scotland last year and only 81 million rail journeys, it is clear that it is buses that have to play the primary role in that modal shift. The minister said that the share of bus journeys is growing, but that is not what is happening. The number of bus journeys has slumped by 150 million in the past few years, while the number of rail journeys continues to rise. Perhaps one reason for that is that the Government provides £667 million in subsidies to rail each year but only £295 million to subsidise far more bus journeys that reach many more parts of Scotland. I applaud investment in our rail network and I know that that balance is not new or unique to the current Administration, but it needs to be examined. In truth, Government funding for buses has been cut. There has been a cut in BSOG and the recompense for concessionary journeys is being squeezed. The result is that, for the first time since devolution, bus passenger numbers per head of population are lower in Scotland than they are in Great Britain as a whole. I warn members that the decline will not be gradual. In my constituency of East Lothian and in West Lothian, First bus services, which had gradually become unreliable, irregular and expensive, were completely removed one day. Unless we act, that will happen more and more. Green buses mean something else to me. For people of my age who grew up in the Lothians, there will always be red buses and green buses. The red buses were the corporation buses in the town and the green buses served the outlying areas. The green buses were run by the Scottish Bus Group. They were required by law to make 6 per cent profit every year, and that was reinvested in the services. They were regular, reliable, busy, profitable and lively. I know that, because I spent four summers as a bus conductor on those Eastern Scottish routes. In fact, they could get too lively. I remember one of my colleagues claiming that he had had a gun pulled on him on the last Dunbar service on a Saturday night. That was one fare that he did not collect. Those routes in East Lothian were the best routes for the Scottish Bus Group. How can it be that we reached a point at which First, the successor company, simply removed them? Competition has not served us well in that part of Scotland. Competition crushed those First services at one end of my constituency, where the people are, and the company was left to try to serve those areas where there are far fewer people. The refocusing of BSOG has not helped my rural constituency. Our buses disappeared. Nothing focuses our minds as much as an election. In East Lothian, when our bus services were removed, the local SNP councillors who were facing the electorate not only suddenly found additional money to subsidise bus routes but told the voters that they wanted to start their own council bus company, and the minister did not discourage them from that. However, they were not serious—and I have to say that the electorate saw through it all and did not believe them. If we look at where buses are succeeding, surely the message is that it is time to change the industry’s structure, not just the fuel used by its buses, if we are to give passengers the assurance of reliability, stable fares and high-quality vehicles. We need look only at London, where Transport for London is so confident and successful that it has ordered 600 hybrid buses to give to the companies, delivering popular affordable services in a regulated market; at Renfrew, where we have Scotland’s only quality bus partnership, which is regularly lauded in the chamber by George Adam as a model that should be followed elsewhere; or at Edinburgh, where we have the nearest thing in Scotland to a publicly owned bus company running a near-monopoly of services across the city at an incredible £1.40 flat fare, however far one goes.

The truth is that low-emission buses are a good thing. However, if they are to serve more, not fewer, passengers, the time has come to go back to the kind of green buses I remember, which were regular, reliable and regulated.

When we were in government, we introduced a form of regulation—quality contracts—that I admit has not worked and which nobody has pursued. I intend to bring forward a bill for a franchising scheme. If the member is relaxed about more regulation, will he sign that bill so that we can bring it forward and debate it here in the Parliament?

Alexander Dennis is indeed a great success story, as many Labour members have acknowledged. Most of the workers in the Alexander Dennis factory are members of the Unite trade union, and they are in no doubt that we need to reregulate our bus industry to support it. Will the member support that and the workers in the constituency next door to his?

1. To ask the Scottish Government whether it supports the proposals that the Scottish Court Service is consulting on regarding court closures. (S4T-00057)

The Cabinet Secretary for Justice has been hiding behind the process for almost a year now. At every stage he has told us that there are no proposals to close courts, but there always have been. He told me that I could attend consultation meetings, but there were none. He told me that the Lord President would engage with me on the issue and the arguments for my local court in Haddington, but the Lord President said that he could not do that. What reassurance can the cabinet secretary give me that this latest consultation stage is anything more than a sham?

Frankly, if the cabinet secretary thinks that the proposals are a response to changes in the way in which we live, it is he who does not understand how the court system for which he is responsible operates in modern Scotland. The proposals will undermine the viability of towns such as Haddington in my constituency, condemn victims and witnesses to lengthy and expensive journeys, take police off our local streets for longer, and create barriers to civil redress for our citizens. The truth is that this is a cost-saving exercise that has nothing to do with providing the access to justice that people in modern Scotland need, require and deserve. Will the justice secretary listen to my constituents and the users of my local court, and will he put them, rather than his bottom line, first?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what assessment it has made of the impact on the arable sector of recent weather conditions. (S4O-01298)

The cabinet secretary agreed today to visit East Lothian Produce Ltd in my constituency, which is Scotland’s main producer of cabbage and a significant supplier of potatoes. His willingness to come and see what is happening is welcome and does him credit, but when he goes there, he will find that the company faces losses of as much as 40 per cent in its key crops because of the exceptional rainfall. Arable farmers who suffer those difficult circumstances really need to know whether he will be able to offer them any support or succour.

Page 5 of the document that accompanies the statement makes it clear that the Scottish Government intends to consult on the closure of the scheme to projects below 5MW. In my constituency, there is an innovative research and development company that is working with anaerobic digestion, and a distillery that is seeking to pilot the use of AD technology. Will the minister enlarge on his reasons for the presumption towards removing such projects from the scheme?

Telling someone that you have volunteered for a debate on EMR is a bit like telling them that you were once a physics teacher—their face immediately rearranges itself into an expression that says, “Oh, really? How dull.” We have only to look at the objectives of the reform to see how important it is to decarbonise electricity generation at a time when every news bulletin brings further disturbing news of the impact of climate change; to guarantee security of supply at a time when every day our leisure, our work life and our industry depend more and more on technologies that are all powered by electricity; and to control the cost to consumers of the reform at a time when 800,000 Scottish families are fuel poor. When we add to that the fact that electricity is an important added-value export from Scotland and the potential—rightly recognised by the Scottish Government—that we can use new technologies to reindustrialise our country, we can see that there is nothing dull at all about EMR. In fact, it is not putting it too strongly to say that our way of life depends on getting EMR right. The consequences of getting it wrong are already becoming obvious. SSE turned away from some of its proposed hydro investments immediately in response to ROCs decisions by the UK Government. In my constituency, 1,000MW of capacity at Cockenzie power station is about to disappear in April, with no investment decision on the horizon in spite of the Scottish Government having already consented to a combined cycle gas turbine replacement. Iberdrola has the investment decision on hold, as it awaits EMR decisions. We are currently in a worrying position. The proposals do not really reform the market. In particular, they would leave the wholesale market unreformed and would not restore any balance between the interests of the consumer and those of the big six energy companies. However, because of the complexity of the contracts for difference system, the lack of clarity on counterparties and a lack of confidence in the proposed capacity market auctions, the proposals have also failed to gain the confidence of the companies, with Ian Marchant of SSE calling them a train wreck. Cockenzie is one example of a hiatus in investment that either results from EMR concerns or for which EMR is the excuse. Either way, EMR is not delivering what we need, and we will not resolve those issues by allowing it to become a polarised battleground over competing low-carbon technologies. The Scottish Government’s position on nuclear is clear. I think that it is wrong because Torness in my constituency generates reliable baseload electricity—15 to 20 per cent of Scotland’s electricity, day by day—without producing carbon emissions and provides 500 highly skilled and well-paid jobs for my constituents, but there is no doubt that the Scottish Government is entitled to take the view that it does on nuclear. However, it should not—as the minister did not—use EMR to try to impose that view on the rest of the UK, lest it undermine its entirely legitimate arguments that EMR must deliver a market that supports renewables. At the same time, the UK Government must not allow any hint of dogmatic and irrational anti-renewables voices—especially anti-wind voices, including that of the new UK Minister of State for Energy in a previous life—to skew EMR against renewables and unfairly in favour of nuclear. In the long term, renewable technologies hold out the prospect of electricity generation without dependence on finite fuel supplies. Balance must be the aim. The Scottish Government should be supported in arguing for transmission charging, contracts for difference and a capacity market that all incentivise renewable generation throughout Scotland, including our islands. However, I add my voice to Mary Scanlon’s and argue that, in its discussions, the Scottish Government should also raise the profile of energy storage. Scotland has a long tradition in energy storage, not least at the Cruachan pump storage station. However, there are only 2,800MW of pump storage in the whole UK and such installations are in a poor position in the current regime because they pay charges as generator and customer. In its briefing yesterday—to which Mary Scanlon referred—the Institution of Mechanical Engineers was extremely clear that EMR as it stands will not incentivise new storage or new storage technologies, although many more thousands of megawatts will be required.

I think that the Scottish Government does believe that—indeed, there is a reference to it in the motion, which I welcome. My point was simply to try to raise the profile of storage in the debate: storage matters particularly for Scotland—as the minister understands—because it is part of the answer to genuine concerns about the intermittency of many renewable technologies. Yesterday, we were shown a picture of a pilot cryogenic storage plant that is situated in Slough but which was engineered and manufactured in Inverness. There are real opportunities in storage. Indeed, we could say that the whole EMR process is fraught with opportunity. However, the minister is right that any loss of momentum is fraught with danger. Therefore, we should unite behind the motion and the amendment.

14. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to tackle long-term unemployment. (S4O-01259)

I thank the cabinet secretary for quite a broad-brush reply to what was, in fairness, a broad-brush question. However, the devil is often in the detail. In my constituency, the number of people who have been claiming jobseekers allowance for more than 12 months has almost doubled. Today’s unemployment figures mean that that situation is unlikely to have improved. Behind that detail, figures that were released yesterday showed that East Lothian and East Renfrewshire had recorded the largest rises in female unemployment over the past four years—rises of more than 275 per cent. The cabinet secretary will be well aware of the strong link between female unemployment in particular and child poverty. Today, the Scottish Government held a summit on women’s unemployment. Will he mention any practical policy actions that he expects to emerge from the summit and which he will implement that might give some hope to the unemployed women in my constituency?

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on the value of Edington cottage hospital to North Berwick and its neighbouring communities. (S4O-01165)

I wanted to thank the cabinet secretary for her endorsement, but I fear that organisations such as the friends of the Edington hospital in North Berwick will find that endorsement rather less strong than they hoped for. Two weeks ago, the Edington celebrated 100 years of serving the people of North Berwick. It continues to provide crucial services close to home. It allows for short-term in-patient care; it allows people to return from surgery in Edinburgh earlier than they would have done otherwise; and most important of all, it provides palliative care close to families. The Edington hospital has served its community for 100 years. It would be unfair to ask the cabinet secretary to promise another 100 years of life for the Edington, but it would be good to hear her suggest that for the foreseeable future, it is a facility that will remain available to serve my constituents in North Berwick.

The cabinet secretary will know that, back in May, NHS Lothian commissioned a paper to look at the option of staying on the current site at Sciennes. That site was rejected as not being fit for purpose for the Royal hospital for sick children in 2003. Does the progress that the cabinet secretary has indicated today mean that that is no longer an option, and can she guarantee that the new hospital will be built on the appropriate site at Little France?

The belief that the future capacity of this country to thrive is no more or less than the potential that is embodied in our young people is undoubtedly an idea that unites rather than divides us. The Parliament should be a place where we come together with the Government to meet our obligation to remove any barrier and to open any door that lies between younger generations and their opportunity to be all that they can be. That is why, six months ago, in Labour’s last debate under my leadership, we called for a new minister to take the issue of youth employment to the heart of Government. That the Government responded with the post that Ms Constance now occupies is very much to its credit. Just as we forged positive agreement in the heat of debate that day, we did so back in 2009 when, in the course of a fractious budget that took two attempts to pass, the First Minister agreed to Labour’s demands to end two years of cuts in the apprenticeship programme and to begin to increase it again. It is exactly because our support for the minister’s task is central to our beliefs that we cannot but speak out when the Government’s actions fall short of what our common purpose demands. That is why we cannot stand by when the figures show that not enough of the new opportunities that are created are going to unemployed young Scots and that the apprenticeship programme does not complement the economy’s needs in sectors such as engineering or renewables.

No, Mr Gibson, my criticism is that the Government needs to spend less time counting apprenticeships and more time making those apprenticeships really count. Colleagues from other parties have said that ours is a disreputable argument. However, the disreputable argument that has been mounted this week is the one that says that, because we voted against the budget, we voted against apprenticeships. That is not only disreputable, but infantile. It is the political equivalent of the argument that, because Scotland beat France a couple of years ago, if France wins Euro 2012, Scotland will really have won it. We voted against the budget because it would not grow the economy; it would cut tens of thousands of public sector jobs; and it would cut teachers from our schools and nurses from our hospitals—and we were right. There were many reasons to vote against the budget, but apprenticeships were certainly not one of them. The minister made a number of very good points, including the need for employers to look beyond the recession. However, that is not happening. For example, 1,000 tradespeople leave the electrical industry every year but there are only 400 apprentices. When the upturn comes, that gap will mean a massive skills shortage. I know that the problem with increasing those numbers is the fact that apprentices need jobs—the Government is right about employed status. However, those jobs should be coming from public sector contracts. No matter whether they are capital or service contracts, unless we ensure that local and small companies get their share of what is available and unless we insist that every single contract creates opportunities for young people to get off the dole, we will waste the most powerful mechanism that we have. I know that the minister agrees, because her draft strategy has at its heart a sustainable procurement bill. Why did she not mention the bill today? Where is it? What are we waiting for? Every day, contracts are being let, still aggregated and still tendered 92 per cent on price alone. We know what works. In Wales, public contracts are let 70 per cent on the basis of social benefit, not price; Glasgow has its apprenticeship guarantee and graduate employment promise; and in Falkirk procurement was used to create hundreds of apprenticeships, which were filled with youngsters lifted from the unemployment scrapheap. The minister herself highlighted an example from Perth and Kinross Council. Why can every single council in the land not do the same? If the Government had the political will to force every council to stop increasing council tax, why can it not put the same effort into getting every council to emulate Glasgow and Falkirk and stop the rise in youth unemployment? The minister is right to say that she needs to reach back into schools to see what is happening there. She also mentioned curriculum for excellence, but an unintended consequence of that move is emerging right now to undermine her efforts. Teachers are telling us that because of the way in which course choices operate, pupils are dropping all sciences at the end of secondary 2. On Sunday, I heard Mike Russell say that curriculum for excellence will not change the laws of physics, but science teachers are telling him that, as a result of it, fewer pupils will learn the laws of physics. In three years’ time, we will not be able to find the very scientists, engineers and technicians that we need to drive our economic growth.

Because there is so much common ground and common purpose, we should support the Government’s motion. However, we need an agreed strategy—in fact, we need it yesterday, not tomorrow—as well as plans with more depth, dynamism and detail and the right focus. That is why, if we are serious, we must support Labour’s amendment.

Surely Mr Stewart is not suggesting that a party that ran Aberdeen City Council for the past five years, during which time it failed to introduce a youth employment strategy, can criticise a party that has been in control for five weeks. I look forward to Aberdeen City Council’s youth employment strategy, because the change in that council is the best thing that could have happened.

Will the member take an intervention?

Surely the point is that, if the Government’s argument is that its apprenticeship programme strategy is right for 2006, it cannot possibly be right for 2012. It is no surprise that it is not working. [Applause.]

I am grateful to Mr Hepburn for giving me the chance to correct a mistake that he and one of his colleagues have made. I did not say that there are apprenticeships in the modern apprenticeship programme that are not meaningful; rather, I said that we have to make the programme count, by which I meant that we have to make it deal more effectively with the unemployment crisis and more effectively match the economy’s needs. That is not the same as saying that the apprenticeships are not meaningful. It is very different.

I simply have to ask the minister what many people are asking: when is that consultation going to happen?

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made with the Scottish Court Service’s review of sheriff and justice of the peace courts. (S4O-01091)

It is true that the wheels of justice grind slowly, and the cabinet secretary is right that in February the minister promised that the proposals would be subject to wide public consultation involving local communities and members. It is now nine months since the Scottish Court Service produced a report—which was not published, but leaked—which suggested that 15 sheriff courts, including the Haddington court in my constituency, should be closed. For exactly how long must communities face the uncertainty of not knowing whether their sheriff courts have a future or not?

Will the member take an intervention?

Mr Adam’s speech is self-contradictory. When we were in power, we introduced quality partnerships and quality contracts. We now believe that we need to go further.

Bus services are being cut and fares are rising everywhere, but my constituency of East Lothian and next-door Midlothian are the hardest hit, as First is to pull out from all but a handful of routes there. Our thoughts are particularly with the 200 people who face redundancy at the Dalkeith and Musselburgh depots and with their families. I welcome to the public gallery some of those who are affected. First’s predecessor, Eastern Scottish, was one of the most profitable parts of the Scottish Bus Group. Its routes in East Lothian and Midlothian were reliable, regular and very busy. I know that because I spent my summer holidays working as a bus conductor on those services. Those routes were sold off for the highest price in the whole Scottish Bus Group when it was privatised, so how can it be that, from June, communities such as Pencaitland, Ormiston, Gifford and Whitecraig could find themselves with no buses at all and no routes that link East Lothian and Midlothian? First certainly must accept some of the blame. I agree with Mr Beattie—like him, I regularly receive complaints from constituents about the condition of First’s vehicles, breakdowns, timetable changes and of course soaring fares. However, the Scottish Government must take its responsibility, too. The number of bus journeys in Scotland peaked in 2007 and has been in decline ever since. The annual number of bus journeys now is the lowest since the advent of the Parliament. It is no coincidence that that decline parallels the SNP in power, because it has never prioritised or supported the bus industry. First, the SNP scrapped its policy of regulating services. It then scrapped the £27 million bus route development fund, cut the bus service operators grant and systematically underfunded the concessionary travel scheme. The SNP has no strategy for taking the bus industry forward. Patrick Harvie was right—the Government believes that buses are the transport of last resort.

SNP back benchers are the only people in Scotland who believe that funding point—nobody else does. I repeat that, for the Government, buses are the transport of last resort, although there are four times as many bus journeys as there are rail journeys in Scotland. The truth is that the Government does not understand buses. Unlike the Prime Minister, the First Minister probably has bought a steak bake from Greggs, but it would be worth asking him when was the last time he bought a bus ticket and took a bus home or whether any of his Cabinet could find their way to a bus stop. I am astonished that the transport minister seems to know and care far more about buses in west Wales than he does about buses in my constituency of East Lothian. It is no surprise that he is reduced to reading out from Private Eye, because the SNP’s bus policy is a joke. When services are cut, local authorities are left to pick up the pieces. East Lothian Council is retendering supported services and is getting welcome help from the Government to do that, but it has also promised in the press and in election leaflets to set up a company of its own to run local bus services. The council says that the transport minister supports it, so why did I hear Mr Brown say on Radio Scotland on Tuesday that “councils aren’t allowed to run buses. The law prevents them from doing that”? Should we believe SNP council candidates, who tell voters that they will set up a bus company to save the day, or the SNP minister, who says on Radio Scotland that they cannot do that?

I am aware of that distinction, but I am surprised that Mr Brown was not aware of it when he spoke on Radio Scotland two days ago. I say to the minister that to set up the equivalent of Lothian Buses in East Lothian would require, for example, the purchase of a number of buses that cost about £200,000 each. I await the indication that he is prepared to fund such an initiative, which is being promised. SNP councillors state in the East Lothian Courier this morning that the Scottish Government will give them money for bus services to link our villages to towns and trains, yet Mr Brown has told us repeatedly in the debate that no more money is to be provided. We do not need election promises that the SNP has no intention of keeping. As Christine Grahame, if she were in the chamber, would put it, we do not need porkies to get councils through the election. We need the immediate restoration of the cut to the bus grant and a rise in support for concessionary journeys, because that would make the axed routes more attractive to new operators. In the long run, we also need better regulation of buses. It is East Lothian and Midlothian today, but how many other communities will have to see their buses go before this Government wakes up and steps up?

Mr Wheelhouse repeats the suggestion that Labour is saying that the BSOG cuts are the only problem. Nobody is saying that high fuel prices are not a problem for bus companies—indeed, in its statement on cutting its services, First cites the current economic climate and high fuel prices. However, it goes on to cite cuts in external funding, which means cuts in the BSOG. When fuel prices are high, that is surely the last time that we should be cutting other support for our bus services.

As the current transport minister, Mr Brown must know that to get the exemption under the legislation to run an arm’s-length bus company a council must demonstrate that it has enough vehicles, drivers and everything else that is needed. Given that a coach costs around £200,000, what financial help does the minister intend to provide to East Lothian to allow it to pursue that option?

None, then.

I am delighted to be able to speak in the debate, as it is the culmination of a process in which I have participated from the very beginning. I think that I am the only one here who was at Wendy Alexander’s lecture on St Andrew’s day in 2007, in which she outlined her view of the challenges that devolution faces and her proposal to create a commission to meet them. There were three principles at the heart of her speech. The first was that the devolution settlement can change without breaking the social, economic and political partnership of the United Kingdom. The second was that any such change should be developed in Scotland. The third was that the Parliament should be accountable for raising more of our resources as well as for spending them. The Calman commission studied devolution settlements across the world and reached a similar conclusion. It said that the Scotland Act 1998 had created a Parliament with an unusually high degree of legislative devolution, but in contrast, it enjoys unusually limited fiscal devolution. The commission’s proposals, which were developed by a powerful group of economists and endorsed unanimously by the commissioners, who were drawn from right across the spectrum of Scottish political and civic life, were designed fundamentally to rebalance that position, and that is still the essence of the measures that we are debating. The Parliament should face the responsibility of setting the rate of income tax that Scots pay, and we should reap the consequences or the benefits of that. It should have the power to borrow and to choose to spend future resource in order to allow us to invest in and shape that future. That is a grown-up power for a grown-up Parliament, and it is a job-creating power for a Parliament that should be spending more of its time creating more jobs with the powers that it already has. As we have heard, the detail that flows from the changes can be complex. However, we should not let the devil in the detail blind us to the power in the principle of the legislation or the uniqueness of its passage. Mick McGahey, of the National Union of Mineworkers, famously said that “there is nothing more painful than the birth of an idea.” Those days back in 2007 were painful ones for Wendy Alexander, yet she brought forward this idea, which has prevailed in spite of everything. First, the Scottish Parliament itself, in what was at the time a dramatic act of defiance, seized the Parliament’s authority in the teeth of opposition from the SNP Government of the day. In spite of it being in defiance of the Government, a heavyweight and wide-ranging commission was recruited. As it was recognised that legislative power in this area lay in Westminster, the UK Government was engaged too and a commitment was made that proposals would be pursued, with this Parliament having a de facto veto through the requirement for the LCM that we are debating today. If that was not remarkable enough, the Scotland Bill survived elections in both Parliaments, which produced in one a coalition led by a party that has only one member of Parliament in Scotland and many MPs who wear their antipathy to devolution on their sleeve. In this Parliament, there was the glorious contradiction of a majority nationalist Government that was hell-bent on refusing, discrediting and sabotaging the offer of more powers for Scotland. However, common sense has prevailed. As Mr Crawford outlined at some length, the UK Government has shown flexibility and agreement has been reached. That is testimony to all those involved: Wendy Alexander and also Annabel Goldie and Nicol Stephen, who set the process in motion; the two Scotland Bill Committees of this Parliament; and the ministers of all the Governments involved. It is testimony, too, to the strength of devolution itself. It nails the lie that those of us who oppose separation must therefore oppose change, too. That has never been the case. Donald Dewar never said that devolution is a process, but he said that “It would be absurd to pretend that ours is the last word on the constitutional settlement.” The truth is that the whole story of devolution has been a story of change in powers and responsibilities. When I worked in the Scotland Office, we devolved rail infrastructure to this Parliament and with it a budget of £300 million a year. Powers over energy consents have been devolved as the industry has changed. The current UK Government is devolving council tax benefit, although that was once an issue of great contention. The SNP’s argument seems to be that the Scotland Bill is not perfect and that some of its supporters admit that, but the understanding that waiting for a perfect blueprint for devolution would mean waiting for ever, and the profound belief that it should not be beyond the wit of future politicians to deal with anomalies and make changes, is what unlocked the modernisation of our constitution in 1999. We can arrange our constitutional affairs in a partnership of nations whereby we pool sovereignty so that we can share risk, resources and opportunities flexibly and responsibly and make changes. That is a wholly different matter from the once-and-for-all question of whether we want to see that partnership ended irrevocably. If we support the LCM, we will show that we have the wit to improve devolution and the willingness to set aside what divides us in order to do what is right and what the people of Scotland want us to do—by that, I simply mean strengthen the powers of this Parliament. Today will not be the last word on the constitution, but it can be a memorable moment to the credit of this Parliament.

Will the member take an intervention?

Wendy Alexander is not here to answer for herself, but does Mr Hepburn not think that if he examined the whole of her political life, he would see that it was devoted to devolving powers to Scotland? That was a ridiculous, ridiculous statement to make.

I intervene for the sake of completeness. Mr Neil has spent the past 10 minutes listing all the things that the Scottish Government failed to achieve, but he missed out the devolution of excise duty.

I invite the Parliament to nominate Caroline Gardner to Her Majesty the Queen as the Auditor General for Scotland. The selection panel was chaired by the Presiding Officer and the other members were Willie Coffey, Murdo Fraser, Jim Hume, Angus MacDonald, Mark McDonald, Drew Smith and me. On behalf of the panel, I thank Janice Crerar, who managed the process for the Parliament, and Louise Rose, the independent assessor who oversaw our work. Louise has provided the Parliament with a validation certificate confirming that the process complied with good practice and that the nomination of the Auditor General is made on merit after a fair, open and transparent process. We make the appointment because of the retirement of the current Auditor General for Scotland, Robert Black. Bob Black was the inaugural Auditor General for Scotland, appointed on 1 February 2000. Just as Her Majesty the Queen has seen off Prime Ministers, Bob has seen off more audit committee conveners than I care to count, of whom I am merely the latest in what I like to think has been a distinguished line over the years. Bob Black has developed an internationally respected, modern, open, independent and highly effective public audit regime. Under his leadership, Audit Scotland’s reputation has been not just Scottish but international. Indeed, Audit Scotland participates fully in the development of international ethical standards and takes part in the audit of the United Nations. Bob has provided Scotland, not just the Parliament, with exemplary service over the years and I know that the Parliament will join me in wishing him a long and happy retirement. However, I do not wish him too restful a retirement, as I sincerely hope that Scotland will continue to benefit from his experience and wisdom in some way or another. Caroline Gardner was the unanimous choice of the panel from a very strong field of candidates. She has 25 years of experience in public audit, financial management and governance. She has worked for Audit Scotland, the Accounts Commission for Scotland and the Audit Commission for England and Wales. She recently returned from the Turks and Caicos Islands, where she spent a year as the Government’s chief financial officer in the most challenging of circumstances. The Auditor General reports to the Scottish Parliament on the financial management and performance of Scottish public services and tells us how well or otherwise our public bodies are performing. The appointment is therefore crucial. The Auditor General is supported by the staff of Audit Scotland and works closely with the Accounts Commission, which secures the audit of local government bodies. The panel believes that Caroline will bring to the post enthusiasm, professionalism, integrity and determination. I am sure that the Parliament wishes her every success for the future in her new role. It gives me great pleasure without hesitation to recommend Caroline Gardner to the Parliament as the Auditor General for Scotland. I move, That the Parliament nominates Caroline Gardner to Her Majesty The Queen for appointment as the Auditor General for Scotland.

Will the member give way?

I appreciate that. Surely Mr Brown will admit that the signal that the measure sends is that if someone is rich and does not pay their tax, the Government will remove that taxation, whereas, if someone is poor and pays their tax, the Government will increase their taxation and they will pay more. Does he really believe that that is the right signal to send?

As one of the initial signatories to John Lamont’s motion, I congratulate him on securing the debate. The motion itself reflects what is a powerful cross-party, cross-community and cross-council campaign in the south-east of Scotland. I have supported the introduction of a local rail service between Edinburgh and Dunbar and on to Berwick for a number of years, and I echo John Lamont’s commendation of the work of RAGES. In fact, I should probably declare an interest as a paid-up member of the group. Although Dunbar in my constituency is served primarily by a mixture of cross-country and east coast long-distance trains, the truth is that it is an afterthought in those timetables. There are gaps of up to an hour and a half between trains during the day and of more than two hours at some points in the evening. Even worse, my constituents in East Linton, where the station closed in 1964, have to watch trains pass through their village all day without stopping. The recent addition of a few ScotRail services to Dunbar is a welcome, if slight, improvement, but the service remains inadequate to the town’s needs and does nothing to address the demand for train services from East Linton. Given that East Lothian’s population is projected to rise by 33 per cent by 2035—the biggest projected increase in any part of Scotland—and that in Dunbar itself planning permission has already been granted for 500 houses that we expect to be built in the near future, it is clear that there is huge potential for rail services to grow in this part of Scotland. The proposed service would link young people directly to Queen Margaret University and job opportunities in Edinburgh; after all, we must bear in mind that this is the part of Scotland where youth unemployment has risen fastest in the past two years. It would also get commuters out of their cars, cut carbon emissions and thereby contribute to the Scottish Government’s emissions reduction efforts in the transport sector. Over the years, successive transport ministers of all political parties—including, I fear, me—have met the RAGES campaign with warm words but lots of hurdles. However, the group’s persistence has overcome those hurdles one by one. For example, some years ago, a STAG appraisal produced a positive business case; East Lothian Council has safeguarded land and committed funding for a station at East Linton; and ScotRail has begun to train drivers to go beyond Drem on the east coast main line. Most recently, the MVA Consultancy feasibility study showed that a station at East Linton improves the benefit-cost ratio for the Edinburgh to Dunbar service and finally laid to rest the argument that a Dunbar local service would impact on the mainline timetable. As Mr Lamont has explained, a multimodal STAG 2 study has now been demanded. We will also get over that hurdle, because the journey on the so-called express bus from Dunbar to Edinburgh takes around an hour longer than the train; in any case, its frequency has just been halved. Constituents in East Linton are often left standing by rush-hour buses that are already full before they get to the village. Like Mr Lamont, I was very pleased that the transport minister took the time last month to visit the site of the old East Linton station. However, I worry about the fact that, on that visit, he emphasised that, at closer to £2.5 million per annum rather than £1 million, the operating subsidy required would be at the upper end of projections. We know that other new stations such as Laurencekirk and new services such as those to Bathgate and between Stirling and Alloa have attracted passenger numbers way beyond expectations, and the MVA study assumes that there will be new rolling stock, which I think would not be necessary. We have every reason to believe that the subsidy required for the service will be less than predicted; in any case, it would be marginal in the overall ScotRail budget. South-east Scotland is looking only for its fair share of rail services. The time has come for a transport minister to say yes, not maybe. That challenge now falls to Mr Brown and I hope that he will rise to it this evening.

This year is Charles Dickens’s bicentenary, and he once wrote: “Charity begins at home, and justice begins next door.” If justice is not only to be done but to be seen to be done, indeed, it must begin next door. On 26 September, the Scottish Court Service issued a report on future court structures that was intended for discussion by those involved in our courts. The paper’s conclusions are the second iteration of a proposal to remove court services from many of Scotland’s communities. In fact, the proposals are drastic and involve the closure of 15 out of 49 sheriff courts and a reduction in the number of sheriff courts holding jury trials from 47 to 14. The report is absolutely explicit about the driver behind the proposals: cuts in the service’s budget of 6.9 per cent next year, 8.4 per cent the year after and 11.1 per cent in 2014-15. The proposals have nothing to do with justice; they are a cost-cutting exercise. My particular concern is with Haddington sheriff and justice of the peace courts, which are both targeted for closure because of their so-called proximity—around 20 miles—to Edinburgh. However, I have no doubt that my reasons for opposing the closure of my local courts will apply in most or all of the communities that are threatened by the plans. I am sure that colleagues will take the chance this evening to speak up for their towns, too. The closure of Haddington sheriff court might be an attractive cost-cutting measure for the Scottish Court Service, but it would be a significant blow to the people of East Lothian. After all, not just people on trial but victims and witnesses would face longer journeys and longer waits. Our justice system often fails victims and witnesses, without our imposing an additional cost in time and travel. We must also consider local police officers, who already spend too much time away from their front-line duties in the community but would have to be extracted for even longer so that they could give evidence. It is no wonder that Sheriff Peter Gillam said that closure would be “extremely detrimental”. He also pointed out that cases in Edinburgh sheriff court already face serious delays, without having the burden of additional work from East Lothian. The issue is not just criminal cases. Citizens who seek recourse in civil law would find that such recourse was offered not next door but a significant distance away. Then there is the whole court supply chain; fiscals, lawyers and court workers could all go. Our local newspapers, the East Lothian News and East Lothian Courier, would find it hard to maintain their coverage of local cases. The papers are to be commended for their campaigning against the proposal. Justice must be not only done but seen to be done. Haddington’s justice of the peace court would go, too. Such courts embody the principle of justice that is delivered in one’s own community by one’s peers. Lay justice was introduced in 1609 by James VI, precisely to protect the people and their communities from the high-handedness and arbitrary decisions of the elite—barons and lords, who could not be trusted to act in the interests of the people. We ask a lot of JPs, not least that they sit on the bench at least 12 times a year. There is no doubt that finding candidates in East Lothian who would be willing to discharge those duties would be made harder if JPs were required to sit in Edinburgh. The effect would be to make the other duties that they undertake more difficult. The closure of Haddington court would diminish the actual and perceived effectiveness of the justice system in my constituency. If justice delayed is justice denied, justice displaced is also justice denied. There is another point. Like many towns in Scotland, Haddington’s reasons for being have changed and been challenged over the centuries. It was a major port when the River Tyne was navigable—that is long gone. Its function as a market town in a rural county, which served farmers and farm workers, has also gone. It has been a shopping centre with a wide catchment area, but as we speak my town centre is fighting for its life in the face of supermarket developments and online shopping. However, Haddington remains the administrative centre of East Lothian, and the court is a central component of its stature and standing. To remove the court would be to diminish the town a little more, to question its purpose a little more, to reduce its vibrancy a little more and to hurt its pride a lot. Some of us find it passing strange that a Government that concerns itself so centrally with the stature, strength and sustainability of the nation can seem so cavalier with the vitality and vigour of the small towns that make up so much of the nation. Haddington has certainly had a court for 600 years and there is every reason to believe that there has been some kind of assize there since the 12th century. In some form or other, the court has survived the siege of Haddington, the reformation, Cromwell, the union, the industrial revolution and two world wars. It would be a tragedy if it did not survive this Scottish National Party Scottish Government. I know that the minister will say that there are no firm proposals, that savings must be made and that there will be consultation. I certainly hope that there will be consultation.

I am sure that some of that is true, but I have tried to make the case this evening that the courts are not about the buildings, but about the justice that is served in our towns and communities. Consultation will be important if the proposals come forward, but I must be honest and say that the truth is that no consultation will convince the people of my town that justice should not begin next door and no saving will convince them that the compromise of their justice is justified. The minister can end this now by telling the Scottish Court Service that Haddington wants, needs and deserves its court, and that the SCS should not waste her time by suggesting to her that she closes it.

It is true that the judiciary is independent of the Scottish Government, but the cabinet secretary made it clear earlier that this will be a decision for ministers, if and when firm proposals are made.

The member makes a fair point. My reference to “next door” was a literary and rhetorical allusion, but the point is a good one. In East Lothian, Haddington might be 20 miles from Edinburgh, but Dunbar is twice that distance, so people would be required to travel an even greater distance.

It may be the case that, for the stakeholders and practitioners in the courts, this was not a secret process but, as far as the public are concerned, the Scottish Court Service document was a confidential document that came to the notice of the public only through its being leaked to a newspaper. In that sense, it has not been an open and transparent process.

10. To ask the Scottish Executive what it is doing to promote buses as a method of travel. (S4O-00706)

That sounds a laudable answer, but the minister did not say that the bus service operators grant will be cut by 20 per cent in the coming year. As predicted in the Parliament, we are now seeing the effect of that locally. As a direct result, one major bus operator in my constituency, Lothian Buses, has already announced fare rises of up to 9 per cent. The other main local operator, First Scotland East, has announced its intention to increase fares on similar terms. Its managing director has said: “It is inevitable that the reduction in funding will lead to increased fares and service reductions.” From the minister’s answer to my colleague Paul Martin, I understand that he does not wish to pursue regulation of bus services—at least, not any more. However, can he explain how forcing up fares is meant to promote buses as a method of travel?

10. To ask the Scottish Executive how it will ensure that reductions in college budgets will not have a disproportionate impact on opportunities for people with learning disabilities. (S4O-00618)

That is a worthy sentiment, but it is not what is happening on the ground. The Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability carried out a survey that found that 34 per cent of part-time college places for students with learning disabilities have been cut in the past year. It identified the reasons for that as “changing levels of funding from the Scottish Funding Council” and “the drive towards accredited courses aimed at employability”. That was before the 20 per cent cut in college budgets that is coming down the line kicks in. It is clear that unless the cabinet secretary takes some proactive, positive measure to protect opportunities for students with learning disabilities, they will be lost. Will he take such action?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00351)

Of course I welcome the potential for those jobs in Dundee, but the announcement comes at a time when 400 jobs are going every day. By Saturday, we will have lost more jobs than that memorandum of understanding promises. Four weeks ago, I asked the First Minister how many Scots had to be unemployed before he would admit that his plan MacB was not working. Since then, another 25,000 Scots have joined the dole queue. Will he now admit that it is not working?

I thank the First Minister for his kind and gracious words, and I certainly accept them in the spirit in which they were said. I am going to miss this, so I hope that he will forgive me if I also disagree with him. To try to play with the figures by looking at previous months and a particular aspect of the statistics is not to treat with respect the problem that so many Scots face. The 229,000 Scots who are on the dole do not believe that we are outperforming the UK. That is not just spin; that is what the Americans call “post-truth politics”—just repeating the same thing over and over again, even though it is demonstrably not true. It is only three months ago that the First Minister was touring the TV studios, boasting: “Scotland is the only place in these islands—the only nation, the only region, the only place—where unemployment is falling. Therefore, there must be something distinctive happening which is not happening in economies elsewhere in these islands. Plan MacB has a great deal to recommend it.” Now he says that the problem lies somewhere else. He loves to claim the credit when things go well, but is he big enough to take responsibility when things go wrong?

Of course we agree that the action that the UK Government is taking is wrong and is not working, but the action that Mr Salmond and his Government are taking is not working, either. That is probably because, in essence, they are doing the same thing: they are slashing the public sector and slashing capital investment. However, the First Minister’s answer goes to the heart of the matter, because on Tuesday he claimed yet again that the answer to the problem is his referendum on separation and more powers, and he has repeated that today. In all sincerity I say this to him: 229,000 Scots on the dole need urgent action. If he really believes that the referendum is the answer and is really telling those unemployed Scots that his referendum is the solution that they need, why is he telling them that they must wait three, four or five years for it?

The last poll I saw at the weekend said that two thirds of Scots want the referendum to be done quickly and out of the way. I have been doing this for quite a while now, so I know that when Alex Salmond starts talking about what other people—Alistair Darling, Ed Miliband or whoever—have said, he wants to run away from what he has said. He said that in Scotland our economy was growing, our employment market was strengthening and we were outperforming the UK, but it was not true. However, it is not just Alex Salmond. Nicola Sturgeon told us that she was not cutting the national health service, but today Audit Scotland has said that she is. Kenny MacAskill told us that he was cutting knife crime; this week, it turns out that knife murders in Scotland have soared. Mike Russell has been telling us for months that class sizes in our schools were falling; last week, we discovered that they have gone up. I saw that Alex Salmond arrived in China last week without his trews. Is that not the perfect metaphor for him and his whole Government? Even on their own beloved referendum, are they not always all mouth and no trousers? [Applause.]

Labour welcomes the reshuffle in the ranks of the SNP Government. We congratulate Mr Mackay on his elevation, Ms Campbell on her sideways step and Angela Constance on what I consider to be her promotion. As the First Minister made clear, Mr Mackay is no newcomer to responsibility for local government, given his experience in Renfrewshire Council. There, he had responsibility for the proposal to replace trained classroom teachers with volunteers; for a 23 per cent pay hike for senior council officials in 2008; and for teacher numbers too, cutting 200 posts in one year alone, which is proportionally the highest amount of any council in Scotland by some distance. He is therefore not so much a poacher turned gamekeeper, but more a ghillie who was always under orders from the big house. No matter. He takes on an important job today, and we genuinely wish him well. Our welcome for Angela Constance to her post is unreserved. We demanded the creation of the post, as did the Smith report. The disastrous unemployment figures announced today underline how urgent the appointment is. Since we began discussing the appointment, another 24,000 young Scots have joined the ranks of the lost generation. The current figure is the benchmark and we will hold the minister to account in bringing it down. We do so in order that she may better win the arguments inside Government, that she is given the authority and influence required and that she is backed by the budget that she needs. We will be on Ms Constance’s side, although it might not always seem like it. For a start, we believe that Ms Constance’s budget is not enough and too much of it is not new money—she needs more. Her job is at the heart of what our politics and this Parliament should be about; it must be properly at the heart of Government. As for Ms Campbell, I hope that she will forgive me if I say that, from the vantage point of my sixth decade, her role as a minister looks to me like a youth employment opportunity in and of itself. The challenges of children’s policy are just as central to the future of our country as youth employment, and meeting those challenges is vital to creating the better Scotland that, across the chamber, we want to see. We therefore wish her success, too, in her vital role. I have great pleasure in supporting the First Minister’s motion. I wish the new ministers good luck in their new roles.

1. To ask the Deputy First Minister what engagements she has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00329)

I am pleased to acknowledge that the Scottish Government seems to be on top of today’s weather crisis, which frees me up to ask about the on-going crisis in our public sector. This week, the Scottish Government’s own figures showed that police numbers have fallen in seven out of the eight police forces in Scotland. That is on top of 700 job cuts in police civilian staff. Everyone knows that those jobs will be filled by uniformed officers who are taken off the streets. Will the Deputy First Minister back an independent audit to find out how many uniformed police officers are filling the gaps left by the cuts?

The pledge was 1,000 additional police officers on our streets. Those police officers are being withdrawn to the back offices. As for those crime figures, they will not stay long if those police officers are spending their time in the back offices. What about our schools, where the situation is even worse? The SNP Government has now cut almost 4,000 teachers out of Scottish schools—700 in the last year alone. Only one new teacher in five can get a full-time, permanent job. Class sizes are up, truancy is up, and applications to universities are down. Two years ago, Fiona Hyslop was sacked for less. Is Michael Russell just going to be allowed to let our schools decline?

We always know that the First Minister and the Deputy First Minister are in trouble when they start complaining that they have not been asked the question that they wanted to be asked. My subject is public sector workers who deliver to the people of Scotland services on which they and their families depend. Those workers include police officers and teachers. I saw that the Scottish Government issued a press release yesterday that was devoted entirely to primary 1 and which ignored the fact that our schools involve 13 stages, because primary 1 was the only year in which the Government could find a number to spin to make it look as if things were improving. It is not just the police and teachers whom Scottish people depend on, is it? It is not the Cabinet Secretary for Justice or even the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning who is the worst offender on job cuts—the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy is still out in front on her own. Since 2009, 4,500 national health service staff have been cut. In the past year alone, she has cut 1,569 nurses and midwives from our NHS. Does she really expect us to believe that that has no impact on patient care?

If Nicola Sturgeon is so proud—[Interruption.]

If Nicola Sturgeon is so proud of NHS staff, why have 40 per cent of them been told not to complain and told to keep their mouths shut about the cuts that are happening in the NHS? As for our record, in every year that we were in power, the number of nurses and other staff in the NHS increased. Under the SNP, those numbers are going down. No amount of spin can hide the reality of the SNP’s record. Teachers are on the scrap heap, police are in the back office and nurses are on the plane to jobs abroad. This Government has cut more public sector jobs than George Osborne has done. Twenty-five years ago, I was a teacher under Margaret Thatcher, but we never saw cuts such as those that have been imposed by Mr Russell as education secretary. This is a very simple question. If SNP members are the social democrats that they claim to be, why are they cutting the public sector faster and deeper than the Tories are doing?

This is the last time under my leadership that the Scottish Labour Party will choose the subject for debate. I chose this subject and to lead the debate in order to make it clear that, for us on this side of the chamber, there is no challenge more important or more urgent. The unemployment figures that were released this month were a milestone and an alarm call: 100,000 young Scots between the ages of 16 and 24 have no work. That is the highest figure ever recorded and is a national crisis for Scotland because of the profound threat that it poses to the future prosperity, equality and fairness of our society. Every one of those 100,000 is a real person with real hopes and real dreams frustrated by the failure of us all, as the leaders of society, to ensure that they have a fair chance. We should not assume that they are passive actors in their frustration. Those young men and women want to work and complete dozens—sometimes hundreds—of job applications. They walk the high streets of our communities delivering CVs to anyone who will take them, but they are knocked back and knocked down. They get up and try again, but the question is, for how long? No matter how polite, courteous or regretful the knock-back is, it is nonetheless corrosive. It poisons optimism, crushes hope and corrodes self-esteem. I know that first-hand from the last time that we were in this position. At the start of the 1980s, I was a teacher in a secondary school in Edinburgh. Many of its pupils did not have the easiest of backgrounds, but they were full of life, hope and bravado—exactly as young people should be. In 1981, I left for two years to work in Africa and when I returned it was to the same building but to a different school. Youth unemployment had soared and the Government of the day believed that unemployment was a price worth paying. The kids in the school had come to believe that society had no place for them. They thought that they would never work; even the ablest thought that there was no point in trying. All their hope, bravado and life had drained away. They had turned in on themselves and against a world that they felt had turned away from them. Today is world AIDS day. In Edinburgh in the 1980s, after the unemployment came the heroin and the shooting galleries, and my city, of which I am so proud, became the AIDS capital of Europe. I saw that generation lost—many did not survive the 1980s. We cannot let that happen again. There is still time to turn the tide. There are things that we can do in Scotland—things that we can do with the powers of the Scottish Parliament. That is why, when the First Minister told us in May that he had no monopoly on wisdom, I asked to meet him to discuss the areas in which I thought that we could collaborate, of which this was one. The manifesto on which Labour stood included a detailed plan to eradicate youth unemployment. I thought that some of those measures could command a joint effort to demonstrate the urgency of the issue and our willingness to take Scotland forward together. I still think that, but I got no sense at that time that the First Minister had a plan for jobs or a real interest in working together on one. Indeed, there seemed to be little sense of urgency then, although it was clear six months ago where things were going. Youth unemployment is the urgent problem of the moment. That is why we propose that the time has come for an emergency response from the Government. Instead, the Government amendment combines complacency with self-congratulation to justify the usual excuses. First, ministers will say that they can do nothing because unemployment is driven by decisions of the United Kingdom Government. We can agree that the Tory-Liberal coalition is driving growth out of the economy and thousands of people out of work. That is why Labour is arguing day in, day out, for our five-point plan for growth. Four elements of that plan are indeed matters for the coalition Government, but it is simply not true that there is nothing that the Scottish Government can do. Secondly, the Government will argue that it is doing all that it can: funding 25,000 apprenticeship places a year and guaranteeing a training place for 16 to 19-year-olds. We support those initiatives—the first was born out of our budget vote some years ago and the second is lifted from our last manifesto—but those 25,000 apprentices need jobs and, as for the guarantee, we have heard about it for six months but we see no sign of it on the ground. As a guarantee it is passing 20,000 by—and that number is growing. Those measures, welcome as they are, are demonstrably not enough. The 100,000 young people who are out of work are testament to that. The time has come to stop telling us what is being done and to start working out what more can be done. Thirdly, the Government will say that we are outperforming the UK as a whole. In fact, the youth unemployment rate is worse here, so ministers spin to youth employment and try that instead. Does it matter? Is the top and hem of this Government’s ambition for Scotland to be a fraction less terrible than the Tories? This Government—any Government—should match its aspiration for the next generation of young Scots to the unlimited potential of every one of those young men and women. It should match the self-belief of those young men and women in all they can be and do. To use the failures of David Cameron and George Osborne as a benchmark is a sad, sorry and limited objective for any self-respecting Government. The first thing that we must do is raise our own expectations, accept responsibility and act. We need more than words and more than a plan; we need an emergency response. Even George Osborne was shamed this week into taking some new action on youth unemployment. The first signal that could be sent is the appointment of a cabinet minister for youth jobs, as the Smith group proposed this week. I have never been, nor ever will be, an advocate of additional ministerial posts for anything and everything, but in this instance any effective response will have to marshal efforts from across the Scottish Executive and command the many elements of Government policy making, so there is a vital role to be fulfilled. It could be a temporary measure, but it could send the strongest of signals to the young people we are talking about that the Government has finally noticed their plight. I know that the Scottish Government likes to say that jobs are a priority, and I know that, to reflect that, John Swinney had the word “employment” added to his title when the new Government was formed earlier this year. However, given the breadth of Mr Swinney’s portfolio it is hard to escape the conclusion that he cannot focus on employment as we need someone to do.

Those of us who have served in cabinets would agree with some of what Liz Smith suggests, although someone with a particular responsibility can pool different elements. The Smith group made that argument earlier this week. If proof were needed that Mr Swinney’s portfolio is so vast that he cannot focus on this particular issue, we need only consider that, since he took on the sobriquet of employment, another 5,000 Scots have joined the dole. There is agreement between us and the SNP on the importance of public sector capital projects and on stimulating economic growth. Interestingly, this is an example of an issue for which the First Minister went as far as to create a cabinet secretary responsible for infrastructure, to mark its importance. However, we disagree on the extent to which the Government is actually investing—as opposed to talking about investing. We know that in the year past the Scottish Government cut capital investment even more than George Osborne did, and this week—

I am sorry; I need to make some progress. This week, we saw a 14 per cent drop in new starts in house building in Scotland. Let us be generous though: some additional consequentials are coming to the Government, and let us assume that it will use them to invest effectively. Any investment is helpful in terms of economic growth; what is not helpful is a procurement system that allocates multimillion-pound contracts without creating local employment and training opportunities for the long-term unemployed. Every public sector contract should do that, and that is why the legislative programme this year should have featured a procurement bill to make that not just possible, and not just desirable, but mandatory. We know that it can be done—Falkirk Council, for example, has created hundreds of apprenticeship opportunities. However, too often it is not done or it is not enforced. It should apply to every public sector contract, whether it be Government, local authority, national health service or non-departmental public body. It should apply to revenue contracts as well as capital—and the Government should introduce it now. I said that George Osborne had been shamed into action this week. He reintroduced a version of the future jobs fund—which he, himself, had abolished 18 months previously. No wonder he reintroduced it—in its previous incarnation, 30,000 Scots benefited from it, and the outcomes were the best of any similar placement scheme. I acknowledge that the Scottish Government has its own version—community jobs Scotland. That is a start, but there have been only 820 placements. The scale of the challenge is much greater than that. We need those placements to be rapidly increased, and it is not enough to seek them only in the voluntary sector. The scheme has to be extended into the private sector. That is harder to do and it takes more effort, but the pay-off is worth it. We cannot allow the UK scheme simply to substitute for what we should be doing. Of course, we want as many placements as possible, so the Scottish Government should, right now, be talking to Jobcentre Plus, establishing a partnership and expanding what is going to be on offer. While we are on the subject of U-turns, the Scottish Government should admit right now that cuts of over 20 per cent to our colleges can only make this problem worse. College principals are clear: they cannot sustain places with that degree of cut, and any guarantee to 16 to 19-year-olds will be delivered only at the expense of opportunities for the over-19s. We have been here before with this Government, when it expanded apprenticeship places for 16 to 19-year-olds by abolishing apprenticeship places for the over-21s. The Government thought twice on that occasion; it should think twice on this occasion, too. We should be worried too that applications for university are down 17 per cent. Mr Russell will say that that figure is a snapshot, but it looks like a trend, and the worry is that young people are beginning again to ask themselves, “What is the point?” What is the Scottish Government doing now to challenge that idea? Who is telling those young people, and their parents and guardians, that an education still means a better future? Ever better education is our only chance of a better future.

The resource on which Scotland’s future hinges is not oil, wind or waves—it is the young men and women of this country, and to lose 100,000 of them is a price that we cannot pay. I say to any SNP member who has in their speech the phrase “talking Scotland down” that they should strike it out now. I am talking Scotland’s young people up. I believe in every one of them. Trying to spin their number away, pretending that everything that could be done is being done, or telling them that they have to wait for constitutional change is not talking them down; it is treating them with contempt.

Yesterday, the First Minister sat in front of a frieze of great Scottish engineers, inventors and scientists of the past to deliver his St Andrew’s day message. It is the 100,000 could-be engineers, would-be scientists and might-be inventors of tomorrow who need his full attention today. It is time that he made this personal, realised the urgency, and demanded that his Government respond. We must not lose another generation. I move, That the Parliament believes that over 100,000 young people unemployed in the country is a crisis for Scotland’s future and that an unemployment rate for 18 to 24-year-olds of 21.5%, higher in Scotland than the UK rate of 20.2%, threatens a lost generation in Scotland; therefore calls on the Scottish Government to produce an emergency response to the youth jobs crisis to include appointing a dedicated minister for youth jobs to get young people into jobs as recommended by The Smith Group, to immediately bring forward a procurement bill including provisions to create employment and training for young people, to expand the Community Jobs Fund into the private sector to take on the long-term young unemployed and to put in place a capital investment plan that supports employment and results in major projects proceeding without further delays; further believes that the Scottish Government should not proceed with cuts in college funding of 20%, which will only make tackling youth unemployment harder, and calls on all political parties in Scotland to make tackling youth unemployment a national priority using the significant powers that the Parliament has to secure a better future for Scotland and its young people.

The First Minister has raised some interesting points about the numbers and statistics. However, he is now six minutes into his 10-minute speech and he is still trying to justify and dismantle the figures and what has been done. Was my point not that the time for that has passed and that it is now time to hear what new action can be taken?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I fear that the cabinet secretary is revealing how little he understands the complexity of the choices that young people face. For example, as those of us who have worked with young people know well, what happens at a time like this is that young people’s aspirations are suppressed. That is why some young people, for whom the right choice would be to go to university, take other options, which of course knocks someone out at the bottom. That is the point that Labour members tried to make. It is a perfectly fair and valid point and it was meant to be a positive contribution. The cabinet secretary should try to understand it.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00317)

This does not apply to the First Minister or to me, but I hope that some of his colleagues, some of mine and others will realise that it is December and will find time today to shave off their Movember moustaches. They are to be congratulated on their fundraising, but enough is enough. I reiterate Scottish Labour’s support for public sector workers and for the 300,000 Scots who took a stand yesterday. I know that the First Minister opposed their action, but he tries to claim that he does not support the pension changes either. Can he explain why his Scottish Public Pensions Agency made pension proposals that were even more punitive than the Tories’ proposals?

We opposed the UK pension changes and we still do. The question is: if the SNP opposes them, why is it simply implementing them as asked by the UK Government? I am not sure how the First Minister knows what made the strikers angry yesterday, as he was not anywhere near any of them, except when he crossed their picket line. I will tell him what made them angry. What made the nurses, teachers and council workers angry was being asked to give more when they are already in the middle of a pay cut, because of the pay freeze that there has been for the past two years. That anger was exacerbated by their having heard George Osborne telling them on Tuesday that their pay will be cut again next year and the year after. But hang on—public sector pay is mostly devolved. Can the First Minister confirm that he plans to pass on George Osborne’s 1 per cent pay cap?

That response contained a lot of ways to avoid saying yes—the First Minister is going to pass on the 1 per cent pay cap. Two days ago, I heard John Swinney on the radio doing everything to avoid saying a simple yes. However, that is the answer. The Tories cut public sector pay and the SNP implements the cut; the Tories cut pensions and the SNP implements the cut; the Tories cut public sector jobs and the SNP implements the cut, only deeper and faster; and the Tories cut capital expenditure and, yes, the SNP implements that cut as well, only again deeper and faster. What, then, is the difference between the Tories and the SNP?

We know that the First Minister would like more financial powers. For example, he would like powers over corporation tax—and why? Because he wants to cut taxes for banks and big business even further than the Tories want to cut them. I hear the meandering bluster, but I see the cuts to pensions, jobs and pay. Is it not true that we know a man’s heart by his actions? On pensions, public sector jobs and pay cuts, 300,000 Scots took a stand yesterday—and, yes, we took a stand with them. When will Alex Salmond stand up for what he says and stop just doing Tory bidding every time?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00293)

At a time like this, we should all be focused on jobs and the economy but, week by week, more and more questions are raised about Scotland’s future—about European Union membership, the euro, defence policy, defence contracts, NATO membership, International Monetary Fund membership, renewables investment, pensions and benefits. The First Minister has no credible answers and the uncertainty is corrosive. Why can he not steady the ship by deciding on a date for his referendum?

That excuse does not really wash any more, does it? The timeline is something that he blurted out off the top of his head when he was in a corner in a television debate in Perth—I was there. It is not in his manifesto, no matter how many times craven back benchers try to pretend that it was. Everyone knows the real reason why he will not name the date: opinion polls such as this week’s, which showed that 72 per cent of Scots do not support separation. Is that not why he cannot decide on a date?

The reason why Alex Salmond talks about normal countries, devo max, indy light and fiscal autonomy is that he is scared to talk about separation, which is what he supports. Listen—if we cannot have a date because he cannot decide on a date, surely we can agree on the rules. I assume that the First Minister wants an honest and fair referendum, so any right-thinking person would think that the Electoral Commission should oversee it. It regulates elections to the Scottish Parliament and it scrutinises elections and referenda all over the world. Sir David Steel thinks that we should use it—[Interruption.]

George Reid thinks that we should use it, and he is a lifelong nationalist. Why is the First Minister so scared of having the Electoral Commission scrutinise his referendum?

I really think—[Interruption.]

I really think that David Steel and George Reid know a little bit about accountability to the Scottish Parliament—they were both Presiding Officers of it. I say as gently as possible to the First Minister that, before I finish my job, perhaps I will get him to listen to the question. I asked him what the date will be. If it will be in 2014, 2015 or 2016, that is fine—just tell us what it is. The longer this goes on, the more it looks as if Alex Salmond is trying to rig the referendum to get the result that he wants. A couple of weeks ago, the First Minister said that he would bring Scotland’s claim of right to the Parliament to reaffirm it. It says that the people have the right to decide “the form of Government best suited to their needs”. I tell him that Labour will have no trouble with that—we have already signed the claim of right. He is the one who could not put his name to it. Why? Because he has always put party before principle. Is that not why he cannot name a date in the first half, second half or any half of the parliamentary session?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00270)

Presiding Officer, 215,000 Scots are unemployed and 100,000 young people are without work. How many Scots have to find themselves on the dole before the First Minister admits that his plan MacB is not working?

Is that really the limit of the Scottish National Party’s ambition? Is that what they call success, to be not quite as terrible as the Tories? Even given that very low bar, youth unemployment in Scotland is higher than in the UK as a whole. George Osborne is cutting too fast and too deep, but is it not the truth that Alex Salmond is cutting capital budgets and public sector jobs even faster and even deeper than the Tories?

If any of the 215,000 unemployed people are listening, that will not sound like a plan MacB to them. It will sound like nothing but a lot of MacMince, which is what they have come to expect from their First Minister. Between last year and this, George Osborne cut capital budgets by 11 per cent; Alex Salmond cut them by 21 per cent. George Osborne got rid of 3.8 per cent of public sector jobs; Alex Salmond got rid of 4.1 per cent. George Osborne cut colleges by 3 or 4 per cent, but Alex Salmond cut ours by 10 per cent. If Alex Salmond cannot give those 100,000 young people a job, he can at least give them the truth. Will he admit that he is cutting faster and deeper than the Tories and that that is why unemployment is rising in Scotland?

I see that the First Minister has won a couple of awards in the past week. It would be churlish of me not to congratulate him, but with unemployment in Scotland standing at 215,000 and at 100,000 for young people, if there was a complacent politician of the year award, he would run away with it. The First Minister likes to talk about a mythical independence generation. This generation is on its own, okay—100,000 of them. He will give them a wristband that says, “It’s starting”, but he will not give them a start, a job, an opportunity or a future. I see that Alex Salmond would like to be called Prime Minister in a separate Scotland. Does not that tell us everything that we need to know about his Government’s priorities? When will he stop thinking about his next job and give our young people a first job so that they can make a start in life?

Let the First Minister not dare call it talking Scotland down when I speak up for 100,000 unemployed young Scots. Somebody must speak for them, because neither he nor his supine back benches are doing so. Let us look at his ministers’ record. Over the past two years, the number of people unemployed is worse; the unemployment rate is worse; the employment rate is worse; and the economic activity rate is worse. That is their record. Not only should ministers be ashamed of it, but the First Minister should tell us now what he is going to do about it.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00255)

This week, the latest report by European experts Arabella Thorp and Gavin Thompson makes clear the cost to taxpayers of the requirement for a separate Scotland to join the euro. Our contribution to the bail-out fund would currently be around £8 billion. Is that a bill that the First Minister is happy to see Scotland pay?

I have read the report. The First Minister needs to understand that he is not the only politician who can read. However, I wonder how much he has read, because he simply asserts that we would not have to join the euro. Let us see how the evidence is stacking up. Those who disagree with him include Thorp and Thompson; Professor Jo Murkens of the London School of Economics and Political Science; Professor Robert Hazell of University College London; the First Minister’s own economic adviser, Professor Hughes-Hallett; the European Commission’s President Barroso, who says that there will be no more euro opt-outs; and the Maastricht treaty—I wonder whether the First Minister has ever read that. On the First Minister’s side, who do we have? The ever-trustworthy First Minister’s spokesperson, who was this week reduced to misquoting the late Robin Cook. If the First Minister has crystal-clear legal advice on the question, will he publish it?

I read Mackenzie-Stuart and Gallagher this morning. The point is that they do not precisely address the question that I am putting to the First Minister. They both say, one on the evidence of the other, that Scotland would continue to be a member of European Union. What does the First Minister say to all the experts who accept that point but say that, as a member of the European Union, Scotland would have to join the euro? It might be that the interpretation is that the rest of the UK would be in the same position. Members: Oh!

I love it when they think they have discovered something. What would Scotland’s position be? All those experts say that we would have to be in the euro and that it would cost £8 billion. As for the legal advice, everyone knows that if Alex Salmond had legal advice that agreed with him on the point, he would have found a way to get it out. Fiona Hyslop says that letting Scotland know whether his policy will cost Scotland £8 billion would be contrary to the public interest. I do not think so. Does not she really mean that it would be contrary to the SNP’s interests, so they are going to keep it secret?

In the face of expert opinion that says that an independent Scotland would have to be in the euro, the First Minister continues to assert on no evidence that that is not the case.

Where is my evidence? I read out a list of expert evidence and opinion when I asked the question. That is where my evidence is. The First Minister has a mandate to ask Scots whether they want separation, but he has no mandate to mislead them. He must give us all the facts before we decide. The experts say that a separate Scotland would have to join the euro and that it would cost at least £8 billion. On such an important question, does Alex Salmond really think that he can just stick his fingers in his ears and his head in the sand?

1. To ask the Deputy First Minister what engagements she has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00236)

Those were welcome words. I look forward, with many others, to celebrating Campbell’s life at Falkirk football stadium tomorrow. This week, analysts from Citigroup told global clients not to invest in Scotland because of the Government’s separatist agenda. Is it not now clear that the uncertainty created by a separation referendum will damage this country’s economy?

I looked very closely at the news about the potential of Aberdeen. I believe that Aberdeen has that potential, but the report says that it will be realised only if we have a transparent and stable fiscal regime—the very thing that Citigroup says that the Scottish Government is jeopardising. If the Deputy First Minister will not listen to investors on energy, what about the engineers? In 25 minutes, the Institution of Mechanical Engineers will brief its “Scottish Energy 2020” report in this very building. It will say that the Scottish National Party’s 100 per cent renewables plan “cannot be justified from an engineering perspective”, that “there are currently no credible strategies from a technical point of view, published by Government”, and that “without ... far reaching changes in Government policy, the target will not be met.” I think that Scottish engineers are the best in the world. Does the Deputy First Minister think that she knows better than they do?

I saw Roy MacGregor’s letter in The Press and Journal. I hope that Roy saw it before it got there. That is a welcome investment by a Scottish company. However, the Deputy First Minister is still answering question 1. Question 2 was about what Scottish engineers are saying about the SNP’s energy policy. They are saying that “energy policy has to be based on an understanding of energy supply technologies, not political expediency.” They are trying to be polite, but they are talking about Alex Salmond. Will the Deputy First Minister listen, or will she send poor old Kevin Pringle off to forge a new engineering report in the professors’ names?

There are none so deaf as those who will not hear. [Interruption.]

The report says that there is no credible plan, there is no credible pipeline and there is no route map to achieving the SNP’s renewable energy targets. The SNP says that renewables is its key policy for Scotland’s future, but it has not got a clue about it. Investors say that the referendum makes the policy unsupportable and that separation makes it unaffordable, but the people who actually build the technology say that it is technically undeliverable. Last week, the First Minister had to apologise for misleading Parliament, but is he misleading Scotland on energy every day of every week?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00203)

Talking of signing up, I have here a picture of the First Minister signing up to an election pledge for the National Union of Students Scotland to protect college places. Will he keep that promise?

I welcome the First Minister’s promise to stick to the pledge, although he will forgive me if I am a little sceptical. Is it the same kind of promise as the promise that he would keep to his manifesto pledges to reduce class sizes to 18 and to maintain teacher numbers? Those were other education pledges to which he signed up. Yesterday, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning told the Education and Culture Committee that “something has to give”. I have a letter from the principal of Angus College that states that Alex Salmond has cut the principal’s teaching budget by 40 per cent and that 2,000 places will be cut. That is in one college. Will the First Minister be honest and agree that college places are going to be cut?

Frankly, those who run Angus College will feel that the First Minister is living in a parallel universe. The letter that I referred to outlines cuts of 40 per cent and says that 2,000 student opportunities will go. Yesterday, the education secretary said that the figures were hypothetical, but there are real cuts in college places already. I spent Saturday at the hardest hit rally in Edinburgh. Disabled people fear for the future, and their figures show that almost 1,000 college places for disabled learners have already gone, which is getting on for half of such places across Scotland. Do those Scots have no place in Alex Salmond’s brave new world? Why is he not protecting their college places and their future?

That promise was from the Labour manifesto not the Scottish National Party manifesto. I welcome it, but the Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability tells him that opportunities are being removed right now for Scots who have learning disabilities. Are they not included in the promise? Alex Salmond spent last weekend rallying his faithful troops in Inverness and rewarding them with wrist bands—[Interruption.] I knew it; they are like sheep. I knew that some of them would hold them up. Perhaps the First Minister missed the news that applications for our universities have plummeted and that our education system consistently fails our poorest children and young people who have disabilities. He must know that one in four of our young men cannot find work. He has let youth unemployment double in this country. When is he going to stop banging on about a mythical independence generation and start doing something for Scotland’s lost generation?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I appreciate the opportunity to raise the point of order. We are 25 minutes away from the end of the item of business and we are rapidly running out of time for the First Minister to come to the chamber to provide clarity about a matter that has been raised in several points of order this afternoon. At First Minister’s question time, the First Minister misled the Parliament when he referred to comments by Professor Qvortrup in the media about the Scottish National Party’s proposals for a two-question referendum. To mislead the chamber is, in itself, a fundamental breach of the code of practice; that it should be on such an important constitutional issue is of the utmost significance. It is bad enough that the First Minister should deliberately choose to mislead the chamber on his Government’s behalf, but that he should give a misleading representation of the views of an academic who has no recourse to answer that in the chamber is surely an abuse of the trust that the public place in us as parliamentarians. The First Minister must explain why his official spokesman tried to nobble—that is the only suitable word—Professor Qvortrup this morning after the professor’s comments appeared in the media and why the First Minister deliberately misrepresented the professor’s views in the chamber. It is evident that either the First Minister knowingly misled Parliament or that his official spokesperson knowingly misled him. Whichever explanation is true, one of those people must face the consequences and the Parliament must hear an explanation from the First Minister for his conduct earlier today. I therefore ask the Presiding Officer to reconsider the issue and to provide additional time this afternoon for the First Minister to clarify the position.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00183)

Indeed, we should be proud of the performance of our universities, but I want to ask the First Minister about something of which I know that he and this country are not proud. When the First Minister said that he would legislate against sectarianism, we supported that intention. In June, when he extended the timetable for his bill so that it could be improved, I welcomed that decision. On that basis, we supported his bill at stage 1 but, in all sincerity, I ask him now: in the intervening three months, what has changed in the proposed legislation to make it work?

It is absolutely true that to act against sectarianism is the right thing to do, but the question is whether the bill is the right legislation. The extra time for scrutiny that the First Minister rightly provided has not convinced the bill’s critics. Yesterday, we saw the views of Bishop Tartaglia; today, we see the concerns of Nil by Mouth. The First Minister cannot accuse them of not taking sectarianism seriously, but they are unable to support the proposed legislation. Does the First Minister not think that we are obliged to listen to them?

This is the second week in a row that the First Minister has cast aspersions on people who have commented on his political initiatives. He should be ashamed of himself. Since June what we have seen is existing law being used successfully to fine and jail those who peddle bigotry on the internet and in sectarian songs. We have seen the arrest of a number of Hibernian supporters in a case that has still to come to trial. However, we have seen no clarity on how the proposed new law will actually work, what the definitions of crime are and how it will be enforceable. The fact is that the minister, Roseanna Cunningham, returned to committee and again failed to answer those concerns. Of course we need and want fresh initiatives—legislation, even—on sectarianism. We argued for that for four years while the First Minister did not wish to act. However, does he not realise that passing bad law that does not work could do more harm than good?

I understand that it is not easy to “face down sectarianism”, which the First Minister said last week we must do. However, he will not do that by facing down the critics of his specific legislation; he will do it by doing the work to build consensus and agreement. When the First Minister has the support of the country, he will deserve the support of the whole Parliament and he will have the support of this party. I have made it clear that my party accepts the need to legislate on sectarianism. That does not mean that any legislation has to be supported. Legislation must garner the support of the country, and this legislation has not done that so far. Does the First Minister not recognise that, as it stands, the legislation cannot be supported?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00164)

How disappointingly mundane. On Tuesday, the First Minister told a conference that he was leading the greatest step forward for civilisation since the hunter-gatherers put down roots 10,000 years ago. I thought that, this afternoon, he might at least be ushering in an epoch of world peace or perhaps personally parting the North Sea for the interconnector to Norway. Perhaps he could just try to keep his promise to protect the national health service budget in real terms. Why is he cutting Scotland’s NHS budget by £300 million?

See what the First Minister did there? I asked him a question about NHS budgets and he gave me an answer about Labour’s manifesto, the Welsh Labour Party and NHS board budgets. That was not the promise that he made. He promised that a Scottish National Party Government would protect the health budget, but it has not done that. Since the First Minister was re-elected in May, we have had fewer doctors, midwives and nurses. He has got rid of 1,700 nurses since 2009. Does he still have the brass neck to say that he is protecting our NHS?

Table 1.06 in a financial scrutiny unit document on the draft budget shows that the change over four years in the total health spend is -£319 million. That is a cut. If the First Minister cared to examine nurse and midwife numbers, he would find that there are fewer nurses and midwives in our NHS now than there were in 2007 when he became First Minister. However, members do not have to take my word for it; let us ask the people who really know. The Royal College of Nursing states: “Our nursing workforce is at breaking point”. General practitioners tell us that “panic measures” to compensate for SNP cuts will compromise the NHS. Who should we trust on the NHS: the First Minister, who made the choices in his budget, or the doctors, nurses and patients, who have no choice except to live with the consequences? Who is telling the truth: Alex Salmond or the doctors and nurses?

No matter where the First Minister goes in his budget, it unravels. Last week, he promised that the Government would invest in capital infrastructure. Then the Centre for Public Policy for Regions examined the figures and we discovered that the Government is cutting capital investment even faster than George Osborne and the Tories are. The First Minister promised to protect businesses, but then we discovered that he is taking an extra £850 million off them. Last Thursday, he promised to protect universities, but on Friday he gave the University of Abertay Dundee five weeks to merge into the University of Dundee. To paraphrase Al Gore, is not the truth just an inconvenience for the First Minister?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00146)

One hundred modern apprenticeships are always welcome but, as we saw last week, 72,000 young Scots are unemployed. Such levels were last experienced under the Tory Government in 1992, so why on earth did the First Minister cut further education funding in his budget yesterday?

The fact is that Scotland’s colleges deliver many modern apprenticeships. The First Minister cut further education funding last year and has cut it again—by 20 per cent in real terms over the piece. I spoke to Scotland’s Colleges today. Colleges do not believe that they can sustain their contribution to apprenticeships with the scale of cuts. A thousand jobs have gone from our colleges and it is clear that student places are next. Last week, Mike Russell told us that he would shut colleges. Let us have the truth about the Scottish National Party’s education cuts: how many colleges will it get rid of—10, 20 or 30?

Yes—indeed. I agree absolutely with the SNP’s George Kerevan, who said that that initiative was “a policy straight out of Labour’s election manifesto, but welcome for all that.” The trouble is that those who have to deliver the training places do not believe that they will be able to do it when they face a 20 per cent cut. Back in the 1990s, when we had similar levels of youth unemployment, even the Tories created new colleges and universities to expand opportunity, but the Government is going to close them down. It is not just colleges, because the First Minister is going to get rid of universities, too. Everyone knows that Mike Russell has a hit list. So let us have the truth: which universities has the First Minister decided to close?

The fact is that the First Minister is not going to close Anton Muscatelli’s university or Tim O’Shea’s university; he is going to close the University of Abertay Dundee, which has 500 staff and 5,000 students and is the best university in the country in environmental science and computer gaming. It is top of Mike Russell’s hit list. Will the First Minister tell us now—yes or no—is he going to close Abertay?

Perhaps the member will acknowledge another example in my constituency, where an application for an incinerator handling 300,000 tonnes a year—well over twice what is required locally—was rejected by the local authority but then approved by Scottish ministers. Perhaps he can ask the minister to explain to my constituents how that is not consenting to large-scale incineration.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00130)

This afternoon, we will debate the First Minister’s plans for corporation tax. I have often criticised the First Minister for failing to build a consensus but, this week, he has managed to unite the Scottish Trades Union Congress and the Confederation of British Industry in rejecting his plans for a regressive corporation tax competition within the United Kingdom. Will he listen to the STUC and the CBI and drop his plan?

I guess the First Minister listens only to those who tell him what he wants to hear. Last week, he was clear that one person he listens to—he called him a voice of economic sanity—is Nouriel Roubini, the economist. The very next day, Professor Roubini was railing against economic nationalism, warning against a race to the bottom on tax and imploring us to leave behind “the nationalist demons of our past”. Surely the First Minister will take the advice of a Roubini and slay his own nationalist demons.

Of course, my predecessor, Wendy Alexander, would happily make the point that she does not believe in a corporation tax race to the bottom at all. The point that she made was that, if one part of the UK were given such a scheme—and it would be a mistake to do so—others should have it as well. Professor Roubini was very clear that the way forward was fiscal integration, not economic nationalism. Yes, he was writing in the context of Europe. Maybe that is why the First Minister thinks that Professor Roubini’s views do not matter this week. It might be that the First Minister does not care about Europe any more. Last week, the Minister for Culture and External Affairs said that we might not be in the European Union at all if we were independent. What about the First Minister? Does he still believe in independence in Europe, since his minister apparently does not?

The house journal of this chamber is the Official Report, in which Mr Salmond’s minister said that perhaps an independent Scotland did not need to be part of Europe. I did not believe that that could be the Scottish Government’s position, so we asked the Government for all the work that it has undertaken on the case for independence. I have it here. On business investment there are three pages; on joining the euro, two pages; and on share of the national debt, two and a bit pages. Frankly, kids in modern studies write longer essays—and this is the case that the First Minister is making for Scotland’s future. Is it not the truth about the case for independence that when one scratches the surface, there is nothing there?

Yesterday, many of our trade unions signalled their intent to ballot for industrial action against the current Tory Government’s assault on the livelihoods and pay of the working people of this country. Today’s newspaper headlines talk about industrial unrest and anarchy, and the editorials talk of destruction and chaos. We are told that any such action, in any circumstances, is always negative, but the men and women of the UCS know that that is untrue. They remember the events of 40 years ago with positive pride in their hearts and as a defining moment in their memories. It was a moment when they stood together for their dignity and for their families. Thousands of men and women over many years since have raised their families with dignity because of their actions. Our unions are how we fight for dignity. They are how we stand together and how we tell the man or woman next to us that their life matters to us as much as our own. Yes—trade unions defend the right to strike, but they also fight for the right to work. That we are joined here today by so many UCS workers, so many of the men and women who came after them in the yards and so many who were not yet born in 1971 tells us something profound. I say to them that the work-in is not a moment of your past—it is how you have lived your lives. You have given this country a story that tells us something about who we were and what we can all be today. Your victory in the past sustains our struggles today, and for that we thank you.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00102)

I would certainly welcome debate on the future of Scotland. In 2009, the First Minister said that the people of Scotland were ready to have their say on separation. Now he is scared to let them have that say because he is scared of the answer. Is that not the simple truth?

What I do not understand is why the First Minister goes back on a clear commitment that he made in 2009. Oh, actually, I do. The answer lies in the opinion poll that showed that 60 per cent of Scots reject his vision of the future of Scotland. The delay would not matter if the First Minister’s ducking and diving was not damaging Scotland. Last week, the Confederation of British Industry said that it is damaging business confidence. These are the people who create wealth and jobs, and the First Minister told them that they should not blunder into politics. Is this Alex Salmond’s Scotland? Is this his independence debate: “agree with me or shut up”?

Let us look at recent history. In 2007, when my predecessor, Wendy Alexander, said that she would not block a referendum, the First Minister would not have one. In 2009, when he knew that he could not have one, he wanted one. In 2011, when he can have one, he is not going to have one. That is the recent history on the question. It is not just the CBI. Even the First Minister’s personal public relations outlet, the Scottish Sun, said this morning that the First Minister should get on with it.

The Sun agrees with the CBI. Is the First Minister going to give it the same answer? Is he going to drop a note to his penpal Rupert Murdoch, telling him that he should not blunder into politics?

I am always interested to find out where the First Minister takes lessons in political strategy—sometimes he does so in surprising places. A friend went to a fortune-teller in Dundee last week, and there, displayed on Gypsy Amalia’s caravan, was a photo of the palmist’s celebrity client, Alex Salmond. Maybe we should ask Gypsy Amalia when the referendum will be, because the First Minister does not seem to know. By the way, if anyone wants their fortune told, if they ask Amalia how much it is for a reading with her, the answer that they get is, “You can never tell, dear. It might be a fiver, it might be 30 quid.” Is that not exactly the First Minister’s plan for separatism: “Say yes first, and then I’ll tell you how much it costs”—the strategy of the snake-oil salesman down the ages?

The last speech that I made was a father-of-the-bride speech at my daughter’s wedding. They laughed, I cried. I hope that the result today is slightly different. Today is an important day in the life of the Parliament. This is the last of the fixed points of a new parliamentary session. We had the election of the First Minister, then we had the official opening. Today, we have the first legislative programme for government of the new Administration. It is, then, the last time that I feel the obligation to begin by making clear yet again that we, on the Labour benches, understand not only that the First Minister won but that he won a majority of seats in the Parliament and that, under our electoral system, that is a remarkable achievement. I have tried to make it clear—how can I put it?—that we get it. I believe that my colleagues have conducted themselves with dignity and even as much magnanimity as they can muster. However, I hope that the chamber will forgive me if I make this point today with a little envy in my heart—not envy of position, patronage, pay check or even power itself but, I confess, envy of the opportunity that power affords. I believe that all of us are here because we want to change our country for the better. I profoundly disagree with the First Minister and with other members in the chamber on how we should do that, but I do not question their intent or the First Minister’s. What an opportunity he has! With an absolute majority, he has the chance to achieve so much—the chance to put into practice the policies that he preaches and the power to shape Scotland for the better. He has power over the national health service, local government, our education system, our colleges, our universities and our legal system—all of those and much more besides. He can define how those institutions are and how they work. He can bend them to his will and make them deliver the things that he wants. There is no place now for excuses or for blaming others. The Government has the power to make Scotland and its institutions work as it would wish. When fears have been expressed in the chamber about the danger of hubris from a Government with a majority, the First Minister has been quick to point out that we have had Governments with a majority before, through coalitions. We have. In those Governments, we took the opportunity of that power to reshape this country. We introduced land reform and ended a thousand years of feudalism. We passed the best incapacity legislation in Europe and the best homelessness legislation in the world. We introduced free personal care. We abolished tuition fees in Scottish universities for Scottish students. We introduced the smoking ban. We even set party advantage aside and modernised the way in which we elect our local councillors. I still have the scars from that and I was not even here to vote for it. As I look around, I wonder how many new members on the Scottish National Party benches owe their start on a political career to proportional representation—more than a few, I think. That measure was introduced by a majority Government setting party advantage aside and pursuing measures every one of which changed Scotland for the better. Every one of them was unique to Scotland—in the case of the smoking ban, at the time at least. Every one of those things made Scotland better and different. That is what a party can do with a majority, even if it is through a coalition. What can a single party with a majority do? It can do more than a national library bill. For four years of an SNP minority Administration, the First Minister dutifully introduced his centrepiece measures and legislation, then dutifully withdrew, cancelled or smothered them, and it was always someone else’s fault. Members: Yours!

Thank you, Presiding Officer. In year 1, we had the class-sizes-of-18 promise, but the big, bad councils would not let the Government do that. Forget the fact that the Government sets its budgets and that it has the power to ensure, if it wants to, that class sizes are cut. It ended up being the broken-class-sizes-promise bill, capping classes not at 18 but at 25. In year 2, we were promised a bill to abolish the council tax. Where did that end up? It ended up with the Government running to the courts to hide the documents that showed just how badly that bill would have punished ordinary Scots—taxpayers’ money being spent on legal bills to stop taxpayers finding out how much tax they were going to have to pay. It ended up with the Government going to the Court of Session to take on the Scottish Information Commissioner. That does not augur well for the amendments that the Government promised to the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 this year. Finally, the Government sneaked out the evidence that it had known all along that we were telling the truth about how much the local income tax would cost Scots on the day on which all eyes were on the First Minister’s erstwhile golf and theatre partner, Mr Murdoch, being humbled by a select committee in Westminster. In year 4 of the previous session, we were promised a water bill, which was going to make Scotland the first hydro economy on the planet. We suspected that, like other promises, it was a flagship that would sink. It did, resurfacing now, a year late, watered down and stripped of the hyperbole. Unfettered by minority, there is nothing now to stop the First Minister. He can legislate for class sizes of 18 if he still thinks that that is the right thing to do. He can introduce his local income tax now if he still thinks that it is a good idea. He can make us into a hydro economy—God knows, the raw material for it has been falling from the sky day after day. If he does not, it is hard to avoid the conclusion that he never had any intention of reducing class sizes to 18 and that he always knew that his local income tax was unfair, unworkable and a massive tax hike for most families. What of the year of the great referendum bill? It was coming on Burns night and we would be voting on St Andrew’s day. It was to be the centrepiece not just of that year but of the very century in which we live. I know how important that issue is to the First Minister. I read it in the paper: “Salmond puts independence at top of the agenda”. That is the headline of a report, dated 15 August 2007, on the launch of the independence white paper. The white paper came out in 2007 and 2009 was to be the year of the referendum. No wonder—[[Interruption.] I did not actually keep the paper as a souvenir; I found it at the weekend. [Interruption.] I tell members what, I reckon that they could go to just about any newspaper from any week in the past four years and find the First Minister launching an independence white paper. No wonder we never got round to the rest of the agenda; we were always stuck on item 1. We had white paper after white paper, we had a national conversation and we had a launch, a consultation, a relaunch and a consultation about a proposal for a white paper about a bill, but we never had the bill itself. The First Minister said that the reason for that was that he did not have a majority for his referendum. He does now, but guess what? We are still stuck on item 1. In 2007, the First Minister asked every Scot to pause and reflect on the matter. He has been pausing and reflecting—noisily and expensively—on exactly that for four years, but he still does not know what his question will be, how many questions he will have or what propositions the questions will be about. He still cannot tell us about the Scotland that he wants to see. He cannot tell us what currency it would have, how it would defend itself, which institutions it would share with neighbours, whether it would be a member of NATO, or how or whether it could enter the European Union. He cannot tell us how our benefits and pensions would be secured. The one thing that the First Minister has told us for sure about the Scotland that he wants is that the Queen would remain our head of state. He told her that right here, only a few weeks ago. Unfortunately, of course, it turned out that he could not be sure of that, because his party’s policy is to have a referendum on that matter, as well. There is nothing that he can tell us about the proposition, after all this time. The First Minister has a mandate now. He has a majority in the Parliament. He has a draft bill—or so he said. He has no credible excuse for not bringing the bill forward, except that he does not think that the people of Scotland are ready to have their say, because they might not give him the answer that he wants. I know that the First Minister knows his Montrose. Why would he not? Any poem that has the line “Like Alexander I will reign, And I will reign alone” is bound to be to his liking. Of course, the poem also says: “He either fears his fate too much, Or his deserts are small, Who dares not put it to the touch, To win or lose it all.” Where is that bill? We will prosecute the case for unity—for all that a strong Scotland in a strengthened United Kingdom can be. We will present the case for a Scotland that is big enough, rich enough, smart enough and talented enough to get the best out of a modern, 21st century United Kingdom. We will present the case for a strong, devolved Parliament in Scotland, as we have done for decades. When the First Minister talks about our history and other parties’ histories, he should remember his own history. The claim of right was a direct result of the Scottish Constitutional Convention, as is the Parliament in which we stand. That was the Scottish Constitutional Convention in which he refused to participate from day one, just as he opposed the work of the Calman Commission on Scottish Devolution and the preparation and early stages of the Scotland Bill until he felt that there was some party expediency to be gained by coming on board. That is the history of his approach to devolution. What do we find in the First Minister’s legislative programme? In the creation of a Scottish police force and fire service, there is a substantial reform, which I have long made clear we will support. However, we have to get it right. We will not get it right if the argument is made solely in terms of saving money. We have the opportunity to strengthen local democratic accountability of our policing at a more local level than is the case now and, at the same time, to streamline policing of organised crime, terror and fraud at the national level. I hope that, from tomorrow onwards, the Government will grasp this opportunity for positive change and not—as I have heard it do in recent days—trot out the tired old argument about Westminster cuts forcing its hand. Establishing a Scottish police force and a Scottish fire service is the right thing to do for reasons of policing and safety. We should do it right and we should do it for those right reasons. I believe that, if we do that, we will win the arguments with those who have not yet been convinced. The Government is entitled to return to minimum unit pricing of alcohol, and we are entitled to continue to ask about its legality and effectiveness. However, I accept that it will happen. I am concerned, though, that the planned bill will be narrowly drawn and will not allow us to look again at other issues, such as restrictions on caffeinated alcohol, or to reconsider alcohol treatment and testing orders, which could have the same impact as drug treatment and testing orders have had over many years. We should be trying to extend further test purchasing and increasing support for children who are exposed to the worst excesses of alcohol-fuelled behaviour. If the bill is drawn too narrowly and we cannot do that, that will be a lost opportunity for Scotland. Speaking of lost opportunities, I must ask why we have not used the measures that we passed in the previous session. A year ago, we passed a ban on alcohol promotions. That has not come into force yet. We also passed the idea of the social responsibility levy, which could be used to push up prices for alcohol and ensure that there is a payback not to the supermarkets but to local government, which could be invested in preventive measures. We agreed that we should implement that proposal. There is no point passing legislation in the Parliament if we simply do not use it. We all agree that the problem is urgent, so why has the Government not urgently used the legislation that we passed? There is a more profound debate that we must begin, and I hope that the politics of this issue will not stop that debate beginning. Last week’s figures showed that, although alcohol consumption in Scotland is falling, it remains 23 per cent higher than it is in England, even though there is no price differential. I do not know why that is, but I am sure that it is something that the action that we take on price—or, indeed on opening hours or the strength of the drinks that are sold—will not completely address. Perhaps it involves issues of inequality or is a symptom of atrophied communities, the stress of modern family life or alienation. I do not know, but I think that it is time that we tried to find out, whatever disagreements we might have about anything else. The delayed bill to tackle sectarianism is another one that we support. We do so, critically, because it involves another area of great difficulty. That has been demonstrated and reinforced by the recent inexplicable judgment in Edinburgh’s Sheriff Court in the case of an assault against a nationally known figure that appeared on live television. The lesson for us is that these offences are on the statute book and the will to deal with them is there, but it is hard to make them work. That is why the First Minister was right to delay the bill and extend the timetable. We must take our time if we are to get it right. On higher education, we agree with the Government on the principle of free education. However, the funding situation is already spiralling out of control. Of course, fees for students from England, Wales and Northern Ireland had to rise and, of course, the fundamental problem is caused by soaring fees in the rest of the United Kingdom—I do not deny that. However, we now have a crazy situation in which the University of Edinburgh is the most expensive university in Britain. That is not what the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning said he wanted or expected. He said that he expected that fees would be set in the range of £1,800 to £9,000. It is, frankly, hard to escape the conclusion that the universities are laughing at him and going their own way. He needs to get a grip, and quickly. Fees for Scottish students are only one element of how we fund our higher education sector, and there are many other questions that we must resolve urgently. I am sure that we will support other bills on the list, such as the national library bill—I apologise to the National Library of Scotland for poking fun at it earlier. We will also support the self-directed support bill, which is late, as it was promised well over a year ago, and support for carers. All that is welcome. This is what I meant about opportunity. A Government with a majority and a five-year term ahead of it could legislate today to create a national care service that would integrate health and social care, stand alongside the national health service and give a guarantee to our older people and those with disabilities that they will be looked after. That would be bold and dramatic, and change Scotland for the future. I go back to my original question: what should one do with a majority like the First Minister’s? In fairness, he got that partly right. He should focus on making a future for young Scots, jobs and the economy, and opportunity. He should start now and aim as high as he can imagine. I welcome the attention in the First Minister’s statement to youth employment and the further measures that are proposed. However, they should be bolder still, and the First Minister should be more prepared in that area to use his majority legislative power if need be. Every public sector procurement of any size should require the creation of apprenticeship opportunities—

Why is there no reform of procurement? The support for small businesses should continue, but it should incentivise job creation. What about the living wage—why not implement that and legislate for it? Why not legislate for no compulsory redundancies instead of just talking about it? Let no one say that those things are too difficult. Majority power bestows the opportunity to do the difficult things because they are right, or else it means nothing. Let us give our young people not just a guarantee of a future but a right. That is what power gives the First Minister the opportunity to do—I wish that I had it, but I will support the Government if it sets out to create that future for our young people.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00086)

We have not set a date for the election of my successor yet, but nonetheless I take those remarks in the spirit in which they were made. In the time in which we have faced each other, the First Minister and I have often talked about the national health service. The First Minister and Nicola Sturgeon have told us that they are protecting the NHS, yet this week we found out that, in the past six months, 1,600 NHS jobs have gone. Of those, 700 are nurses and midwives—the very people on the front line of patient care. The Royal College of Nursing called that “unsustainable”. Why is the First Minister not protecting the NHS as he promised he would?

The First Minister needs to examine the statistics that he has given to make sure of their veracity. The fact is that there are fewer nurses and midwives in the NHS now than there were at the end of 2007-08, which was the period of the last budget of the Labour Administration that was in office up to 2007. It was not just nurses who got big promises that the First Minister would protect them. In March, he announced: “if the people return me as first minister, then I will secure that prize—of no compulsory redundancies”. He said specifically that he was talking about local government, schools, colleges and the health service. Fifty staff at Edinburgh’s Telford College are facing compulsory redundancy. The chances are that some of them voted for Alex Salmond on the basis of that promise. He has his job as First Minister, but they are getting P45s. This Tuesday, Michael Russell told a parliamentary committee, “I have no power to enforce the policy”,—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 28 June 2011; c 26.] so why did Alex Salmond make the promise?

Mike Russell was right and the promise was worthless. As for directly employed employees, what about the 16 Caledonian MacBrayne workers who are redundant today? CalMac is a company that is wholly owned by the Scottish Government. Those workers are employed by a company that is owned by the Scottish Government and they are redundant today. If promises to nurses and college staff were worthless, what about teachers? Paul Bisland is a newly qualified teacher who, no matter how hard he tries, cannot get a job, and 80 per cent of his colleagues are in the same boat. Mr Russell wrote personally to Paul Bisland in January and promised him that “there will be a sufficient number of vacancies for all teachers seeking employment in 2011”, so where are they?

This is the pattern, is it not? The First Minister makes the promise and then blames someone else when he breaks it. When the First Minister made his announcement of no compulsory redundancies in March, he said that he would spend every day trying to deliver the policy. Is the problem not that he has spent every day doing something else? I do not deny that he has been busy, what with non-stop constitutional bickering over his referendum, gratuitously insulting Supreme Court judges and, let us not forget, introducing a bill on sectarianism so badly drafted that his own minister could not explain it. There has been intransigence, intemperance and incompetence, and, all the time, indifference to cuts in the number of nurses, redundancies in colleges and teachers on the scrapheap. All they get are excuses. When is he going to get off his personal agenda and start paying some attention to the promises of jobs and services that he made to the people of Scotland only six weeks ago?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00065)

Two weeks ago, I met the First Minister and told him that we want to support legislation against sectarianism, but I expressed serious concerns about the timetable. He told me that the football clubs were demanding that he legislate before the start of the season. Yesterday, both Rangers and Celtic said that the bill was too rushed. The Law Society, the churches and Christine Grahame, the convener of the Justice Committee, all agreed. The Lord Advocate said that the bill does not necessarily have to be in place before the football season. Does the First Minister now regret not acting for four years and having to squeeze the legislation into two weeks?

I welcome the fact that the First Minister has listened to the concerns about the timetable. It is certainly the intention on this side of the chamber to support the principles of the bill. I made it clear that we want to support the Government in legislating against bigotry in football and, indeed, anywhere else. To achieve consensus, however, we have to try to get the approach right. This week’s examination of the bill has not helped with that. At her appearance at the Justice Committee, the Minister for Community Safety and Legal Affairs struggled to clarify what actions would be caught by the bill. Indeed, the Lord Advocate had to return to the committee yesterday to provide further clarification. In the spirit of achieving consensus, I ask the First Minister to clarify now how actions such as singing the national anthem or blessing oneself could be considered a crime under the bill.

If the First Minister had listened, he would have heard me say that, yes, we can go forward on that basis. However, that does not mean that we can sidestep difficult questions about legislating on such a difficult and sensitive area, or questions about the way in which the legislation, which we want to be put in place, will be implemented. Concerns have been raised this week not only about the timescale, but about resourcing implementation of the legislation. Les Gray of the Scottish Police Federation said that he supports the bill, but it will not work without resources and the financial memorandum is not enough. Given that we all must prove that we are serious about legislating properly and ensuring that legislation works, will the First Minister make any commitment with regard to the additional resources that will be required to implement the legislation and make it work?

One of the statements about the bill that the minister made this week—and which I welcomed—was that this would not be the beginning and end of legislation or other action to address sectarianism and bigotry. As the First Minister well knows, we have for some years now argued that we must at community level, and through educational measures in particular, work to root out this aspect of our society. What other measures does the First Minister envisage will follow consideration of the bill, that will go beyond football into wider society and, indeed, beyond legislation?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00047)

Yesterday, we saw another attack by the First Minister on one of Scotland’s most senior judges. The political editor of The Times commented on Twitter: “Going by Salmond attack on Lord Hope, the First Minister has finally lost the plot.” Well, has he?

That of course was one of the milder comments that followed on from the First Minister’s comments in his Holyrood magazine interview. At the very least, the First Minister is in danger, if not of losing the plot, then of losing any argument that he might have by prosecuting it in that way. This morning, Jim Sillars, the former deputy leader of the Scottish National Party, called the First Minister’s remarks “undignified”, “foolish” and “juvenile”. In the remarks that the First Minister aimed at Lord Hope, he said: “At least I went to the bother of getting elected.” That is true, but those crass personal attacks demean the office to which he was elected. Will he retract them?

My view that the remarks were inappropriate is not one that I alone hold. We have seen comments that the First Minister’s statements were crude, ignorant and embarrassing. That is not my judgment; it is the judgment of commentators and the legal establishment. It is no answer for the First Minister of Scotland to say, “This is something I said two weeks ago when I was in a bad mood.” The truth is that the issue has spiralled out of control. It started with the usual constitutional grandstanding and led to gratuitous attacks on judges, courts, lawyers and even newspapers that dared to question the First Minister. That has brought us to an extraordinary joint statement from the Faculty of Advocates and the Law Society of Scotland, which described the situation as “a challenge not only to the courts but to the rule of law.” The First Minister is now taking the advice of the editor of The Scotsman to “Calm down, Alex, dear”, but he must also grow up, own up and apologise so that the debate can move on and be conducted in the way that it should have been from the word go. Will he apologise?

The First Minister cites some important principles that underpin our democracy. The problem is that his public statements to the press and otherwise undercut those principles, and that is what his critics are saying to him. Let us examine some of those fundamental principles. The First Minister attacked a lawyer for representing people because they are vile. His justice secretary threatened to cut off funding from a court because he did not like its judgments. I do not like some of its judgments either, but vile people having rights is the price that we pay for us all to have those rights. Vile people being properly defended in court is the price that we pay for our right to be defended too. Yes, we make the laws, but the independence of the judiciary is the price that we pay for the freedom to do that. Does the First Minister agree? Will he retract his statements, which undermine those principles of the Parliament?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00036)

The First Minister is famous for blaming someone else. It used to be us; now it is the Tories. Councils, too, are always good for blaming. After last week’s exchange on care services, it was good to hear the Deputy First Minister and Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy taking personal responsibility for the standard of those services. Can the First Minister tell us what the Government’s plan is for residents of Southern Cross care homes if that company collapses?

I also listened to the Deputy First Minister this morning, and I heard her say that the presumption of any contingency plan would be continuity of care. That is very welcome. I was also reflecting on the First Minister’s criticism last week of the private provision of care. If the Southern Cross care homes face closure, surely the simplest and best plan would be for local authorities to be able to take over their running to ensure continuity of care. The First Minister could give certainty to concerned residents and relatives right now by committing to that and promising councils the resources to do it if they need those resources. Will he do that?

On the contrary, the First Minister must understand that the certainty that those residents and relatives need is that there will be a way—which will be funded—to have continuity of care. One of the responses from a council to the questionnaire that was circulated said that it could not identify alternative providers and it could not take over the running of the care homes in its area without additional funding from the Government. Certainty would come from a commitment to provide that funding. Yesterday, Southern Cross announced cuts of maybe 300 or 400 staff in Scotland. Even if Southern Cross survives, its homes will need careful and constant inspection to ensure that care is not compromised by those staff cuts over the next 18 months. Last week I asked the First Minister to reverse his 25 per cent cut in the inspectorate that is tasked with those inspections and the news of the Southern Cross staff cuts makes that even more important. For the sake of certainty, will the First Minister reinstate the care inspectorate’s budget?

Those figures are from the old inspection regime. The new regulator has a new inspection regime, whereby those care homes that have previously received a good grade will be inspected only every two years. As I explained to the First Minister last week, 50 staff have gone from the regulator in the past year and perhaps as many as 55 more will go in the next year. Some of those staff are the very people who are required to make the inspections. The loss of 400 jobs from the biggest private sector provider of care in Scotland is a change to the situation that the regulator’s staff have to deal with. One way in which we could give certainty would be to reverse those cuts. The health secretary has called the matter a sacred duty and a personal crusade and has accepted that the buck stops with her, but all of us have to put our money where our mouth is. We should underwrite the cost of local authorities stepping in, should Southern Cross fail, and we should reverse the cuts in the inspectorate so that it can ensure that the quality of care is maintained in the light of the Southern Cross cuts. Why will the First Minister not give families that reassurance?

1. In a conversation with me and Miss Goldie last night, the First Minister mentioned rediscovering the joys of watching television after the election. I rather suspect that some of us have more time for that than others. I am just relieved to be back on Thursday daytime television rather than watching it at home. I saw on television this week the “Panorama” documentary that showed the appalling abuse of residents in a private hospital in England. Yesterday, four staff who were involved were arrested. The programme highlighted the failing of the care regulator—the Care Quality Commission. The Scottish equivalent of that commission is, of course, Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland—SCSWIS—which is a newly formed body from the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care and other bodies. What assurances can the First Minister give us about the new regulator’s capacity to ensure standards of care in Scotland?

My apologies for my lack of practice at doing this, Presiding Officer. [Laughter.] We can practically see the Elsie Inglis care home from the Parliament; it is just down the road. Two residents of that home have died in recent weeks and six more have been hospitalised. The conditions are so bad that the rest of the residents have been evacuated. I asked about the capacity of the new care regulator in Scotland. It is a fact that the care regulator has had its budget cut by 25 per cent, 55 staff have gone and another 50 might go in the year ahead. Those are the very staff who are meant to inspect homes such as the Elsie Inglis care home. Should not we consider what happened at Elsie Inglis and cancel that cut?

I did not criticise the response of SCSWIS to the situation at the Elsie Inglis home; my question was about the inspectorate’s continuing capacity to carry out such work. We are moving from a statutory requirement for six-monthly inspections to a risk-assessment model that will mean fewer inspections. Further, the number of staff who carry out those inspections has been cut and will be cut in the two or three years ahead. However, concerns have been expressed not only about the regulator. Audit Scotland has today condemned the community health partnerships, which are supposed to plan and manage social care, and doctors say that those partnerships have “spectacularly failed”. Southern Cross Healthcare, which runs 98 care homes in Scotland, is on the verge of collapse after financial speculation on the beds in which our older people are cared for. So, the inspectorate is being cut, the social care system has been declared not fit for purpose and the biggest provider of residential care in Scotland is on the verge of collapse. This week, the First Minister held an emergency Cabinet summit on the United Kingdom Supreme Court. Does he not think that a summit on the crisis in care is more urgent than that?

A cautionary note to the First Minister: I think that he will find that the Scottish National Party council in Fife is currently transferring its publicly owned care homes to the private sector. We should not try to score points on the issue; we should try to move forward. We have done that before in the Parliament. In the first session of Parliament, when the First Minister and I were both members, we introduced the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, the learning disability strategy and then free personal care, although I think that Mr Salmond was not a member by that time. Only last week, the First Minister said: “This Parliament speaks for the people of Scotland, and the people’s voice should be heard.”—[Official Report, 26 May 2011; c 67.] I agree with him. It is too late for Lynn Beveridge from Elsie Inglis to be heard, but we need to hear the voices of the elderly, the disabled and the vulnerable in the Parliament. They are not talking about the things about which we have heard so much—the constitutional issues, the Supreme Court, corporation tax or the Crown estate—important as those may be. No, those voices are asking what we are going to do to improve and secure the care that they need. Our job is to do that together. What are we going to do to improve the situation?

I thank the First Minister for his statement and for making it available in advance. As I have made clear over the past three weeks, we on this side of the chamber recognise the mandate that the Government has, and we want to identify the common ground on which we can take Scotland forward together. However, we must begin to explore the detail of that common ground—the how and the when. It is time to move from the poetry to the prose. That is especially urgent in the case of action on sectarianism, as the First Minister has said that he wants to see new legislation on the statute book before the summer recess. We want to co-operate. The First Minister knows that we on the Labour benches are proud of Jack McConnell’s initiative in facing up to sectarianism and believe that more could have been done over the past four years. He knows, too, that one of our former Labour colleagues, Trish Godman, was a victim of the incidents that have led him to his current proposals. We take the issue very seriously and believe that it is about more than football, as he acknowledged in his statement. Nevertheless, we have concerns about getting legislation right in a very short time. Legislating for cybercrime is notoriously difficult, although I agree that we should legislate. We want to co-operate but, to do so, we must start talking immediately about the detail of what is proposed and the process, which will have to draw on evidence from outside the Parliament, as all good law making must. We cannot afford to legislate on the issue in haste and repent at leisure or to begin this session with a law that the police, courts and judiciary do not use. I wrote to the First Minister last week, offering to discuss that matter and his plans to reintroduce alcohol minimum pricing proposals. On the latter, a good start would be to implement quickly the laws that we have already passed—months ago—to stop drink promotions. Above all, in that letter, I said that I wanted to work with him on my highest priorities—jobs and getting the economy growing. Last week’s unemployment figures may have been encouraging but there are still more than 200,000 Scots out of work and the number of women claiming jobseekers allowance in Scotland is the highest that it has been since records began. We agree with the Government on a lot, in spite of the exchange that the First Minister and I had at a Federation of Small Businesses hustings. Attacking my plan to create 250,000 jobs, he said that “Government can’t create jobs by diktat.” He is right: we cannot do it by diktat—we need a plan. We need apprenticeships and job placements for the unemployed; we need support for employers in the small business sector to enable them to take on more staff; and we need investment in infrastructure. There is plenty of agreement there, and there is a lot more that we can do. A mortgage deposit scheme would boost construction and give young Scots the chance of getting on to the property ladder. Providing better support for students at college by extending the educational maintenance allowance would improve their opportunities. Extending co-investment funding, which has been so successful, would plug investment gaps in new and growing businesses. We propose a plan for jobs and growth with more than 80 elements. We have a real chance to drive Scotland forward. The coalition Government at Westminster has no plan for growth and no plan for jobs. The regional development agencies have been abolished in England. I agree with the First Minister that Scotland can, right now, construct a comprehensive and coherent plan to get those 200,000 Scots back into the job market and let them take their families, enterprises and Scotland forward. We can add to that the advantage that we have, on which we agree, in terms of green jobs and especially renewables. The Scottish Government’s 100 per cent target for renewable electricity production is ambitious. Now it must deliver it. An increase in marine production from a consented 45GWh to a delivered 2,260GWh and an increase in offshore wind generation from a consented 650GWh to more than 20,000GWh in only nine years are heroic assumptions that are based on some fairly speculative plans. It is right to provide support for the University of Strathclyde’s innovation and technology centre and the offshore infrastructure fund, and we welcome that. However, we need quickly to start thinking about what else needs to be done. The plans need an extra 2,000MW of onshore wind generation delivered by the end of the decade. Should we not revisit the national planning framework to make it clearer where that might be installed? What are the grid implications? How quickly can all of that be consented? Of course, this is not just about energy. Scotland should not just have the wind turbines; we should have the jobs, too. I remember the jobs boom when the North Sea opened up. I was growing up in Inverness at the time, and everyone who was just a little older than me seemed to be heading offshore or to the construction sites at Nigg or Ardersier. Scotland got 70 per cent of the jobs that were created then. Now, however, we get only 10 per cent of the jobs that renewables projects create. We need to do more. I will give one example to illustrate the point. The diving school at Fort William, which was originally set up to train Scots as divers for the North Sea, should be training Scots now to be the divers—potentially thousands of them—that those offshore wind projects will need. However, it is not doing that; it is training divers from across the world—from everywhere except Scotland. We have to change that. We should be finding a way to fund that work, so that those opportunities are available here in Scotland. The First Minister and I signed a pledge that higher education would be free. He has the mandate to deliver that and no excuse not to. However, we have to start answering the questions about how we do that without slashing student places and while keeping our universities world class, because the First Minister promised all that, too. We have to improve support for students and end the situation in which they have access to less resource to live on than their counterparts elsewhere in the United Kingdom. That is urgent because course planning and the student application process mean that we need to begin to answer those questions in weeks rather than months if the future of our higher education sector is to be secure. Another promise that the First Minister made—surely part of any social contract—was to protect the national health service. The First Minister promised to maintain that protection throughout this parliamentary session. That was the right thing to do, and we will hold him to that. However, in the course of the election campaign, I met NHS workers from around the country and across many professions who told me the health service that we cherish is struggling: vacancies remain unfilled; beds are being closed; operations are being cancelled; and building projects are being delayed. Some said that the situation was the worst that they had ever known, which surprised me. I know that the First Minister heard those things too—an NHS worker challenged him in one of our television debates. The truth is that protecting the NHS does not just mean protecting the budget; it means protecting the service. Yes, we should reject the reforms that are—perhaps—happening in England, but we need to face up to reform of the bureaucracy or even the number of boards. Surely that is common ground, just as reform of care services—moving forward on self-directed care as the health secretary promised before the election—is common ground. Another area in which we agree on direction but need detail now is policing. The First Minister has promised to maintain police numbers and we will hold him to that, but we do not know how many police forces the First Minister believes that we should have. I think that one force would maximise what savings there are to be made to protect the front line, provide more effective policing at a strategic level and strengthen the accountability and authority of local policing—if we get it right. However, to do that we need to get governance structures right and build confidence in the reform within the police service itself and in the communities that it serves. We cannot begin to do that until the Government makes up its mind on how many forces are best. I think that one is best; if the Scottish Government decides that three or four are best, that will happen, given the parliamentary arithmetic, but we should move on that—and move quickly. Those are just some of the areas in which we are in agreement with the Government about how to take Scotland forward, and I agree that Scotland’s path should be different from that pursued by the Tory-Lib Dem coalition in Westminster. There is a fairer, better way, and we will hold the First Minister to his promises on the social wage, as he has characterised it: on free personal care, concessionary travel, free prescriptions and free education. We agree with the need for pay restraint, but the First Minister must accept and understand that the public sector pay freeze is, in a time of inflation, a pay cut for many thousands of public sector workers and families throughout the country. He cannot assume that those public sector workers will bear that burden alone to pay for the social wage for five years to come. That would not be fair; what is more, if in Scotland—as he says—the poor are not to pick up the bill for the rich, that pay restraint must be moderated by the full implementation of a living wage to protect those on the lowest incomes so that they are not the ones paying the highest price for something that they did not create. There is common ground—but not, of course, when it comes to the First Minister’s ambition to separate Scotland from the United Kingdom. The First Minister was clear during the election campaign that an election result could not provide a mandate for such a separation, but I am clear that he can claim a mandate to hold a referendum on the issue. I do not think that such a referendum is a good thing for Scotland, because it creates—and is already creating—uncertainty about the country’s future. It could damage investment in our economy, both internal and external, but I assume that it is going to happen because he now has no excuse for it not to. That begs questions that the First Minister is now obliged to stop avoiding. When will it be? What will the question be? How much will it cost? What will the franchise be? How will campaigns be funded? What choice will be offered? He spent four years drafting the bill—was it three white papers that we saw?—but it never appeared because, we were told, there was a majority in this Parliament against it. There is no such excuse now. It is simply not credible for the SNP to say after all this time that it does not know when or what the question will be or how many questions there will be, or, best of all, that it is not sure what it means by independence after all. That is not credible—and it is not convincing. Last October, I said: “I love my country too much to be a nationalist”. Members: Oh! I meant that I do not think that Scotland is too small, too poor or too stupid to stand on its own; I think that it is big enough, rich enough in talent and certainly smart, creative and educated enough to take every opportunity afforded by being part of a bigger social and economic unit. In any case, I know that the sentence enraged those SNP supporters sad enough to comment on my speeches in the middle of the night. It was meant to do so; indeed, it is still working. [Laughter.] However, I hope that some of them were literate enough to know that I did not coin it—it was a quote from Albert Camus, who also said: “You know what charm is: a way of getting the answer yes without having asked any clear question.” If that is the First Minister’s referendum strategy, it is not good enough. The question is too big and too important not to be clear. I know that the election result means that we will have to make our case against separation—and we will do so. The First Minister should be prepared to make his case for it, honestly and openly. He has no excuse not to. I know that the election result also means that we will in any case talk about the Parliament’s powers. I do not mind some of that; we even agree with the First Minister sometimes, including, for example, on the need to get capital borrowing powers more quickly. However, we will not move Scotland forward if the Government turns every challenge to it into a challenge to the constitutional settlement. We will not move Scotland forward at all by talking about the powers that we do not have and failing to use those that we do. In the spirit of last week’s parliamentary multilingualism—for the avoidance of doubt I tell Mr Crawford that this is Spanish, not Portuguese—I say: “no hay camino, se hace camino al andar”. In other words, there is no road; the road is made by walking. Yes, Scotland’s road forward is different—that is devolution—but we make it by walking, not talking. There are many directions that we agree on—on health, education and jobs, for example—and Scotland expects us to take those forward and to do so quickly.

I rise to offer our congratulations to those ministers to be appointed and reappointed today. When I heard on the radio this morning that a major television personality was retiring to look after other interests, my thoughts, of course, turned to Mr Neil. Alas, however, it was only Oprah Winfrey. I congratulate Mr Neil, and all those new SNP back benchers who will be able to launch their late-night TV careers by filling the vacuum that he leaves in the “Newsnight Scotland” studio. Mr Neil’s post, of course, reduces Mr Swinney’s portfolio, which I welcome because, four years ago, we were clear that Mr Swinney’s portfolio was too broad and combined too closely control of the budget and major spending responsibilities. Mr Neil’s appointment goes some way towards addressing that. In any case, I am personally delighted to see Mr Swinney continuing at the highest level of Government. After all, he was once the defeated and devastated ex-leader of his party, but look at him now. There is hope for us all. The First Minister has suggested that these changes will allow Mr Swinney to have an intensified focus on jobs. I welcome that, too, as I welcome today’s Amazon jobs announcement, although it is the case that the key areas of enterprise support, infrastructure and skills are now split across three portfolios. The three cabinet secretaries involved will have to work together very closely if they are to secure the recovery that we all want. Making that happen is perhaps the task of Mr Crawford in his new Government strategy role. I genuinely wish him good luck with that. In offering our congratulations to the new junior ministers and to the law officers, I cannot pass by without specifically welcoming back Stewart Stevenson. Mr Stevenson’s return to the climate change brief was heralded in spectacular fashion by a cataclysmic deterioration in the climate, unleashing gale-force winds and closing down road, rail and air networks in a fashion that I confess that I found almost nostalgic. Further, as if that was not enough, right on cue, the arc of prosperity erupted again, engulfing Scotland in volcanic ash. Apparently, it is not only the First Minister who has been endowed with God-like powers by a majority mandate. Mr Stevenson’s apocalyptic touch seems only to have been intensified by his brief sabbatical from ministerial office. I am happy to welcome him back, although I fear that I might not speak for the commuters of Scotland. All the ministers who have been appointed and reappointed today face significant challenges, and we will challenge them, too. However, in all portfolios there is common ground and we look forward to working with them there. We wish them well.

Presiding Officer, on behalf of the Labour group I offer our congratulations to the First Minister and our best wishes to him and to Moira for the task that lies ahead of them. To win a majority in this Parliament is indeed a remarkable achievement. That majority is another stage in the coming of age of the Parliament, whose first First Minister, Donald Dewar, said: “Scotland’s Parliament is no longer a political pamphlet, a campaign trail or a waving flag. It is here; it is real.”—[Official Report, 13 May 1999; c 18.] Whether in government or opposition, we must now put the campaign trail behind us and face the real challenges ahead. For the First Minister, there is the challenge of delivering all that he promised without the limitations of minority government. For this Parliament, and our democracy, there is the challenge of holding a majority Administration to account. That is why this moment matters so much. It is a reminder that even in these circumstances, our First Minister must still be elected by the Parliament, not appointed. The symbolism is profound and important. The First Minister and his Government are answerable and accountable to the whole Parliament, and thereby the whole people—I know that he understands that. Across the chamber, we have great responsibility, too: the more powerful the Executive, the more important the scrutiny we bring to bear on it in committee or in plenary, and the more diligent we must be in our engagement with the people and institutions of Scotland through the evidence that they give us, the petitions that they submit to us and the consideration that they seek from us. This is the result that the people chose, so it is up to us to make it work for them. For those in the Government party, that will require an independence of thought and action, especially in committee, which might not always be comfortable but is their democratic obligation. For those of us on the Opposition benches, it will require a willingness to accept the mandate that the Government has and to style our opposition and scrutiny accordingly. That will not always be comfortable either, but it is an obligation, too. I thought that I would check Mr Salmond’s own remarks as leader of the Opposition when he congratulated Donald Dewar on the equivalent day in 1999. He said: “although I know and hope that Donald will speak for Scotland, he will certainly eat for Scotland at every opportunity.” Far be it from me to suggest that the current First Minister will live up to that. [Laughter.] Alex Salmond also said of opposition: “There has been some debate about how we can have the new consensus politics and still have vigorous debate. I suggest that we can have both.”—[Official Report, 13 May 1999; c 25.] I agree. Where we agree on what is best for Scotland, Labour will work with the Government, but where we disagree, we will debate vigorously. I think that we agree that we need to get Scotland working. Today’s unemployment figures show a welcome drop in unemployment, yet there are still more than 200,000 Scots unemployed. This week, we saw that three of the four worst unemployment black spots in the United Kingdom are here in Scotland. In the past 10 days, we have heard plenty about the 57 varieties of independence. Yes, we will explore the powers that we might have—that is a consequence of the election result—but the most urgent and pressing matter is how to exercise the powers that we have now to create opportunity for our people now. We will debate what divides us, but let us begin with something that unites us. Scotland needs an action plan for jobs and economic recovery, and we need it quickly. That would be a good start in taking Scotland forward from here together. [Applause.]

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2978)

Today, we meet to squeeze in two bills at the end of the First Minister’s time in government. However, thousands of Scots are still waiting for his bill to abolish their student debt. What happened to that? That was a bigger promise than the one that Nick Clegg made to students in England. It was a £2 billion promise—or, as the First Minister likes to have it, a £2,000 million promise. Did the bill just slip his mind or did he never have any intention of ever bringing it forward?

No, Presiding Officer. Tuition fees were abolished by the Parliament in 2000. I was there, as was the First Minister, as it was just before he ran off to Westminster. I voted for the abolition of tuition fees; he abstained. We are still waiting on the First Minister’s crazy local income tax bill, too. What happened to that? Did he run out of time or did he just realise that the idea is unfair, unworkable and unwanted? Working families would have had a 30 per cent hike in their income tax. Does he still think that that is a good idea?

Labour introduced support for students from low-income families. That is what the First Minister abolished. If he wants to, he can speak to students on the matter; they are outside the Parliament. Let us see him explain to them why he did not abolish their student debt as he promised four years ago. Let us go to the core of Mr Salmond’s beliefs. I always thought that the First Minister was a proud separatist, so why are we still waiting on his referendum bill? We have lost count of how many times it was definitely coming to the Parliament. Now, one of the First Minister’s favourite commentators is writing that the SNP “is no longer a serious party of separation”. Is that true? Is that why the referendum never appeared? Has the Scottish Government had a deathbed conversion to the union?

After 92 times at this, you would think that the First Minister would have realised that I get to choose what the questions are about, but his turn will come soon enough. Is the referendum not the problem of the past four years? For four years, the First Minister was distracted by a referendum that never was, while unemployment in Scotland raced ahead of that in the rest of the country. There was the nonsense of a national conversation, while youth unemployment soared by 350 per cent. While budgets were rising, the number of teachers and nurses was cut. Now, we have had four weeks of frantic announcements that were held back and timed for party advantage. That does not make up for four years of promises broken, schools unbuilt, projects cancelled, criminals released and thousands extra on the dole. Time is up. Has the First Minister not failed on all the issues that matter to the people of Scotland?

I support the motion in the First Minister’s name and pay tribute to colleagues who are leaving Parliament from all parties. However, I wish to give my personal thanks to Rhona Brankin, Marlyn Glen, Wendy Alexander, George Foulkes, Peter Peacock, Cathy Jamieson and Margaret Curran for their service to the Labour group and—which is more important—for their service to those whom they have represented in the chamber. In the case of Trish Godman, I add to that my appreciation of her service as Deputy Presiding Officer throughout the parliamentary session. [Applause.] Mention of service brings me to Jack McConnell, the former First Minister of Scotland, who is also among those who will leave us today. Jack’s legacy will be a lasting one, not least in the continuing work of the Parliament in international solidarity, especially with Malawi. The legacy of the smoking ban, which he led, is a real one that will eventually be measured in saved lives of many of Jack’s fellow Scots. He leaves the Parliament but—as the First Minister said—Jack McConnell has much public service to give and I wish him well in that. [Applause.] It is somehow invidious to pick out other members, but for those of us who grew up in Edinburgh politics, Robin Harper was always a presence and a character. It is one of the Parliament’s strengths that it has given Robin the opportunity to make his unique contribution during the past years. His door was always open to the civic Scotland that we serve. He has served Parliament and his city well. [Applause.] I turn to the motion itself and to our Presiding Officer. Alex Fergusson and I have a little-known bond through the village of Leswalt. He was born and grew up there, my mother-in-law lives there and, as it turns out, the manager of my football team grew up there, too. Leswalt really rules all aspects of my life. Fortunately, all of those figures of authority carry out their duties with grace and success—even Colin Calderwood, these days—and the Presiding Officer does so particularly. The First Minister is right that the Presiding Officer has not lost his political antenna. On at least one occasion in visiting Leswalt, I had been there only five minutes when I received a text from him to let me know that he knew that I was in his constituency. [Laughter.] Alex Fergusson has presided over debates and even First Minister’s question time with a careful mixture of light touch and firmness. I think that the uniqueness of his task as Presiding Officer has been to preside over a Parliament not just of minorities in general, but in which the Administration itself is a minority, too. That has led to high drama once or twice, not least at budget time, and to occasions when the Parliament has chosen a direction in defiance of the Government, as in the Calman process. Throughout that, the Presiding Officer has presided with care and kept the integrity of our Parliament intact, for which he deserves our thanks. Alex Fergusson has also discharged his duties of representing the Parliament at home and abroad with great dignity and gravitas. I do not think that he will mind my saying that he did not seek the office but, rather, had it thrust upon him. He has, nonetheless, served us well and he has done us proud. [Applause.]

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2962)

Yes, that is a great project. It was a great project when the First Minister first announced it in Oslo in August. That is the great thing about Alex Salmond’s renewables announcements—they are endlessly renewable. Yesterday, in response to new unemployment figures, the First Minister boasted that his policies were “paying off handsomely”. Does it not worry him that there are 218,000 Scots out of work, which is 2,000 more than there were one month ago? They were not paid off handsomely; they were just paid off. Youth unemployment has increased for the third month in a row. Does the First Minister really think that that is something to boast about?

There are 218,000 Scots out of work, which is 2,000 more than there were a month ago. Frankly, I think that they expect more than a rousing chorus of “Always Look on the Bright Side of Life” from the First Minister. The First Minister also told us yesterday that the construction sector was booming. When did he last speak to a construction worker? Construction workers do not believe that and we did not believe it, either, so we got the official figures. Alex Salmond inherited £1.3 billion-worth of construction-ready projects from Labour. When he leaves government, he will leave behind projects that are worth £135 million. That is one tenth of the work that we left behind.

That is the Salmond slump: tens of thousands of construction jobs gone, right there. Does the First Minister really think that that is something to boast about?

The trouble is that those on the ground who face the reality of unemployment believe none of that—and with good reason. The First Minister’s promise was to match Labour brick for brick, but the reality is a Futures Trust that has yet to build a single school. [Interruption.]

The First Minister’s promise was to match Labour’s teacher numbers; the reality is that he has cut 3,000. His promise was to protect the national health service from Tory cuts; the reality is a cut of 1,500 nursing jobs. Never mind the statisticians—can the First Minister look teachers, nurses and construction workers in the eye and tell them that everything is “paying off handsomely”?

Here is the figure—[Interruption.] Look—I am happy to talk about U-turns. This is the man—[Interruption.] This is the man who promised Scottish students that he would pay off their student debt and did not do it: a bigger U-turn than Nick Clegg ever carried out. Here is the figure that matters. Alex Salmond inherited a Scotland with lower unemployment than the rest of the country, and he leaves a Scotland with higher unemployment than the rest of the country. Why is that? It is because of four SNP-Tory budgets. That is why the former Tory leader over on the Tory benches once said: “Let us face it: the next best thing to a Tory Government is a Government that does what the Tories tell it to do”.—[Official Report, 4 February 2009; c 14667.] He was speaking about the First Minister, was he not?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2945)

I am happy to associate Labour members with the First Minister’s remarks. We send our condolences to the family of Lance Corporal Tasker. I see that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing will speak to the British Medical Association today to tell them how well she is doing. She might be better speaking to patients, such as the 24,500 patients who had their operations cancelled by the national health service last year. Does the First Minister think that that is good enough?

Twenty-four and a half thousand cancelled operations last year is not the best statistic that the NHS has ever had. Behind every number is a personal story. Yvonne Williams, from Helensburgh, represents one of the 24,500. She was due to have her gall bladder removed at Vale of Leven hospital last year. The hospital cancelled the operation with four hours’ notice, because there were not enough beds. She was given a new date and told to phone the hospital on that day at 5.30 am to ensure that it had enough beds. There are reasons why operations are cancelled. Yvonne’s operation was cancelled because there are not enough acute hospital beds. In opposition, Nicola Sturgeon said that she would increase the number of acute beds in the NHS, but in Government she has cut them. Why has she broken her promise to patients?

The number of long-stay beds indeed fell under our Administration—as we transferred patients to care in the community, where their care properly should be. Nicola Sturgeon promised to increase the number of acute hospital beds. Over the past year alone, NHS Tayside has cut 100 beds; Glasgow has cut 200 beds; Grampian has cut 600. NHS Scotland has lost 1,400 acute beds over the past year and 4,000 acute beds have been cut since Nicola Sturgeon took charge. That is why more operations are being cancelled. Last year, 2,500 staff were also cut from the NHS, with hundreds more job losses planned. Beyond the press releases and the photo opportunities, is it not the truth that the First Minister has failed to protect our NHS in Scotland?

I will take on the First Minister any time when it comes to who will stand up for our NHS. Telling us his spin in a quiet voice does not make it any less spin. Last year, 2,500 jobs were gone—652 of them in Glasgow and 705 of them in NHS Lothian—and 3,000 more job losses are planned in NHS workforce plans. The health secretary promised not to cut bed numbers, but she has done. She wrote personally to NHS staff, saying that their jobs were safe, but they are not. She promised that delayed discharge would be zero, but in one NHS area 93 people died waiting to get out of a hospital that they did not need to be in. The First Minister boasts that our NHS is better than England’s. I should hope so. In England, the Tories are dismantling the NHS. Is that the best that he can do? Has not the First Minister broken his promises on the NHS, just as he has done on schools, jobs, students, class sizes and everything else?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2932)

The fiasco of the gathering continues to dog the First Minister’s reputation. Around £700,000 of taxpayers’ money was lost. According to Jim Mather, in a reply to a parliamentary question, the First Minister called Steve Cardownie, the Scottish National Party group leader on the City of Edinburgh Council, on 9 October 2009. Mr Mather says that in that call the First Minister discussed with Mr Cardownie “the financial difficulties of The Gathering 2009 Ltd”.—[Official Report, Written Answers Report, 10 January 2011; S3W-36917.] Is that true?

I have consulted the record, and these matters have been looked at extensively. The trouble is that questions remain to be answered. Mr Mather says that the First Minister discussed the financial difficulties of The Gathering 2009 Ltd with Mr Cardownie, but on 3 November Mr Cardownie told the Public Audit Committee, with reference to the same call: “The First Minister did not apprise me over the telephone as to what the issue was.”—[Official Report, Public Audit Committee, 3 November 2010; c 2119.] Mr Mather and Mr Cardownie cannot both be right. The First Minister was on the call. It is his reputation that is on the line. Who is telling the truth?

Knowing what to believe matters here. What followed from the meeting that the First Minister refers to was a press release, written by the First Minister’s officials but issued by the City of Edinburgh Council. It contained the sentence: “DEMA”—[Interruption.]

I can understand why the First Minister does not want us to keep pursuing this issue. The press release contains this sentence: “DEMA”— that is, the council— “will take on The Gathering 2009 Ltd’s remaining private-sector obligations”. One hundred and three small businesses that are owed money believed that commitment. However, the SNP council leader now denies that he ever made that promise. While the First Minister and his SNP colleague in the city chambers are playing pass the parcel, the creditors are carrying the can. Who is liable for those obligations—Steve Cardownie and the council, or the First Minister and the Scottish Government?

I know exactly who Steve Cardownie is: he is the person who is carrying the can for the First Minister. I think that the people of Scotland believe that the reputation of their First Minister is a matter of some importance. Let us consider this affair. It started with a secret loan from the First Minister, now written off. Then, he tried to sell off The Gathering 2009 Ltd, without the knowledge of its own directors, and he failed. Then, he tried to pass liability to the City of Edinburgh Council, but that fix failed too. Councillor Cardownie faces a no-confidence vote; creditors face ruin—103 local businesses; and taxpayers potentially face multimillion pound legal bills. When will the First Minister finally face up to his responsibility for this fiasco?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2913)

Following yesterday’s alarming incident in Auchinleck, does the First Minister agree that, when airgun legislation is devolved to this Parliament, we should use that power to get airguns off our streets?

The First Minister and I agree that we need tough action on airguns, yet the toll of knife crime is even greater, and the power to act already lies with us. In 2008, I asked the First Minister to act, but he would not agree. In 2009, I asked him to act, but he would not agree. In 2010, I brought legislation on knife crime to the chamber, but the First Minister voted it down. Labour’s knife crime petition has collected 30,000 signatures of support and, last weekend, an Edinburgh mother collected 2,000 signatures on her petition in only two days. Why does the First Minister refuse to listen to those people?

Of course, and that is why the Labour-led Executive introduced the violence reduction unit in 2006 and that is why we increased the maximum sentence for knife crime. However, to say that the violent crime statistics are less bad is not good enough, and it does not tell the whole story. In Lothian and Borders, for example, the freedom of information response that I have here tells us that knife crime increased by 22 per cent last year. We have to listen to the people who tell us that they want more action. On the streets of Blantyre, 2,000 people marched to demand action on knife crime. The murder of Reamonn Gormley shocked his community and appalled the country. Justice of the peace Caroline Johnstone even stepped down from the bench to campaign for mandatory jail sentences for knife carrying. Although the First Minister talks of the action that he takes, he has legislated to send fewer knife criminals to jail, not more. Surely that is wrong.

Let us accept that, last year, there were still more than 7,000 crimes of handling an offensive weapon, almost 3,000 people were convicted for handling an offensive weapon and 44 per cent of murders in Scotland used a blade. That may be less, but it is still far too many. Let us also accept that 70 per cent of those who are convicted of knife crime do not receive a jail sentence of any kind. Knife crime is a serious subject. In Blantyre, Gorebridge, Tranent, Edinburgh and Glasgow, five young lives were cut short in the past couple of weeks alone. There are 30,000 signatures on Labour’s petition. The Greenock Telegraph has collected 15,000 and the Paisley Daily Express has collected 10,000 more. Tracy Smyth collected 2,000 in Edinburgh last weekend. They all want knife criminals to go to jail, and the Labour Party stands with them. Why does the First Minister insist on standing in their way?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2897)

New jobs are always welcome, but we are losing jobs all over Scotland, too. Two months ago, I told the First Minister that the Scottish National Party in Renfrewshire was planning to sack 60 teachers and to replace them with unqualified staff for part of the school week. He had no idea then what his SNP colleagues were up to. He thought that it might be a mistake or a misapprehension on my part. It was not. Renfrewshire Council now plans to implement that proposal in all primary schools in August. Does he support replacing teachers with unqualified staff, and is this the thin end of the wedge?

I am glad that the First Minister has brought up North Ayrshire. I know that he has had his spin doctors out, trying to whip up the story. Perhaps he should have checked first. I have with me an e-mail from the leader of North Ayrshire Council, which says: “I can confirm that we were asked by the SNP Group to bring forward radical options”, such as a “4 day week”. When I heard that, I spoke immediately to the Labour leader of North Ayrshire Council and I got his assurance that that will not happen. He went on radio and television and said that it will not happen. Will the First Minister get on the phone to the SNP leader of Renfrewshire Council and get him to tell us that his plan will not happen either?

I did not just speak to the leader of North Ayrshire Council about what was happening there, which is not a four-day week. When I asked Alex Salmond about Renfrewshire back in December, he did not know what was going on: he looked frantically through his big book, but he could not find an answer. So I thought that I would go to Paisley and find out what is happening by asking local parents to come and tell me. Five hundred of them turned up, and they told me what Renfrewshire Council is planning. It is planning to take people off the long-term unemployment register, pay them £11 an hour as sessional workers and use them to replace 60 fully qualified teachers. They think that that is an outrage, and they are right. Why will Alex Salmond not call a halt to that crazy plan right now?

If I was the First Minister of Scotland, and I was asked about what was happening in schools in Renfrewshire for which I am responsible, and I gave an answer that was about David Miliband’s career plans, I would be embarrassed. As for the GTC, I have the letter that Mr Salmond was reading from, and this is what it says: “GTC Scotland therefore takes the view” —it is talking about Renfrewshire’s plans— “that it would be both professionally inappropriate and potentially illegal”. He did not read that bit of it out, did he? As for HMIE, I do not know what it will say, but I know what 500 parents, grandparents and teachers in Renfrewshire told me on Friday. The First Minister does not always take this line, does he? When Argyll and Bute Council planned to close schools, Mike Russell—who just happens to be the local SNP candidate—ordered SNP councillors to do a U-turn. When I challenged the First Minister on the SNP making 900 council workers redundant in Aberdeen, John Swinney ordered those SNP councillors to do a U-turn. So why will Alex Salmond not tell SNP councillors in Renfrewshire to do a U-turn on this irresponsible scheme? Is it just because he does not have any SNP seats in Renfrewshire that he is worried about?

I apologise to the First Minister that I did not ask him the question that he wanted. [Interruption.]

It is Friday night tomorrow night. I will get those 500 parents in Paisley back. Will the First Minister come with me, look them in the eye and tell them that the council’s proposal is a good idea for their schools?

The SNP asked for it.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2873)

As of Tuesday, 6,000 convicted criminals a year will escape jail because the First Minister pushed through legislation against short prison sentences. Kenny MacAskill has said that it is fine, because those convicted criminals are just “daft laddies”. Does the First Minister agree?

It is all very well having 1,000 additional police officers, but when they arrest criminals, what happens to those criminals matters. Last year, 736 of those 6,000 “daft laddies” were violent offenders, 148 were knife criminals and 17 were sex offenders. This year they will not go to jail at all; they will do community service. We read this morning that they might get “30 days’ hard knitting”. Can the First Minister tell me how many criminals who are given those arduous sentences ever even complete them?

What is important is that the justice system backs those police officers and backs the public. Even those who agree with the First Minister with regard to short sentences—I do not—would tell him that the policy will work only if the community justice system is working, too. The fact is that 40 per cent of those who are sentenced to community service do not finish their sentences. In some parts of Scotland, the figure is as high as two thirds. The community sentence system is not working, but the First Minister is cramming thousands more offenders into it. Everyone knows that many will get off scot free. That is why the First Minister is seen by so many as “Soft-touch Salmond”. Does the First Minister know how many times, under his Government, someone has to be convicted before they actually go to jail?

As ever, the First Minister has no answer to any of the questions. I have freedom of information figures that show that some first-time prisoners had 40 previous convictions. They had not not reoffended; they had reoffended 40 times before they went to jail. Hundreds of them had 10, 20 or 30 previous convictions before they ever faced jail. They do not go to jail, and some of them do not even turn up for community service, and all of that happened before the Scottish Government abolished thousands of short sentences. It is not right. Does the First Minister understand that it is the law-abiding public who are being treated like “daft laddies” by him?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2857)

This week, Labour released a list of 100 promises that Alex Salmond made to Scotland and that he has broken. Here is another one that is not in that list. In April 2008, the First Minister promised that he would never leave the city of Aberdeen in the lurch. This week, Aberdeen City Council announced that it will make 900 council workers compulsorily redundant. Those workers are in a pretty big lurch. What is the First Minister going to do about it?

The Scottish National Party will never get away with saying one thing in Holyrood and another in Aberdeen. The SNP councillors in Aberdeen have not heard the First Minister’s signal. They are not doing all that they can do to avoid the redundancies. For the sake of £3 million for a voluntary redundancy scheme, they are going to make 900 workers redundant. They can find £60 million for their new council headquarters, but they cannot find £3 million for a voluntary redundancy scheme. Of those 900 job losses, 100 will be teachers. Even in the dark days of the Tories, I cannot remember teachers being made compulsorily redundant. Rifkind, Younger, Lang, Forsyth: none of them did that or allowed it to happen. If it did not happen in Thatcher’s Britain, why is it happening in Salmond’s Scotland?

We have an SNP First Minister here and an administration in Aberdeen with the SNP as part of it. Is the First Minister seriously saying that it is Ed Miliband’s fault? Of course, it was a different story when SNP councillors planned to close schools in Argyll. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning ordered them to do a U-turn and walk out on the council. When SNP councillors in Aberdeen are planning to sack 900 workers, will the First Minister get on the phone and tell them to walk out on their mess, too?

If Ed Miliband is willing to take responsibility for anything, that puts him one step ahead of Alex Salmond, who has never taken responsibility for anything in his life. The First Minister is right, though: it is not just Aberdeen. In Dundee, the SNP has the nerve to claim that it is improving schools by cutting education budgets. In Edinburgh, Alex Neil was sent in last week to cut the Edinburgh jobless services in half, by more than £2 million—at a time like this. And yes—then there is Glasgow. The SNP cancelled the Glasgow airport rail link last year, and this year it has cut the Glasgow gateway—the biggest regeneration project in Scotland—by half. What is it with Salmond and the city? Does the First Minister have some sort of vendetta against Scotland’s cities?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2838)

The Scottish Government was caught red handed this week doctoring evidence on Scotland’s economic future. It took from an academic paper the quotation that I have here but changed the words so that it means something else. Will the First Minister tell the Parliament who doctored that evidence and on whose authority it was done?

No. When I studied English at school, if one took a quotation and changed the words in it, it was not a quotation any more. The First Minister cannot just dismiss the point. The Scottish Government used that doctored evidence in its draft budget and published it in its policy paper on financing Scotland. It was the centrepiece of Alex Salmond’s speech to his Scottish National Party conference, but it is simply not true. Will he now admit that it is simply not true?

The committee examined the evidence, and it was found wanting. The First Minister told us this week that, as a boy soprano, he had a range of four octaves. I was impressed—Pavarotti could manage only two and a half, although I believe that Julie Andrews has four octaves, too. However, that is nothing compared to how far the First Minister will stretch the truth to try to make his case for independence. The First Minister told the SNP conference: “We know thanks to the work of Andrew Hughes Hallett and Drew Scott that with economic powers we could grow the Scottish economy ... 1 per cent a year.” However, the professors did not say that and they still do not say that. It is not true. Did the First Minister misspeak, or did he mislead his own party?

Frankly, the longer the First Minister spends on a desert island, the better for Scotland. Leadership is a question of character, trust and judgment. If you take a piece of disputed research and then doctor it to mean something else, and you then embellish it and multiply the figures to suit your argument, how can you be trusted? If you then base your vision of Scotland’s future on that edifice of nonsense, what does that say about your judgment? And when you are caught out, if you will not put your hands up and admit it, what does that say about your character? Will the First Minister now republish his budget and take that doctored evidence out?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2818)

We always welcome new jobs in Scotland. In October, I announced Labour's policy on a single Scottish police force and challenged the First Minister to join us. However, he set up sub-groups of the police board and the ministerial advisory committee. They have reported, so he has set up a consultation, which will report to a commission. Is the First Minister incapable of taking a decision? Does he agree or does he not agree that Scotland should have a single police force?

Presiding Officer, "This is daft stuff." [ Interruption .]

Presiding Officer, "When you have to make the decisions, when you are First Minister, you can't afford to be on two or three sides of  the same issue at the same time, you have to make your decision and stick with it, live with it." Those are not my words; that is what Alex Salmond told the newspapers at the weekend. He is consulting on three options for the police, but the Cabinet Secretary for Justice said on television last night that the Government is now down to two options for the police, although perhaps one option is stronger than the other. Is it three options, two options or one option? This is "daft stuff"; in fact, it is pathetic. When will the First Minister act as he says a First Minister should act and make his "decision and stick with it, live with it"?

I know what Councillor Eric Milligan thinks on the issue and what Tricia Marwick MSP thinks on it, too. She, too, is against a single police force. However, I simply do not know what the First Minister thinks. Last July, the First Minister's spokesperson said: "We have no plans to move away from eight police forces". In October, the First Minister himself told The Daily Telegraph that he was opposed to the creation of a single Scotland-wide operation. The same month, his spokesperson said that there would be more than one force but fewer than eight. Last night, his justice secretary said that the case for one force was the strongest. Is it not the case that the First Minister does not even have a consensus with himself on the issue?

I still do not know what the First Minister thinks. Yes, it is a serious issue—that is why it demands leadership. We can all see how painful it is for the First Minister to sit on this fence. Dither, delay and dodging decisions: that is the First Minister's modus operandi, and he is a serial offender. On public sector reform, a commission is to report—after the election. On higher education, there is to be a Scottish solution—after the election. On climate change targets, there is to be no action until after the election. On police and fire services, there is to be a consultation—which is to conclude after the election. Has the First Minister just given up on governing at all?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2800)

It is indeed Christmas time, and we are nearly at the end of 2010. The First Minister promised us a big year this year. He was going to have an independence bill on Burns night and a referendum on St Andrew's day, but he did not. Less than a quarter of Scots now support his independence project. Is Alex Salmond really still one of them?

I thought that I should check the latest arguments for independence, so I went to the SNP website this morning. When I clicked on "Independence" and "Success Stories", all the old favourites were there. Let us start with Iceland. The website states that "Independence has given Iceland the freedom to become a world leader" and that "The Icelandic economy has been growing steadily since the 1990s." I do not think so. What about Ireland? The website states: "Independence has given Ireland the freedom to compete with others on a level playing field, and win." In the real world, it is nearly 2011, but, in Alex Salmond's Bute house Brigadoon, it is still 1990- something. The First Minister does not really still believe this stuff, does he?

I thought that Norway would come up. After all, the arc of prosperity stretches all the way from Trondheim to Oslo these days—except on the SNP website, where it still includes Montenegro. The website states: "Montenegro shows us just how easy it can be to become an independent country. 40 days is all it took for Montenegro to regain her freedom. It could be Scotland next." Yes—40 days, two world wars, the Balkan conflict, ethnic cleansing, a war crimes tribunal and a United Nations peace-keeping mission.

You could not make this stuff up—unless you are the SNP. [ Interruption .]

Iceland, Ireland and Montenegro—is it any wonder that the First Minister has lost the argument on independence? [ Interruption .]

It is the party that says on its website that Montenegro shows how easy independence is that insults the history of that country and that people. The First Minister has lost the argument on independence, dropped his independence bill and run away from his referendum. Thanks to the SNP, we have lost the ability to use our tax-varying powers. He has left the Parliament with less power than he found it with. Two weeks ago, he led his MSPs to vote against more powers for Scotland. Everyone knows that Alex Salmond has failed as a First Minister—3,000 teachers know it and 500 nurses know it—but has he not also failed as a nationalist?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2781)

Last week's blizzards obscured the news that our schools have 800 fewer teachers than they had a year ago. Indeed, Alex Salmond has now cut 3,000 teachers from our schools in three years. How many more does he plan to cut?

Let us look at what Scottish National Party councils such as Renfrewshire Council are doing under the deal. I have a leaked council briefing note that contains a cunning plan from Renfrewshire Council to cut another 60 teaching posts. It has already cut 240. The plan is: "a revised operating model ... In which part of the pupil school week is delivered in primary schools by non teaching staff." Councillors were told that classes could be covered by community education workers or—get this—even volunteers. Does the First Minister support that SNP plan to replace teachers with volunteers?

It is time that Alex Salmond got a handle on what is happening in his councils. I admit that I could not believe that that council was really suggesting that it would replace teachers with volunteers for part of the school week, so I checked that and was told that the director of education had said that he thinks that having non-teachers teaching classes is what the curriculum for excellence is all about. Meanwhile, SNP Dundee City Council has cut £4 million from its schools. However, we have not to worry. The council's education convener, Liz Fordyce, says that that will make the schools better. Why did she not cut £8 million and make them absolutely fantastic? Is it really SNP school policy that cuts are good for our schools and children do not really need teachers?

Even the First Minister's silly pantomime voices cannot hide the fact that, for the first time in 40 years—in an SNP council—pupils are to be taught by those who are not qualified to teach. That did not happen even under Margaret Thatcher, but it is happening under Alex Salmond. I gently remind him that he promised parents that they would have the same number of teachers that they had under Labour; he promised teachers that they would have the same number of jobs that they had under Labour; and he promised pupils that they would have the new schools that they had under Labour. He has let them all down. Is not his legacy on education failure, failure, failure?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2762)

This is fast becoming First Minister’s apologies. We have had apologies for losing our tax-varying powers; apologies for losing our money in dodgy loans; and, this week, the apology from the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change for losing the plot and leaving hundreds of Scots stranded in their cars overnight. Will the First Minister now apologise to Scotland for his Government’s incompetent response to Monday’s severe weather?

To be honest, last week even I could not have foreseen the degree of incompetence that the Scottish Government demonstrated this week. The problem is not just information flow; it is the minister’s incompetent response. Why was nothing done to prevent more traffic from joining motorways that were already blocked? Why were motorways not closed sooner to get them cleared? Why, at 4.30 pm, was the minister saying that roads were clearing when they were not? Why was there no emergency meeting until 9 pm, when some people had already been stuck for 12 hours? Why did it take until 11.15 at night to announce a helpline number, do so on  television and get the number wrong anyway? Above all, why is Stewart Stevenson still the transport minister?

For three days, the First Minister and the transport minister have tried to blame the Met Office. Now, it would appear, they are blaming the police for the decisions that were taken—[ Interruption .]

Frankly, the people of Scotland expect greater leadership from their Government. Last week, Alex Salmond was praising The Sun newspaper’s coverage of the weather. This week, the paper says that the transport minister “turned incompetence into an art form.” As for the First Minister, “it’s his total failure to show any kind of leadership in a crisis that will be remembered long after the snows have melted.” It is clear that the hundreds of Scots who were stuck in their cars, the hundreds of thousands whose lives were disrupted and the national media en masse have lost confidence in the transport minister. Does the First Minister really still have confidence in him?

Of course the weather last Monday was extraordinary, but what was also extraordinary was the incompetence of the response from the Government and its transport minister. I say to the First Minister that, as the apologies mount week by week, there has to come a point when he realises that standing by incompetent ministers is not a show of strength but a sign of weakness.  Let us go back to those editorials that he loves so much to read out. The Daily Record states: “They lurch from crisis to crisis”— [ Interruption .]

It states: “They lurch from crisis to crisis with the look of an administration in terminal decline.” As for platforms in May, I tell the First Minister this: if I was First Minister and my transport minister proved as incompetent as his, I would sack him. What on earth does a minister have to do to get the sack in Alex Salmond’s apology for a Government?

This is a remarkable day in Scotland. The M8 is open; the trains are running, more or less; and our schools are open, for the most part. More to the point, however, the democratic structure of this Parliament is working in a fashion never seen before.

When, in 2007, my predecessor as leader of the Opposition, Wendy Alexander, proposed that the Parliament take the opportunity of our 10th birthday to review the devolution settlement, determine how it should be strengthened and undertake to create a stronger iteration of the settlement, many did not believe that it could be done. The party of government in Holyrood did not favour the project: it embarked on a constitutional path of its own, which involved a so-called national conversation, leading to an independence referendum. In any event, constitutional matters are reserved to the United Kingdom Parliament, and it was claimed that the Government there had little interest in strengthening devolution, especially as it approached what was likely to be a difficult general election. Yet here we are today.

This Parliament took matters into its own hands, as any self-respecting Parliament should. We debated and agreed the creation of a cross-party and cross-sectoral commission under the chairmanship of Sir Kenneth Calman, and the then UK Government, respecting that parliamentary wish, engaged with the commission and its conclusions and produced a white paper outlining how they could be legislated for at Westminster.  Even the intervention of a bitterly contested general election and the resulting change of Government has not derailed progress towards a stronger devolution settlement. The coalition in Westminster has tabled its Scotland Bill and has undertaken to steer it through the legislative process by next year.

The Scottish National Party has sat out of this process all along, so what should be different today? The coalition in Westminster has indicated that the progress of the bill depends on the agreement of this Parliament not only to the principles of the bill but to the detail.  The power of Parliament over the Executive, the partnership of two Parliaments across the devolved-reserved divide and the persistence of a cross-party idea through a general election all make this debate a remarkable one indeed. We should acknowledge those who have steered us to this point, including the three Opposition party leaders at the time of Calman’s inception: Wendy Alexander, Nicol Stephen and Annabel Goldie.  This is also a moment when we should thank Sir Kenneth Calman and his commissioners once again for their work. They focused rigorously on what is right for Scotland. They took evidence widely, studied the forms of devolution that are to be found elsewhere in Europe and the wider world, and assessed the performance of our devolution settlement assiduously before reaching their conclusions. They recognised that Scotland has a high level of legislative power but a low level of fiscal devolution. To rebalance that, they pursued the extension of our fiscal powers in order to improve our accountability to the people whom we serve. The expert group that the commission created developed the proposals for the devolution of some taxes and, crucially, the sharing of income tax between ourselves and the UK Parliament. It supported the idea of this Parliament having powers to borrow. Those are serious proposals, prepared by serious people, and they form the basis of the fiscal sections of the Scotland Bill.  The wider financial powers in the bill will give this Parliament real choices. Those will not necessarily be easy choices, but they will be ours to make about how to tax, spend and borrow. We will have the power to make different choices from those of Westminster if Scotland wants us to, for Scotland’s good.  The changes will make us directly and financially accountable to Scottish voters and taxpayers for our decisions. That means that if we take the wrong decisions, and fail to support and grow the Scottish economy, there will be a risk. However, if we get the decisions right, and get Scotland growing again, there will be a prize to be had. That is what responsibility means: it must be a two-way street.

It is a principle of the bill that taxation is shared. There is a reason for that: it is to sustain the social union that is so important to the people of Scotland—something that the Scottish National Party does not want. The bill means that we remain an integral part of the United Kingdom, not just a neighbour—good or bad—living next door. Most of our taxes will be pooled and redistributed to the Scottish budget via a grant, which is a practical expression of solidarity through sharing resources and risks across the United Kingdom. Recent history has shown how important that is. Everyone except the SNP knows that it was the sharing of risk across the larger economy of the United Kingdom that allowed our two biggest banks to be saved from collapse. If the SNP does not understand that, surely the considerably greater difficulties that Ireland has encountered in dealing with its banking crisis are a reminder that small is not always beautiful when it comes to risk. Sharing income tax will give us real accountability when we set a Scottish rate, as we will have to do under the bill’s proposals. There will still be a common UK tax framework, which makes practical sense for workers and employers. It also means that capacity will still exist for redistributive policies across the whole UK—the social union that the Calman commission made very clear was a central part of the structure and strength of the United Kingdom. Parliament should support the principles of the bill for all those reasons, but there is a greater reason, too. The bill moves us to a stronger Scottish Parliament in a strong United Kingdom, which is the overwhelming desire of the Scottish people. It is demonstrated in opinion polls but, more important, it is demonstrated in election after election. Of course, there is much detailed scrutiny to be carried out. The previous Government’s white paper did not exactly follow the Calman proposals  in every detail, and the new Government’s Scotland Bill is not the same as the white paper. That is why the work of the ad hoc committee that has been set up under Wendy Alexander’s convenership is so important. The detail of the financial plans requires careful scrutiny, but we do not need to accept the SNP’s scaremongering to agree that the implementation plan must be designed with a very close eye on the consequences for the Scottish budget. It is not too late for the SNP to be a constructive part of this constitutional challenge. The SNP has stood apart from it until now, but that is the pattern of the party’s engagement in devolution, just as it boycotted the Scottish Constitutional Convention but then joined the referendum campaign when it realised that that was in step with the desires of the Scottish people and the SNP was not. The SNP has the space to do this, as its own constitutional cupboard is bare. The national conversation has fallen silent—not that it was ever anything more than an echo in an empty room—its referendum bill has fallen by the wayside and its core purpose has fallen yet further out of favour, with independence attracting the support of less than a quarter of Scots. The SNP can be a constructive partner in strengthening devolution, but to do that it must accept the principle that a strong Scottish Parliament that is anchored in the monetary, fiscal, social and political union of the United Kingdom is the settled will of the Scottish people. To be a constructive partner in the project, the SNP must end its endless search for coded formulations of independence—fiscal autonomy, full fiscal responsibility or whatever it is going to be today. It cannot be a constructive partner in the project with its amendment today, which tries to disguise opposition as grudging support and cannot be supported for that reason. Detail is important, but today is the day when we take the decision of principle. Do we wish to rise to the challenge to put party politics aside and create a stronger devolution settlement—[ Interruption .] Do we wish to rise to the challenge to put party politics aside, as we have done, the Conservatives have done, and the Liberal Democrats have done—[ Interruption .]

Are we capable of rising to the challenge of putting party politics aside? The SNP is clearly not. Does the Parliament wish to rise to the challenge and create a stronger devolution settlement in a stronger United Kingdom, as the people of Scotland would have us do? Do we accept that challenge? Of course we do.  I move, That the Parliament welcomes the introduction of the Scotland Bill in the House of Commons on 30 November 2010; notes that it is based on the recommendations of the Calman Commission on Scottish Devolution, which were warmly welcomed by the Parliament on 25 June 2009; supports the general principles of the Bill, which will give the Parliament substantial new taxation, spending and other powers, strengthen its relationship with the rest of the United Kingdom and enable it to serve the people of Scotland better, and calls on the Scottish Government to respond positively and timeously to any requests for assistance or analysis from Scottish Government officials from the committee considering the Bill.

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2747)

Will the First Minister agree that, if his much-promised 1,000 extra bobbies on the beat are actually bobbies stuck in the back room, his promise on police numbers is just a con?

I am all in favour of police officers; I just think that they should be out on the beat, policing. The reality on the ground is as described to me by a civilian custody support worker who contacted me to say that he is to lose his job, but only after he has trained a new police recruit who will replace him. He said: "When you hear that my force has recruited 100 new officers, 80 or more will then be taken from that and placed within the custody area doing jobs already being done by Custody security officers." The First Minister trumpets his 1,000 extra police, but they are being used to fill civilian jobs. Is not that a con?

The crime statistics are not testament to the First Minister; they are testament to the work of police officers, like—[ Interruption .]

The figures are testament to the work of police officers such as Detective Inspector Paul Swinburne from East Kilbride. He has 30 years' service, and this year he has seen 10 murders solved, 50 house break-ins solved, and eight drug dealers brought to justice. He has received five commendations, a Royal Humane Society award, and two police medals. Surely he is exactly the kind of dedicated police officer we want. No: he is being released. Why? So that he can be replaced by cheaper probationers, so that the SNP can get its 1,000 police officers. Does the First Minister think that the police should be protecting the public or protecting his election pledges?

It is the real experience of real experienced police officers and civilian support staff that I bring, but which the First Minister treats with contempt. When I was a justice minister, we worked to release hundreds of police officers from back-room work in order that they could do their jobs on the streets, and we worked to keep experienced police officers in place. Every time we hear the First Minister talk about 1,000 police  officers, we should remember that it is a con. Support staff are being sacked so that they can be replaced by police officers who are taken off the beat, and experienced officers are being forced out. Grampian Police have called it "naive"; Unison has called it "a cosmetic political exercise". Last week, the First Minister admitted that he was not telling the whole story on tax powers. Yesterday, he had to admit that he was not telling the whole story on The Gathering 2009 Ltd's loan. Today, will he admit that he is not telling the whole story on police numbers, either?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2730)

Yesterday, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth was forced to apologise to the Parliament for covering up the fact that tax-varying powers were no longer available to us. Presumably, the First Minister knew that too and also hid it. Will he, too, apologise to the Parliament?

Yesterday, we called for publication of all documentation and we have nothing to fear from that. However, the document that I perused as part of preparation for yesterday's events was the local income tax consultation paper that the Scottish Government launched on 11 March 2008. That consultation paper makes it clear that, to collect the local income tax, the Scottish Government planned to use the system that Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs had designed to collect the Scottish variable rate. Now the Government tells us that that system was inoperable.  I always thought that the local income tax was unfair, unwanted and unworkable. Now we know that the Scottish Government, too, knew that it was unworkable, even as it launched its plans. True to form, it covered that up as well. Will the First Minister apologise for that?

Of course, the second part of the paragraph that the First Minister read out, on page 26 of the consultation paper—paragraph 4—says:  "the Government believes that earlier preparations made by HMRC for the SVR at the time of devolution should provide a basis for the arrangements that will be needed to implement a local income tax." Presumably, the First Minister was suggesting at that point that the Government should indeed spend the many millions of pounds that it knew would be needed to make that system operable, but which it omitted to tell us about. In a sense, this is an academic debate, because on 11 February 2009 Mr Swinney withdrew his plans to replace the council tax because, he said, there was no parliamentary majority—that is just as well, because there was no collection system either, as it turns out. Let us talk about what the First Minister was prepared to spend. Why did he continue to spend taxpayers' money on a staffed-up council tax abolition unit in the civil service for 18 months after the Parliament had told him to drop his local income tax? Will he apologise for that?

No—I am asking why the First Minister has spent more than £250,000 on a local income tax that the Parliament does not want and which he will not implement. Yesterday, we discovered that the Government had secretly stopped spending money on a tax power that the Parliament should have. Today, we find that it was secretly spending money on a tax that we do not want and which it has given up on. It is not good enough to say that the local income tax unit was working on a range of things, none of  which was the thing that is in its title. In fact, the Government has spent more money on the unit since local income tax was dropped than it spent on it before the policy was dropped. It is bad enough that this Parliament does not know what the Scottish Government is doing. The real problem is that it does not know what it is doing, either. The Government is an incompetent shambles. Will the First Minister apologise for that?

The Government has lodged an extraordinary motion. It seeks to justify the deliberate and—as it turns out—secret disempowerment of this Parliament. Our claim to be a Parliament rests on two powers: the power to legislate and the power to tax. Mr Swinney has chosen to allow the capacity for this Parliament to vary taxes to fall into abeyance. The finance secretary made it clear in his statement today that, when he decided not to sign off the £50,000 annual cheques from 2007 and not to meet the other requests for a contribution, he knew that the consequence would be that our tax-varying powers would fall into abeyance. Three former finance secretaries on the benches behind me well understood that when they signed those cheques, it was to maintain the power year in, year out. The consequences of failing to carry out that duty are straightforward.

The point is—[ Interruption .]

The point is that the £50,000 annual payment had been made year in, year out in order to sustain the system. As for the argument that the choice was made only because of an inability to find £1.2 million, £7 million or £26 million—or another of the figures that have been blown around like a snowstorm to hide what has happened—surely the correct thing to have done, if Mr Swinney's view was that the payments should be withheld, would have been to seek the agreement of the Parliament. This is not simply an operational decision. To not sustain the capacity to vary taxation is not a choice that Mr Swinney had the right to make. He said that he would always take the people's choice, but the point is that the choice to give Parliament the power to vary taxation was made by the people of Scotland—1.5 million of them, who all put their crosses to say yes to giving the Parliament tax-varying powers. They did not mean some hypothetical power that exists in statute but has been rendered unusable; rather, they meant a real, practical choice that would be available to the Parliament. No Government may simply abrogate either of the two fundamental powers of the Parliament without abrogating the will of the people as well.

No. The Scottish Government says that no party has any intention of using the tax-varying power, but that is not true. The SNP itself has sought to use it in the past. The Liberal Democrats in this Parliament have sought to use it to reduce the tax rate, and Green MSPs have argued that it should be used this year to avoid cuts. In any case, Mr Swinney's decisions have rendered the power impossible to use for the next Parliament too, thus binding a future Administration in a way that can be described only as undemocratic. No matter the policies or mandate of that Government, it will not be able to use the tax-varying powers in effect for the course of the next parliamentary session. This Government has failed in the stewardship of this Parliament and has breached the confidence of the people who supported the power in the 1997 referendum. The only possible justification for the decision would have been that it was taken with the Parliament's agreement. Even then, such a move would have been open to severe criticism. However, the decision was, in fact, taken not just  without Parliament's agreement but without Parliament's knowledge. If Mr Swinney was involved in such an assiduous attempt to ensure that the tax-varying power was available, why did he not inform us of that and allow us to share the burden of his difficulty in ensuring that the Parliament had the power? Yesterday, he explained in committee that he did not want to burden us with the information, lest our briefcases became too heavy for us. So far, so flippant. However, Mr Swinney did not just omit to mention the decision—he hid it behind references to the SVR. In his budget statement last week, he said: "We have been mindful of the need to consider the effect of the significant tax rises that the UK Government has announced ... I therefore confirm that we will not raise the Scottish variable rate of income tax."— [ Official Report , 17 November 2010; c 30463.]  That was clearly meant to imply that he had such an option, which he now tells us he knew he did not have. In answers to parliamentary questions in January this year, Mr Swinney said that the SVR could have raised £1 billion in 2009 and 2010, yet he knew that it could not have done so. No hair-splitting between what is on statute and what could actually be done can be allowed to confuse the issue. When Mr Swinney said to the Equal Opportunities Committee in May—

I am sorry—I will not give way. Mr Swinney said to the Equal Opportunities Committee in May this year: "We could use the tax-varying powers—for example, we could increase the basic rate of income tax by 3p in the pound ... It is clear that that is an option for any Administration".—[ Official Report , Equal Opportunities Committee , 4 May 2010; c 1630.] Those words were simply not true. [ Applause .]

That was not an oversight or careless words; they were carefully chosen to give a false impression. A deliberate and systematic attempt has been made over years to cover up the situation and the decisions that meant that the SVR was not an option. A deliberate and systematic attempt was made to mislead Parliament and wider Scotland into believing that the Government still had the option of varying the SVR. To be frank, no matter whose fault that was and no matter when it occurred, to fail to tell the Parliament and to continue to pretend that the option was available is simply unacceptable.  That we must listen day in and day out to Mr Swinney's demands for more powers for the Parliament when we now know that he failed to maintain the powers that the Parliament had is unbelievable. That by doing so, he thwarted the will of the people as expressed overwhelmingly in a referendum is unacceptable, but that he conspired to hide the decision from the Parliament and from Scotland is unforgivable. The explanation that Mr Swinney has given today is disingenuous and his apology was grudging and unacceptable.

Mr Swinney must apologise fully or consider his position. I move amendment S3M-7477.1, to leave out from first "notes" to end and insert: "considers it an abuse of power for the Scottish Government to abandon the Scottish variable rate of tax without the approval of the Parliament and by consequence preventing the Parliament from using this power until 2013-14 at the earliest; further considers it unacceptable for ministers to mislead the Parliament over the existence of these powers; believes that it is wrong that a power given to the Parliament by the people of Scotland in a referendum should be taken away by the action of a minority government without reference to or endorsement from the Parliament, and calls on the Scottish Government to admit responsibility for the lapse of the tax varying powers and to apologise to the members of the Parliament and people of Scotland to whom it has conveyed the impression that these powers are still capable of use."

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2708)

The First Minister has a woeful record on building consensus, but yesterday he managed it: he united all the Opposition parties in the chamber in agreement—agreement that his budget is a cynical, short-term stop-gap measure, made in a vain attempt to get re-elected. Everyone knows that he put the short-term interest of his party before the long-term interest of his country. Especially at a time like this, is that not an abdication of his responsibility as First Minister?

Mr Swinney said yesterday that the budget was "more than a one-year challenge".—[ Official Report , Wednesday 17 November 2010; c 30461.]. However, he then immediately failed his own test. Alex Neil admitted on television—I was standing right beside him—that, if the SNP gets past the election, it will bring out the three-year budget then. What is the First Minister hiding? What happens in years 2 and 3 of his spending plans that he will not tell us about now?

I have indeed read the budget document, and not even it was as tedious as Alex Salmond's answers. It is full of commissions, reviews, contracts and concordats, but it has no answers in it. All budgets—

All budgets—especially the one that we have been discussing—are about priorities. Let us look at the First Minister's priorities. We have  obtained the information that, last year, as Scotland tried to recover from recession, he spent £0.5 million on the 16 members of staff in his speech-writing unit. I have heard his speeches. Can we have our money back, please?

I will stand alongside workers who are trying to save their jobs any day of the week. [ Applause .]

The only job that the First Minister is really trying to save is his own. He should start to do that job. He has no idea about reform of the teaching profession. Someone else can sort that out in June. He has no idea about public service reform. Someone else can sort it out in June. He has no idea about higher education funding. Someone else can sort it out in August. The First Minister has no ideas and no answers, and there is no leadership from him. He used to fancy himself as a Celtic lion. Does not the budget show that he is just a cowardly lion instead?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2682)

The First Minister's Scottish Futures Trust was supposed to raise patriotic bonds for patriotic bridges, patriotic schools and patriotic hospitals, but it has raised no money and built no bridges, schools or hospitals. It was also supposed to end the need to buy in expensive consultants. How is that going?

If the Scottish Futures Trust is so efficient and so cheap, why did it spend £872,000 on consultants last year? It has 26 staff and a chief executive who earns £200,000 a year, but it spends £2,000 a day on consultants and it has yet to build a single school. However, I must admit that the Scottish Futures Trust looks like a model of fiscal rectitude in comparison with Skills Development Scotland. Regular viewers will know that Skills Development Scotland likes to spend money on stage hypnotists and rebranding. Will the First Minister hazard a guess at how much that organisation has spent on external consultancy fees?

Here is a tip for the First Minister: he must get the answer to question 1 after that question and not find it after question 2 but give it anyway. Of course—[ Interruption .]

Of course I welcome—[ Interruption .]

Of course I welcome 20,000 apprenticeships.

We argued for putting the money for them into the budget. The point is that Skills Development Scotland also spent £2.3 million on consultants last year, so we could have had another 1,500 apprenticeships instead of an army of consultants. This is the organisation that is meant to be creating opportunity for our young people and ensuring that we have the skills that we need to get the economy growing. It is no wonder that our recovery is slow.  It is just as well that we have Scottish Enterprise. Just for the record, can the First Minister tell us how much it spent on consultants last year?

This time, he gave the answer to a question that I did not ask at all. The question was: how much is Scottish Enterprise spending on consultants? He does not know. I will tell him. Last year, it spent £21 million on consultants. The First Minister has cut 3,500 teachers' jobs and 4,000 national health service jobs, and 40,000 construction jobs have gone as well. Unemployment in Scotland has overtaken unemployment in the rest of the country, but his economic agencies are spending £500,000 a week on consultants. Is he really saying that he is happy with that? Is the First Minister driving this gravy train or is he just a passenger?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2661)

Yesterday, at the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, we heard about the proposed cuts in Scotland's further and higher education sectors. Alastair Sim, director of Universities Scotland, said that cuts of 16 per cent will cause severe damage to the sector. He said that "urgent work" was required now to bring forward a workable scheme for Scotland. The education secretary says that he hopes that a funding solution can be found by next August. Is that the First Minister's idea of urgent action?

Linda McTavish of Scotland's Colleges said: "there are going to be colleges across Scotland that will fail." Tony Axon from the University and College Union said that 4,000 jobs could go. Everyone told the First Minister that the crisis was coming. It is more than two years since we told him that he needed a review of higher education funding. Although he and I might agree that we do not like the answers that are coming forward south of the border, at least answers are being brought forward. That is not the timetable that we are following here. Why is the First Minister just starting to think about a Scottish answer to the problem now?

The First Minister needs to listen to the questions, too. We suggested a review almost two years ago. If he had held one, we would have a solution now. Tony Axon said yesterday that if  we had had a review, we would not be in this situation today. I have listened to the education secretary talk about his timetable—there is a summit this month, a green paper next month, a leisurely stroll through the ideas and perhaps a solution next year. One would almost think that the First Minister knew that it will be someone else's problem by then. Does he not understand that higher and further education funding is a problem now? Does he not see that it is he who is kicking the problem into the long grass on the other side of an election?

That is right; I have one more question, because this is First Minister's question time. For as long as the First Minister sits in that seat in the chamber, the question will be, "What is his answer?" Of course, if he had one we would not believe it anyway. It is not just Nick Clegg who has broken his promises to students; Alex Salmond dumped his promise to cancel student debt. He left Scottish students with less to live on than students in the rest of Britain. He abolished the graduate endowment, and last night his MP Pete Wishart said, "Of course we can bring the graduate endowment back". The First Minister cut university places by 10 per cent and now he does not know what to do. Presiding Officer, you were at the Scottish reformation reception last night at which the First Minister reminded the audience that our ancient universities were founded by papal bull. Now they are being jeopardised by Alex Salmond's bull. Will the First Minister show some leadership and introduce his plans for higher education right now?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2637)

The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning said yesterday that he was "deeply sorry" that the SNP has thrown hundreds of newly qualified teachers on to the scrap heap. Will the First Minister now do likewise and apologise?

Clearly, the First Minister does not share his Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning's shame about the situation, which he said causes him "difficulty", "heartache" and "sleepless nights". At yesterday's meeting of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, Ken Macintosh referred to Allison Baird, a newly qualified primary teacher. Of her entire class, only four teachers have found jobs: one in Scotland, one in Spain, one in Kuwait and one in Abu Dhabi. Spain, Kuwait and Abu Dhabi—the arc of desperation for new teachers. Allison's e-mail says at the top: "I'd love to be there myself"— she means at the committee— "however I am lucky enough to have 2 hours work today." What is the First Minister's advice to Allison? Should she also get on a plane to the middle east?

My question was about the situation in Scotland. There is a pretty simple equation here in Scotland. The First Minister promised Scotland that he would maintain teacher numbers, but he has cut 3,000 teaching jobs, and that was in the good times when his budget was rising by about £1 billion every year. As those 3,000 teaching jobs have gone, there are 2,900 newly qualified teachers who cannot find permanent jobs. It is not rocket science to see what has happened. Allison Baird says that when she applies for jobs she is unsuccessful because there are often 300, 400, 500, 600 or 700 applicants. Mike Russell said yesterday: "it will be impossible to protect teacher numbers going forward". Can the First Minister tell us how many more teachers he plans to cut in the future?

The First Minister seems to think that he is irrelevant. However, he is in charge of our education system. Yes, let us put the numbers in context. The SNP promised to maintain teacher numbers. Yesterday, Mr Russell said that the number that he promised was "arbitrary" and "unsustainable". If that was the case, why did he make that promise? What about having class sizes of 18, cancelling student debt or matching Labour's school building programme? Were they, too, arbitrary and unsustainable promises, or is the truth that the First Minister is prepared to promise anything to anyone to get elected, but never has the slightest intention of delivering?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2617)

On behalf of the Labour Party, I thank the First Minister for his kind recollection of Donald Dewar. The First Minister's rates bombshell is costing the national health service £5 million. NHS Grampian alone will be hit for more than £750,000, but it has a great plan to get back £400,000 of that cost. It is asking nurses to work an extra shift for nothing. In June, those same nurses got a nice letter from Nicola Sturgeon saying "none of you will 'lose' your job ... it is job security I think you deserve." She did not mention that they would have to work for nothing to keep their jobs. Does the First Minister think that that is what our nurses deserve?

The First Minister needs to check his facts. What Labour has said about the NHS budgets is identical to what John Swinney has said. There is no difference whatsoever. I think that the First Minister will find that surgical nurses in Grampian are being asked to work an extra shift, and in return, they are being given unpaid 15-minute breaks throughout their other shifts. In my book, that is being asked to work extra for nothing. I suppose they should be glad of it, because if they accept that proposal they will have jobs. The fact is that the NHS is cutting 4,000 jobs, of which 1,500 are nursing jobs. At the same time, health boards plan to spend £30 million on agency nurses to fill the gaps. Does the First Minister accept that we cannot cut 1,500 nurses from the health service without impacting on patient care?

The nurses in Grampian will be delighted to hear that the First Minister believes that they are making up what they have been asked to do because, as far as they are concerned, they are being asked to work more for no more money. Let us talk about patients and guarantees. Let us talk about Janet Adams, who is living in pain while waiting for surgery in Grampian. Her general practitioner referred her to the orthopaedic clinic on 14 July. The Scottish Government guarantees her an appointment by this week, but she has been offered an appointment by Christmas. She does not have that guarantee. Is the First Minister's NHS waiting time guarantee just another promise that he cannot be bothered keeping?

Here is what the Royal College of Nursing says: "This change in working arrangements is clearly to the detriment of our hard-working and overstretched members who are bearing the brunt of the cuts that are being made by NHS Grampian." The First Minister is making it up as he goes along, and so is Nicola Sturgeon. Yesterday, she cancelled a new health centre in Mull and, today, she uncancelled it in a hastily arranged radio interview. John Swinney plundered £5 million from her hospitals while her back was turned. [ Interruption .] Nurses are being asked to work for nothing. Nursing jobs are being cut and millions wasted on agency replacements. Kirkcaldy accident and emergency—[ Interruption .]

Kirkcaldy accident and emergency unit is closed by staff shortages. Procedure rooms in half of Scotland sit idle most of the time. The Scottish Ambulance Service call centre has crashed twice in the past few months. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing is asleep at the wheel. When will the First Minister tell Nicola Sturgeon to get a grip?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2598)

It was one of those clear autumn mornings this morning when we feel like we can see for miles. Where should we look for the First Minister's arc of prosperity today: Australia, New Zealand, Spain, Iceland or Ireland?

The fact of the matter, of course, is that Norway's oil fund has been built up because Norway—

It is because the Norwegian state still owns its oil and gas industry. If the First Minister is proposing to nationalise the oil and gas industry, he should probably tell us. [ Interruption .]

It is no surprise that when the First Minister is asked about Ireland nowadays, he talks about Norway. The First Minister once said: "I am sure that most of Europe's Finance Ministers would give at least one limb—possibly more—to have Ireland's problems". Today, the cost for Ireland of bailing out the Anglo Irish Bank reached €34 billion. The finance minister warned that its failure would destroy Ireland's economy. Which limb would the First Minister give to have that problem?

It was an Irishman who said that there are none so blind as those who will not see. Ireland is teetering on the edge of collapse, and Scotland's banking sector is 10 times the size of Ireland's. The Royal Bank of Scotland alone had a balance sheet 15 times the size of the Scottish economy. The investment in saving those banks was £470 billion. Will the First Minister admit that, in an independent Scotland, RBS and HBOS would have collapsed and the Scottish economy would have collapsed with them?

Support for the Scottish banks was £470 billion—£70 billion capital injection, £100 billion special liquidity scheme, £100 billion credit guarantee, £200 billion asset protection scheme and £10 billion in fees. The Government may get some of that back, but if it had not had it at the time when it was needed, we would have suffered the consequences. Everyone in Scotland knows that, in a separate Scotland, our two biggest banks would have gone and, with them, all the jobs, savings, pensions, mortgages and salaries. Everyone in Scotland knows that we would have tipped over the edge on which Ireland teeters today. Is Alex Salmond the last man in Scotland who does not realise that his personal obsession with independence is daft, deluded, deranged and downright dangerous for this country?

I congratulate the save Leuchie campaigners, who have fought a marvellous campaign. They have refused to give up and I wish them all luck for Saturday, which is a key date in their efforts. I well remember the first time I visited Leuchie house as the newly elected MSP for East Lothian. Although it was June or July, I was greeted at the door by Santa Claus. I had come at the end of one of the family fortnight holidays in which Leuchie house specialises and, to mark the occasion, the people there were having what I was told was an Australian Christmas—in other words, Christmas in the middle of summer. I think that that illustrates the sense of fun and happiness that one gets with those holidays, which will be recognised by visitors and, in particular, anyone who has participated in the dinners that end them. That also points us to Leuchie house's uniqueness. The facility provides respite or a holiday not just for those who suffer from MS but for their carers, usually husbands or wives, and indeed whole families. It is the only facility that allows its users to have a holiday without being separated from their loved ones and their loved ones to have a holiday with them in the knowledge that their care needs will be looked after.  Since that first time, I have been back to Leuchie lots of times and have never heard anyone who has used the service say a bad word about it. I cannot say the same about any other health service, care service or public service that I have encountered. Many users have explained how Leuchie house is a lifeline and an absolute necessity in their being able to continue to live with their loved ones at home. Indeed, the point was never more poignantly made than it was when I visited just after the MS Society took the decision to close the facility. Of course we are not just talking about people who come to Leuchie house from afar. Fifteen families in east Lothian also use the day service and for some of the MS sufferers concerned, the service's removal means the difference between their being able to continue to live at home with their family or not. I understand that many MS sufferers might like more choice or more flexible short-break options. However, I do not understand why the route to that involves taking away choice from those who already have what they want. Those who face this situation are clear that they will be offered the choice of a nursing home or hospital, and that is simply not acceptable. I do not understand why the MS Society has made what I think is a wrong decision. The society should have been so proud of Leuchie house that it could not have considered its closure. I can tell the chamber that east Lothian is proud of Leuchie and does not want it to be closed down. I have been disappointed by the response not only from the society but from the Scottish Government. When I raised the matter with the minister, I was told, first, that it was a matter for the society and, secondly, that respite for MS sufferers is a matter for their local authorities. Both those things are true, but cannot the Government see that, to those service users, it is washing its hands of the service—not once, but twice? I know that the minister supports better services for people with MS and that she understands the Scottish dimension to the disease. I do not understand why she will not help to find a way to keep Leuchie house open. I close by mentioning the staff—some 83 of my constituents—whose jobs will go. If they were here—some of them may well be—they would say that their jobs were not the important thing here. However, I know that some of them have found alternative employment but have turned it down to stay at Leuchie for the final 10 weeks, because they could not bear to walk away. Given that degree of dedication to the service—a service so loved and valued by its users—surely we should stand alongside the staff, the campaigners, the  carers and, above all, the service users in their efforts to keep Leuchie house open. [Interruption.]

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2576)

Two weeks ago, I called for a cross-party campaign, together with trade unions, on the aircraft carrier contracts. I am pleased that that has happened. At one of the meetings in St Andrew's house, I could not help noticing on the wall a large, North Korean-style slogan, with a great leader-style quote: "Our one central purpose is to increase Scotland's economic growth." It was signed A Salmond. If that is the First Minister's purpose, has he not failed miserably?

Those are indeed the challenges of the day. The question of the day is this: why is Alex Salmond's Government failing them? Let us take yesterday's report from the independent Joseph Rowntree Foundation, which said that Scotland is getting poorer faster than England. One of the report's authors spelled it out: "It had enjoyed a good three years between ... 2005-2008 but since then things have slipped away steadily and are still getting worse and that is before one has talked about the possible effects of the cuts."  Is that not a damning indictment of the First Minister's Government?

The First Minister is simply in denial. Let us interpret the present. As of today, unemployment in Scotland is still going up, whereas it is going down in the rest of the country. Compared with last year, there are 50,000 more Scots sitting at home because they cannot get a job. They see Alex Salmond sitting at home in Bute house doing nothing and they are asking, when is the First Minister finally going to take some responsibility?

The 136,000 Scots on the dole are sick of hearing from Alex Salmond what he cannot  do rather than what he can do. It is not just the unemployed who are suffering; it is the 260,000 children who are living in poverty. The rate in Scotland is increasing—[Interruption.]

It is increasing twice as fast as the rate in the rest of the country—on his watch. The Salmond slump cost Scotland 40,000 jobs. He cut 3,000 teaching jobs and 4,000 jobs in the national health service. This First Minister inherited a Scotland where employment was higher than it was in the rest of the country, unemployment was lower and child poverty was dropping faster. He has thrown all that away. This First Minister is leaving Scotland poorer than he found it. Now the Tory cuts are coming.

Is that not a legacy of miserable failure?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2531)

Has the First Minister had the privilege of visiting the construction of the Queen Elizabeth class aircraft carrier at Rosyth or on the Clyde?

I would certainly recommend that the First Minister finds the opportunity to visit the construction of these carriers. Last month in Rosyth I joined workers who were constructing sections of the first carrier and stood on what will be the deck of the biggest naval ship ever built in  Scotland, or indeed Britain. It is truly remarkable in its complexity and scale, but even more remarkable are the pride and skill of those who are building it. To even think of cancelling that first carrier at this stage is crazy. In the First Minister's dossier, can we be sure that he makes the case that both carriers must be built?

It is absolutely the case that we must marshal the most united campaign in defence of the contracts. That is the lesson from previous occasions, for example when Rosyth was betrayed by previous Governments in the early 1990s. This morning I spoke to trade union conveners in Rosyth and on the Clyde. They are concerned not just for the jobs in their yards but for the future of shipbuilding in the United Kingdom. I know that the Scottish Trades Union Congress and the Scottish Council for Development and Industry are making their views known on the consequences of a decision to cancel the contracts. In a spirit of unity, will the First Minister join me and the trade unionists in making cross-party representations to the Ministry of Defence, in London if necessary, to save Scotland's shipbuilding industry?

There is no disagreement between the First Minister and me about the consequences of a decision to cancel the contracts. Cancellation would mean the loss of 4,000 jobs in Govan, 2,500 jobs in Rosyth and perhaps as many as 10,000 supply-chain jobs. Hundreds of apprenticeships would go. Cancellation would not only in effect end shipbuilding in Scotland but undermine our engineering base, which is so important not just for the future of shipbuilding but for other, new industries, such as renewables. The importance of the decision, which is imminent, cannot be overstated. Later today I expect to see the Secretary of State for Scotland, and I will certainly raise the issue with him. The dossier is welcome and the meeting that the First Minister is arranging is welcome. For the sake of unity, we must make the argument in as many places, in as many ways and with as many voices as we can do. The case cannot simply be a Government case. That is why I am asking the First Minister to work with me and the trade unions to make cross-party representation in support of the Scottish Government's case. Like the First Minister, I do not know how wide the cross-party support that we get will be, but surely the voice of the First Minister and the leader of the Opposition would be a good start.

Will the minister give way?

If Nicola Sturgeon asks her colleague, she will find that he, too, has not said that he will ring fence the health budget. My question for Nicola Sturgeon is this: when she says that she will use her experience in the budget bill, does she mean the experience of cutting 1,500 nurses from our hospitals this year?

Will the member give way?

This is the First Minister's fourth programme for Government statement and, of course, his last. Presenting his first programme for Government in 2007, he made a virtue of its being light on legislation: that is one promise that he has not broken. The legislative programme that has been presented to us today is, in parts, worthy but it is not substantial and fails to address the most pressing concerns of Scotland and its people. I exclude from that remark the Alcohol (Scotland) Bill, because there has never been disagreement from the Labour Party that Scotland's relationship with alcohol is a pressing concern. That is why we have always signalled our willingness to work with all parties to progress measures to address it. However, we cannot support the Government's approach to price, not because we think that price does not matter but because the Government's proposal is still likely to be found illegal, still leaves major problem drinks untouched and still constitutes a windfall for the supermarkets to the tune of £140 million a year. There is no single solution on alcohol in any case, and we will support the vast majority of the bill's proposals. I hear from the Government benches that we want to do nothing. Nothing could be further from the truth. I hope that the Government will, in turn, be able to set aside party politics and support the amendments that we will lodge on, for example, alcohol treatment and testing orders to tackle drink-fuelled crime, a mandatory challenge 25 scheme to tackle underage drinking, and action on caffeinated drinks, which fuel much youth crime. Those proposals now have the backing of the independent commission that Labour set up. From its proposals, I ask the Government also to support amendments that we shall lodge quickly to end price-based alcohol advertising in our print media, and to end supermarkets competing on the depth of their drink discounting.  We agree with the Government that double jeopardy should end, and we will support the bill to achieve that. However, I wonder why that has taken so long; it is three years since the collapse of the World's End case, which clearly illustrated the importance of that measure. We will also support the Government on forced marriages. However, what has been proposed is catch-up to the rest of the country, for which legislation on forced marriages was passed two years ago. We welcome the idea of Scottish Water being able to engage in new profitable commercial activities. Indeed, there are other possibilities that the First Minister did not mention—the use of the Scottish Water pipe network for fibre optic networks, for example. However, our welcome is cautious because we must see the details of how that engagement will be achieved. If the model is, as I suspect, the model that has been developed by the Scottish Futures Trust, that does not augur well. The Scottish Futures Trust should probably try to build the Scottish National Party's first-ever school before it tries to build the world's first hydro economy. Of course, the problem is that in every previous year Mr Salmond's statement has had a major policy—a core promise; the hallmark and substance of his Government—at its centre for the year ahead that he has committed to absolutely and without prevarication. In 2007, it was the sure and certain delivery of class sizes of 18 in all primary 1, 2 and 3 classes throughout Scotland. In 2008, it was the sure and certain introduction of a council tax abolition bill and the introduction of a local income tax. In 2009, it was the Government's introduction of a referendum bill in 2010. That bill was going to be introduced on Burns night. That is the bard who wrote the immortal lines: "The best laid schemes o' mice and men Gang aft agley". We can see the theme. Every year, Mr Salmond's grand plan comes to nothing. Let us see whether his water bill survives or whether it, too, evaporates like so much before it did. Last year, Mr Salmond's independence bill was his flagship policy; now it is a ghost ship that flits eerily in and out of view from time to time. We have had four programmes for government, three consultations on his bill, a national tour of sparsely attended town halls, and endless drafts of a three-part question that nobody could understand. What is the First Minister going to produce out of all of that? He is going to produce an election leaflet. There will be no bill in the Parliament, but there is a £2 million bill for the Scottish taxpayer. Now the Scottish Government is at it again. Surely the central question of this year's  programme is the Budget (Scotland) Bill and its impact on services, jobs and the economy. The Scottish Government tells us that the comprehensive spending review will impose enormous pressure on the 2011-12 budget and beyond. We know that. It tells us that the Con-Dem coalition is cutting too fast and too deep and is threatening recovery. We know that, too. What we need to know is what Alex Salmond is going to do. Instead of telling us, he is sending John Swinney and one wise man around Scotland all over again for a national conversation—on cuts, this time. It is time that the Scottish Government told us what it is going to do with its "Independent Budget Review" and time that it got its proposals to this Parliament. The First Minister has form in refusing to say what his budget might bring. This time last year, he omitted to mention that the Budget (Scotland) Bill's high point would be the cancellation of the Glasgow airport rail link. Has not that been the pattern of the First Minister's actual programmes for Government: the cancellation of rail links to Edinburgh and Glasgow airports; failure to complete the motorway network; failure to build the Aberdeen bypass; failure to build the Borders rail link; no replacement for the route development fund; year-on-year cuts to the enterprise budgets; the cancellation of transitional rates relief; and a rates revaluation that threatens the existence of businesses across Scotland that today face a 50, 100 or 200 per cent increase in their rates?

I would have built the Glasgow airport rail link. I signed it off and I would have built it. [ Interruption .]

Last year, the First Minister said that he would be spending £3.5 billion on schools, hospitals and transport projects. Here is my question to Mr Swinney. Where are they? Where is the missing £2 billion-worth of capital projects that disappeared between 2007 and now? They are gone, and 40,000 jobs have gone with them. The truth is that in the good years this Government failed to make the investments that would have connected Scotland to the rest of the world and which would have strengthened it as we work our way back to economic growth. In every programme for Government, Alex Salmond has talked the language of economic growth, but every year he fails to deliver. What happened to the Celtic lion?  Remember the arc of prosperity, whereby Scotland could look to Ireland and Iceland—small, northern, prosperous countries. Now Alex Salmond tells us that the arc of prosperity bends all the way to the southern hemisphere and that Australia is the model for our future. No longer the Celtic lion, he aspires to be the Celtic kangaroo. The new Labour Government in Australia should be afraid—very afraid—because Alex Salmond's record on picking economic winners to emulate is even worse than his economic record at home. There is more. I see that during the summer the First Minister was made a "Star Trek" Starfleet officer, so who knows where the arc of prosperity will reach out to next, boldly going where no serious economist has ever gone before. As for cuts, the truth is that in the good years this Government was cutting our public services: 2,000 fewer teachers, 1,000 fewer classroom assistants, 4,000 fewer posts in the national health service and 1,500 fewer nurses. If that is the First Minister's idea of protecting front-line services in the best of years, what is in store in his budget this year? Even where there is consensus, the Government cannot deliver. The First Minister boasted of our "courageous" climate change legislation. He went to Copenhagen to boast about it, and for all I know he is still planning to go to the Maldives to boast about it, but he still has not managed to construct the annual targets that the legislation demands. He is in danger of breaking his own courageous law. There is always less than meets the eye with this Government and this First Minister. Students learned that when their loans were not cancelled. Parents learned it when class sizes did not come down. First-time home buyers learned it when their grants did not materialise. The construction industry learned it when capital projects dried up. Small businesses learned it when their rates doubled or worse. Knife crime victims learned it when the Government refused to act on knife crime. In his first programme for government, Alex Salmond said that his statement was different, because we had a Government and not an Executive. Right enough: an Executive does things, but this Government undoes things. It undid the capital programme of schools, hospitals and transport projects, it is undoing 10 years of economic progress and it has undone every promise it ever made to anyone. We cannot fault the First Minister for chutzpah. If anyone has expounded "the droopy mantra of 'it wizny me'"  in this Parliament, it is the First Minister. Every day he gives the impression of being in office but not in power. He is out of ideas, out of steam and running out of time.

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2514)

Presiding Officer, for two parliamentary years now, I have asked questions of the First Minister every Thursday. He never answers any of them. Perhaps he will answer Kelly McGee, whose brother Paul was murdered on 25 October 2009. He was stabbed outside the family's home when he went to help someone else. Kelly's question is this: when more people are killed by the use of a sharp instrument than are shot, why is a minimum sentence in place for gun carriers but not for knife carriers?

I have to tell the First Minister that the families of the victims of knife crime who were here yesterday did not feel respected by all members of the Parliament. In particular, the family of Kelly McGee, whose brother was an Iraq war veteran, felt absolutely disrespected by the contribution that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice made. I accept that, when in power, we did not introduce minimum sentencing for carrying a knife. We did double the maximum sentence. We acknowledge now, as I have done before, that we did not do enough. Yesterday, when Kelly, John Muir and the other families of knife victims asked me what I would do for them, I promised them that I would not give up and that mandatory minimum knife sentences would be in Labour's manifesto next year. I promised them that I would bring that policy back to the chamber and that we would try again to do the right thing by them. What new action to tackle knife crime will the First Minister have in his manifesto next year?

Well we are going to need extra police on our streets, because the First Minister is going to release 7,000 criminals on to those streets. Those 7,000 criminals currently go to jail. If his purpose in ending three-month sentences was to save money, that should have been said yesterday, but that was not the reason that was given. Look, we should not be surprised that the Government ends this year by releasing 7,000 criminals from our jails. It started this year by releasing the Lockerbie bomber from jail. In between, the First Minister was found out providing testimony for a drug dealer. His deputy was caught trying to keep a serial fraudster out of jail. Why is it that Alex Salmond is always to be found on the side of the criminals and never on the side of the victims?

Let us look at what is happening in Scotland; let us look at the achievements. What does Alex Salmond's year add up to? We have seen not just fewer knife criminals going to jail but fewer teachers in our schools and fewer nurses to follow; not one school built, not one hospital completed and the Glasgow airport rail link cancelled; and more jobs lost than anywhere else in Britain, unemployment higher than the rest of the country and economic growth trailing the rest of the country. Alex Salmond talks about this chamber. What about his alcohol policy? Rejected in this chamber. His climate change targets? Thrown out of this chamber. The First Minister is too scared even to bring his referendum bill to the chamber. Has he got anything planned for his final parliamentary year, or will it be a waste of time as well?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2496)

The Tories' savage budget will hit Scotland hard. [ Laughter .]

I assure colleagues opposite that they are the only ones who are laughing. Nicola Sturgeon was right to complain that the VAT bombshell in the budget will cost our national health service £26.5 million, but she could do something: she could get Alex Salmond to cancel his rates revaluation, which will also cost our NHS millions—£1 million in Grampian alone. That has been done in Northern Ireland. Will the First Minister do it here?

If the rates revaluation system is income neutral, as the First Minister told me two weeks ago, the measure that I propose would help the NHS and would not cost him anything at all. What about our games industry? The budget cancelled Labour's tax break for the industry. The Scottish National Party says that that will cost 200 jobs in Dundee, and I think that it is right, but let us not just complain—let us actually do something for a change. John Swinney told us yesterday that he has £300 million in the bank. We can take £5 million of that—equivalent to the tax break—and find a way to support the games industry anyway.  Let us save those 200 jobs, despite the Tories and the Liberals. Will the First Minister do that?

The First Minister is an awful lot better at explaining what he cannot do than he is at explaining what he can do and why he chooses not to do it. What does someone have to do to get help from the Scottish Government? They have to put on a kilt and call themselves a clan chief. Then they can have a secret, interest-free loan, with no questions asked. Here is the best bit: they do not even need to pay it back; they just need to promise the First Minister a photo opportunity in a beaver hat and name their price. What do the NHS, the games industry and businesses that are not The Gathering 2009 Ltd have to do to get action from the First Minister?

I do not expect that the First Minister wants to ignore the fact that Edinburgh businesses appeared on the news last night, explaining how they had had to make people redundant because of the mishandling of the event by his Government. I hear nothing from him about what he will do to help them. Audit Scotland's report, "The Gathering 2009" shows that the First Minister can take action when it matters. It shows that he spent a month cold calling everyone he could think of, to try to get them to buy up his bad debts on the clan gathering. One phone call today could cancel the small business bombshell and help the NHS. One more call could put £5 million of support into our games industry in Dundee. Those are the kind of calls that a real First Minister makes. I will even lend him my phone. Will he make the calls?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2476)

In March, I asked the First Minister whether the curriculum for excellence would be ready in time. Since then, things have gone so well that the Scottish Secondary Teachers' Association is planning industrial action, and the Educational Institute of Scotland agreed last week to ballot teachers on a curriculum for excellence work to rule. Can the First Minister explain why teachers have had to take that action?

I am not sure how having a ballot on industrial action for the first time since 1986 can be described as rallying behind the education secretary. I think that the education secretary's view is similar to that of the First Minister. The education secretary has said where he thinks the problem lies. He has said that teachers who sit back and expect everything to be done and handed to them on a piece of paper are bound to be disappointed, and he has told teachers in no uncertain terms that they "are not going to get everything on a plate". Mike Russell thinks that the problem is lazy, whingeing teachers who should get on with things. What arrogance. Does the First Minister agree with his education secretary?

The First Minister really needs a new joke writer. I, too, have read Ronnie Smith's comments. He looked back to the 1980s and said that 40,000 teachers marched against cuts then and that 10,000 teachers are marching against cuts under the Scottish National Party. He asked what kind of progress that is. As for not boycotting the curriculum for excellence, the trouble is that the First Minister does not understand how curriculum development works. People do need to boycott it; if they work to rule, they will kill the new curriculum stone dead. The First Minister should listen. Teachers are under pressure because the Government has cut their numbers, not their class sizes. The Government has left teachers having to beg parents to buy jotters and pens for their classes and now it is asking teachers to create courses out of chaos. Teachers have neither the time nor the money that they need. That is why they are taking industrial action against the SNP Government. This week, 55,000 Scottish children will go to their primary school prom; in August, they will go to high school. Can the First Minister look their parents in the eye and tell them that the curriculum for excellence will be ready?

Frankly, if you have £34 billion, which is £1 billion more than you had last year, and you inherit £1.5 billion of resource for a rainy day, logic says that there should not be cuts in our schools, but there are. When I taught, pupils had a single transferable excuse: "It wisnae me." That is what we are hearing from the First Minister. He is either saying, "It wisnae me, it was the Westminster Government" or, "It wisnae me, it was the big, bad councils." In Mr Russell's case, we are hearing, "It wisnae me, it was the teachers complaining. They should just get on with it." As an excuse, it was laughable in kids; it is pathetic in a First Minister of Scotland. Parents and teachers do not believe that the curriculum for excellence is ready and they know whose fault that is. They saw Maureen Watt fail, they saw Fiona Hyslop fail, and they are now seeing Michael Russell fail. A real First Minister would step up in person, get the local authorities and teachers around the table and guarantee the resources and preparation time to make this work.

Will Alex Salmond do that or will he, too, fail our children?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2457)

The First Minister well knows that I always welcome apprenticeships. That is good news indeed. Unfortunately, when it comes to the economy in Scotland, it is not all good news. We have also read today about the loss of 350 printing jobs in Dundee. Unemployment is still higher in Scotland than it is in the rest of the country, our growth is still trailing that of the United Kingdom and this week we saw that small business start-up rates are lower in Scotland than they are in the rest of the UK. Alex Salmond said that he would make Scotland the most competitive nation in the UK. What has he actually done?

My question, of course, was about what the First Minister has done. One of the things that he has in train is a revaluation of business rates. In the past, he has said that most businesses will benefit from this revaluation. However, I have with me the figures for a typical Scottish high street. In the town of Ballater, there are 18 small businesses that are all just getting by in tough times. I acknowledge that, last year, 12 businesses did not pay any rates because of the small business bonus; however, this year, that has turned into the small business bombshell for those businesses, all but two of which face a massive rates increase. None of them is better off and, this year, Ballater's high street will pay about 470 per cent more in rates than it did last year. Can the First Minister tell us how much extra money his Government is raking in from these punitive increases in small business rates?

The trouble is that nobody in the business world believes that 60 per cent of businesses are better off. Last week in the Parliament we had 26 nursery owners from Fife, all of whom will see their rates soar, seven of them will pay 150 per cent more and one of them will pay 200 per cent more. In my constituency, Alexander Pollock Ltd engravers' rateable value has gone up from £25,300 to £41,800. The Scottish Chambers of Commerce tells me that the worst example that it has been able to find is in Ballater again, where a restaurant faces an  increase of over 400 per cent in rates payable. The First Minister should probably not drop in there for lunch on his way home tomorrow. Does he understand that such hikes in rates could close those businesses down?

It is a fact that small and medium-sized enterprises employ thousands in Scotland. It is a fact that the rates hikes put those jobs in danger. It is a fact that in England, the same changes are staggered over five years. It is a fact that in Northern Ireland they have stopped the process because of the damage that it will do to the economy. If Alex Salmond will not listen to me, perhaps he will listen to the managing director of Alexander Pollock, who says in his letter to me: "This is Scottish Industry we are talking about and our own legislators are doing their best to put us out of business. Can you help? Yours despairingly". The First Minister can help. Will he stop this crazy revaluation right now?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2443)

Members on this side of the chamber would of course wish to be associated with the condolences and sympathies for those who suffered in yesterday's terrible incident and with the support for those who are working in its aftermath. This week, there are no surprises or leaked documents, just the Scottish Government's own official figures on how many new teachers have found a job. The Educational Institute of Scotland called the numbers "shocking". Others have called them "disturbing" and "a tragedy". They are certainly a disgrace. Can the First Minister possibly disagree?

The public spending pressure that the First Minister faces in this year—it is this year that we are talking about—is that he has more money than he has had in any previous year. The figure of 90 per cent of new teachers in employment is pure and simple spin. It includes, for example, teachers who are on a supply list, sitting at home and hoping that the telephone might ring so that they might get a day's work. The truth is that three out of four new teachers cannot find a permanent, full-time job. We trained those teachers, parents want them in our schools, and pupils need them in front of them, teaching them, right now. Can the First Minister explain why three quarters of them cannot get a permanent job?

We have heard before the excuse that local government had the money but spent it on something else. We heard it from Fiona Hyslop just before she was sacked. The problem is not the envelope of spending; the problem is that the Government has cut 2,500 teaching posts from our schools. Yesterday, Mike Russell said on television that teachers who are accused of incompetence should be suspended automatically. What about a Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong  Learning who cannot deliver his promise on teacher numbers, who cannot deliver on class sizes, who cannot find jobs for three quarters of new teachers, who will not build a single school in four years and who has had to write to 50,000 parents to apologise for the mess that he has made of the new curriculum? That is incompetence, so will the First Minister suspend Mike Russell?

Our Administration raised the number of teachers in our schools to 53,000 and the First Minister promised to keep that figure there. He should not accuse me of crocodile tears for teachers. He started by blaming the Westminster Government and ended by blaming councils. When will he take responsibility? Every year, the First Minister has had more money, and every year, he has thrown more teachers on the scrap heap. What are those teachers doing? They are applying for jobs in England, looking for jobs in Canada and heading for jobs in the middle east. The First Minister brought up the health service. He is right—what I described is not just happening in our schools. Nicola Sturgeon admitted today that the teachers will be joined by more than 1,500 nurses. It is a Salmond shambles all round. Is the First Minister's message to young Scots, "If you want to be a teacher or a nurse, emigrate"?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2423)

In these difficult financial times, what would the First Minister think of a Government organisation that planned a visual identity transition—a change of name, to you and me—on which it planned to spend more than £0.5 million?

The First Minister is right that he is indeed, as usual, in the dark and I intend to enlighten him. I refer to Scotland the Works—he is probably still none the wiser—which we know as Skills Development Scotland. It was set up just two years ago, at a cost of £16 million, and has now come up with this daft scheme to spend £555,000 rebranding itself. Its real job is supposed to be getting our young people into work, which could not be more important. Why is it wasting our money on this?

I am very happy to give Skills Development Scotland credit when it spends money on what it is supposed to spend money on,  which is creating the kind of opportunities that the First Minister has elaborated on. However, those targets are not the only things that Skills Development Scotland is exceeding. As well as its visual transition strategy, Skills Development Scotland has a marketing and brand migration plan that will cost not £0.5 million but £1.68 million. As the First Minister can—probably—tell, Skills Development Scotland does not have that money spare, so it will ask the First Minister for a £500,000 top-up. Let us not forget that the same organisation booked Paul McKenna for unemployed youngsters. Perhaps it will bring Paul McKenna back to hypnotise the First Minister into handing over that cash. Why has the First Minister still not got a grip of that organisation?

From the First Minister's answer, I take it that he approves of Skills Development Scotland spending £2 million on changing its name and marketing that name change. I well remember the meeting that the First Minister and I had, when we forced him to include in his budget the apprenticeships target that he trumpets. I well remember him asking me, "How can we possibly deliver this many apprenticeships?" We made some suggestions, the First Minister, to his credit, followed them and we achieved 20,000 apprenticeships. Perhaps the First Minister will listen to me again when I tell him  that the £2 million should be spent on more apprenticeship places and skills training. It is the First Minister who is not too effective if he cannot get a grip of Skills Development Scotland. However, the issue is not only that organisation. Last week, he did not know about nursing jobs going; this week, his Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning had to write to parents, apologising for the shambles in our schools; and now money for skills is being spent not only on hypnotists, but on marketing mumbo-jumbo. The Government is adrift. How long will it be before the First Minister's colleagues realise that they need a rebranding—starting at the top?

My question is a simple one. Skills Development Scotland has £2 million. Does the First Minister think that it should spend the money on changing its name, or on getting young people into work?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2405)

Last week, I asked the First Minister about a document that shows Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board's plans to cut 1,200 posts in the national health service in Glasgow. It was clear that the First Minister had no idea that that was happening and could not explain why it was happening. He has had a week to think about it; would he like to try again?

The fact that no compulsory redundancies are planned in the NHS is welcome, but that is not the point, is it? If 1,200 posts are removed from the NHS in Glasgow, we cannot say that there will be no cut in service. If those were all pen-pushers' and bureaucrats' jobs, maybe we could believe the First Minister, but they are not: Glasgow wants to cut 650 nurse and midwife posts. Now we see the Lothian NHS Board plan. To be fair, Lothian plans to get rid of 133 managerial posts. However, it also plans to get rid of 333 nursing posts this year. If 650 nurses in Glasgow and 300 in Lothian are not contributing to patient care and are not providing front-line services, and are not going to be missed, what on earth are they doing? Can the First Minister tell us?

In eight years of Labour administration of the NHS in Scotland, there were no compulsory redundancies, so I will be delighted if the First Minister can continue that. However, over that period of time, there was also a steady increase in the NHS budget and the number of staff working in the NHS. Although it is true that there was a 0.1 per cent real-terms increase in this year's NHS budget—a fraction, I might say, of the real-terms increase in the rest of the UK—that begs the question why, during the past week, drip by drip, have we discovered that 500 posts are to go in Tayside, 600 jobs are to go in Grampian, 1,200 are to go in Glasgow, and 2,000 are to go in Lothian? It transpires that the First Minister has had those plans since 30 April. What about Lanarkshire, Highland, Forth Valley, Dumfries and Galloway and the Borders? The First Minister must know. How many NHS jobs is he planning to cut? How many doctors? How many nurses? He knows; will he tell us now?

Presiding Officer, you are quite right. I asked a question about the NHS in Scotland, which is the First Minister's responsibility. I asked a question about the NHS this year, the year in which the First Minister has £1 billion more than he did last year. What do we see? Accident and emergency departments in Fife are closing because they do not have enough staff; community health partnerships in Glasgow are collapsing; and thousands of NHS posts are going. If Alex Salmond had published the plans in April, when he received them, his election slogan would have had to be, "More Nats, less nurses." We know that the Con-Dem cuts are coming in June, but the con man's cuts are here right now. If he has so much confidence in them, I ask the First Minister to publish all the workforce planning documents for every health board, right now—today—and let us see how many doctors and nurses he plans to cut.

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day (S3F-2386)

Two weeks ago, I asked the First Minister whether he would match Labour's election promise to protect our schools and hospitals. He said, "Yes." Was he telling the truth?

The First Minister also aspired to win 20 seats last Thursday and he fell pretty far short—[ Interruption .]

Just as a baker's dozen is 13 instead of 12, a Salmond score is six instead of 20. I suspect that the First Minister probably could not bring himself to read the Scottish press on the day after the election. If he had done so, he would have read that 700 jobs are to go in NHS Lothian, mental health provision is being slashed and a new kidney unit is being cancelled in NHS Ayrshire and Arran, and 500 cleaning hours are being cut at Glasgow royal infirmary. When he told the chamber that he would protect the national health service, was he covering up those cuts, or does he just not know what is going on? Is the First Minister shameless or just clueless?

We will get to the Tory cuts to come in a moment. At 11 o'clock this very morning, unions emerged from a meeting with Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board at which they had been presented with the plan that I have in my hand—a plan to cut more than 1,200 jobs in Glasgow's NHS this year, more than half of which are nurse and midwife posts. Is that what the First Minister calls protecting our NHS?

No, the health board cuts are the First Minister's fault. The document that I hold makes it clear who asked for this plan: it was the Scottish Government health department, on 9 April. Nicola Sturgeon is not letting those cuts happen; she is demanding them of the health board. If voters had known what that lot are up to, they would not have given them six seats never mind 20. Yes, there are £6 billion of cuts coming from the Con-Dem parties over there, but this is the alliance that Alex Salmond is part of: cuts, cuts, cuts. Yesterday, Alex Salmond wrote to David Cameron, telling him that he does not want cuts here. Can I suggest that he uses his mighty hand to write to his Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to tell her that we do not want her cuts in our hospitals?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2373)

The centrepiece of the Government's programme for Scotland is the First Minister's draft referendum bill. How is it going? How many responses has he received to his consultation?

The thing is that the people have had their say on the issue over a long time. The latest consultation is the second consultation on the third draft of a four-part referendum question that no one understands or—it appears—cares very much about. I have here all the previous consultations. The Government's flagship policy is running out of steam. The consultation on it has received 200 responses, while the consultation on the cycling action plan, important as it is, received more responses. The truth is that no one is listening to Alex Salmond any more. Even his Braveheart bedroom bloggers can't be bothered responding to the latest referendum consultation. Exactly how much is this Alex Salmond vanity project costing the Scottish taxpayer?

If 600,000 people responded two years ago and there are 200 responses now, I think that that shows that people are losing interest. I asked about the cost. Nicola Sturgeon told us in 2007 that the cost of this one-sided conversation would be £48,000. I thought that that was quite a lot of money, but three years later it is costing 40 times that amount: £2 million, including £750,000 on civil service wages alone. If Alex Salmond gets his referendum, that will be another £10 million that he intends to spend. When will the First Minister start thinking about what matters to Scotland instead of what matters to him?

Alex Salmond's problem is that although there is a real national conversation going on in Scotland right now, he is just not part of it. He must be the only person in Britain who thinks that the general election is about how many times he can get on television. In the election, the real national conversation is between Labour values—jobs, protecting tax credits for families, raising the minimum wage, and protecting schools, hospitals and the police—and Tory values, which are about cutting their way back into recession and tax cuts for the ultra-rich. Let me tell members one thing that the national conversation is not about: it is not about a referendum that no one wants, with a question that no one understands, about a separation that no one believes in. The £12 million could be used to start investing in construction jobs or to re-employ the teachers that Alex Salmond has sacked and the classroom assistants that he has cut. Will the First Minister dump this expensive and pointless bill now?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2355)

Labour is committed to protecting investment in our schools and hospitals. Last week, on television, the Deputy First Minister was asked eight times whether she would match that promise; eight times she failed to do so. Will the First Minister promise to protect investment in schools and hospitals?

The question, though, that voters will be asking themselves is this: when the First Minister says yes, is that the same as when he said yes, he would cancel student debt; when he said yes, we would have smaller class sizes; when he said yes, first-time buyers would get grants to help them; when he said yes, he would match our school building programme brick for brick; or when he said yes, he would build the Glasgow airport rail link? The trouble is that no one believes the First Minister's promises anymore. He breaks them all, so why should we believe that he will protect Scotland's schools and hospitals?

Let us look at the SNP's commitment to public services in Scotland. Two and a half thousand teachers and 1,000 classroom assistants have been cut; the Edinburgh airport rail link and its 3,000 jobs have been cut; the Glasgow airport rail link and its 1,300 jobs have been cut; and £2 billion-worth of schools and hospitals have been cut, the cost of which has been a cut of 30,000 construction jobs. Thirty years ago, I was a teacher organising strikes against Tory cuts; now our teachers are organising strikes against nationalist cuts. The First Minister's economic spokesperson has just been on the television, saying that under the SNP there will be no miserable cuts. What are these—happy cuts?

The First Minister's record on cuts is second to none. He has made more cuts than any politician in the past 13 years of British politics. Now we read in no less than the Financial Times about the cruellest cut of all—cutting a deal with the Tories. We should not be surprised, because the SNP's London leader, Angus Robertson, votes with the Tories more often than Scotland's only Tory MP does. David Cameron's local champion must be Alex Salmond, who voted with David Cameron 70 per cent of the time. Alex Salmond could not get out of his bed to vote for the national minimum wage, but he gets out of his bed to vote for the Tories. [ Interruption .]

I ask the First Minister to tell us now: will he betray Scotland by doing a deal with the Tories?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2339)

Nine months ago, Labour forced the First Minister into a legally binding target to reduce carbon emissions by 42 per cent by 2020. How does the First Minister plan to achieve that?

It is exactly the pace at which we are proceeding towards those targets that I want to raise. Yesterday, the First Minister published his target for carbon emissions reductions for this year. The target says that he intends to reduce emissions by one five hundredth of a per cent. That is so small that it appears in the tables as zero. However, in 2013, the target suddenly jumps to 9 per cent in a year. How does the First Minister think that that quantum leap is going to happen? Is the answer simply that he does not care, because he knows that it will not be his problem by 2013?

If the First Minister had the slightest idea about the detail of the policy that he is talking about, he would know that those renewable energy improvements will not kick in immediately. Indeed, they will not kick in until after 2020, largely. [ Interruption .] I am sorry, but here is the First Minister's policy—perhaps he should read it. The reason why there is a jump in the target for 2013 is not based on any of the things that the First Minister talked about; it is based on a piece of wishful thinking. It is solely based on phase 3 of the European emissions trading scheme. [ Interruption .] I am sorry, but if the First Minister does not know his own policy, he is going to have to have it explained to him. Here is the cunning plan. [ Interruption .]

Here is the First Minister's cunning plan. This Scottish Government is basically going to do nothing to cut emissions and the next Government will depend on a hypothetical scheme, which might be agreed, if we are lucky. Is that not all just Salmond-speak for "I haven't got a clue, but we'll cross our fingers and hope something turns up later"?

If the Government is doing so much, why is its carbon emissions reduction target for this year zero? The First Minister loves to boast about the world-beating climate change legislation. He flew all the way to Copenhagen to tell the world about it. He is going to the Maldives to tell people there not to worry, because Alex Salmond is on the case. They will not be too impressed when he tells them that his target for reductions this year is precisely nothing. However, we should not be surprised, because Alex Salmond believes that he introduced free personal care in the Parliament and that he is going to win 20 seats in the general election. I do not doubt that he can leap tall buildings in a single bound, but even Alex Salmond cannot believe that he will cut carbon emissions by 42 per cent with this plan. Will he just take it away and bring back something serious?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2320)

I thank the First Minister for that update. Clearly, the whole chamber will support the Government in its efforts to deal with the problem that has developed. This week, the Justice Committee stood up for knife crime victims throughout Scotland in backing Labour's policy of carry a knife, go to jail. The number of knife murders in Scotland is more than double the number in the rest of the United Kingdom. Will the First Minister finally listen to the victims and to our communities? Will he respect the Justice Committee of the Parliament?

Tens of thousands have supported Labour's carry a knife, go to jail campaign and petitioned the Parliament. They are clear about what they want: they want those who have been convicted of carrying a knife to be sure that they will go to jail. The amendment to the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill is clear, and following the Justice Committee's meeting this week, it has been included in that bill. Will the First Minister respect that decision, or does he intend to  try to remove that amendment from the bill when it comes to the chamber?

It is a fact that only 70 per cent of convicted knife criminals go to jail. That is bad enough, but it is worse that Alex Salmond wants to end six-month sentences and get the percentage of convicted knife criminals who do not go to jail up to 90 per cent. Only one in 10 convicted knife criminals would face a jail sentence. The Justice Committee rejected that, too. Alex Salmond has been around Scotland saying that Scotland needs local champions to articulate community concerns. We know that he loves to articulate at great length and at even greater volume, but exactly which community in Scotland is telling him that it wants to see knife criminals released on to its streets?

I think that the First Minister rather missed the point that knife murders are running at double the rate in Scotland that they are in England. That is why we need special action here in Scotland. There is not much point having those 1,000 extra police officers if, when they arrest and convict knife criminals, the First Minister lets those criminals out. John Muir, whose son was murdered; Kelly McGhee, whose brother was killed; Christine Halley, whose son died at the hands of a knife criminal—Alex Salmond is not their champion. Whether it is Alex Salmond on knife criminals, Nicola Sturgeon on a benefit fraudster or Kenny MacAskill on the Lockerbie bomber, the SNP is all too ready to champion those who commit the crimes, not those who suffer the consequences. When the time comes and the bill comes before the chamber, will the First Minister choose to champion the criminals or our communities?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2301)

Last week, the First Minister asked: "is it not time for us to unite as a Parliament to demand that there be no cuts in public spending in Scotland next year... ?" In fact, yesterday's budget put the First Minister's budget up by £82 million. He can reprofile the figures any way he wants; the fact is that he will have more than £1 billion more to spend next year than he has had this year. Is not it time that he had the good grace to welcome that?

Here are the actual figures that are in SPICe. There is, taking account of the funding from next year that Alex Salmond asked permission to bring forward and spend, an increase of 0.9 per cent. That is the actual figure. He talked about accelerated capital. Yesterday's  budget provided a £2 billion capital fund for renewables, of which we can expect £1 billion of capital investment to come right here, right now, to Scotland. What else did the First Minister say last week? He said that it was time "to demand a reflationary package".— [ Official Report , 18 March 2010; c 24753.]  Yesterday, we saw more money for Scottish pensioners, more money for Scottish children and families, more money for Scottish first-time buyers—who, by the way, are still waiting for the help that they were promised three years ago—and more money to help to create jobs in Scotland. Surely it is time for the First Minister to welcome those measures and to get on with his job.

There we have it again: he is a grievance, not a Government. He will not take responsibility for his own decision—a correct one—to accelerate capital. He will not take responsibility for his Futures Trust fiasco killing jobs. He will not take responsibility for the more than 2,000 teachers who are on the dole. He will not take responsibility for the cuts in our enterprise and university budgets. He shouts, he screams and he stamps his feet to hide the fact that he has no idea what to do with the money that he has. What about those consequentials of £82 million? What is he going to do with them?

I asked about £82 million of resources, and the First Minister has not the faintest idea what he is going to do with them. Yesterday, Alistair Darling created and protected thousands of jobs in Scotland, including 150,000 jobs with the green investment fund, 5,000 jobs—

Members say "Fantasy." What was Alex Salmond's contribution to the renewables industry this week? It was to delay his £10 million saltire fund by a further two years to 2017. Alistair Darling created and protected 150,000 green jobs, 5,000 jobs from the future jobs fund, and 10,000 jobs in the games industry through tax breaks. That was yesterday. Today, a further 4,000 jobs have been secured on the Clyde. How many jobs did Alex Salmond create yesterday?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2280)

While we are on celebrations, yesterday saw 20,000 new apprenticeship places achieved. Labour fought hard to get those apprenticeship places in the budget and we are delighted to see 20,000 youngsters getting that start in life. However, Michael Levack of the Scottish Building Federation says that the number of apprentices in training is about to drop by half. Will the First Minister promise us that he will not let that happen?

Not for the first time, the First Minister's memory lets him down. We voted against the budget for this year because it did not have these apprenticeship places in it. When the Government put the apprenticeship places in, we voted for it. The truth is that if it had not been for  us, these apprenticeship places would not have been in the budget. There was good news for Britain as a whole yesterday, when unemployment went down by 33,000, but it was bad news for Scotland, where unemployment went up by 16,000. Scotland is going backwards under Alex Salmond. What is his excuse?

There is a recovery in Britain, where unemployment is falling, but across all four key employment measures, Scotland is underperforming in comparison with the United Kingdom as a whole. Economic output in Scotland is falling faster than it is in the UK as a whole—that has not happened since world war two. Two thirds of all the jobs that have been lost in the whole of the UK over the past few months have been lost right here in Scotland. Something is going wrong. The First Minister takes the credit for the number of apprentices. Will he take the responsibility for unemployment going up in  Scotland while it goes down in the country as a whole?

When I was enterprise minister, Scotland had the highest employment rate in Europe. Scotland's employment rate may still be marginally higher than the UK's, but the figures for this month and last month show that the UK is catching up on us, and fast. Our potential is huge. Scotland should be leading, not lagging. What has happened? What has happened is the Salmond slump. He talks about fiscal stimulus, but he is the one who cancelled rail links in Edinburgh and Glasgow, cancelling thousands of jobs. His Scottish Futures Trust has built nothing and has destroyed 30,000 jobs. His housing budget cuts will cost even more construction jobs. He got rid of 1,000 assistants from our classrooms. This week, another 600 teaching jobs have gone—almost 3,000 teachers are on the dole. Alex Salmond never tires of telling us that facts are chiels that winna ding. The fact is that Scotland is going backwards under him. Does he have any ideas or does he just have more excuses?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2261)

Will the First Minister confirm that curriculum for excellence will begin in all schools—primary and secondary—this August?

My question was fairly straightforward. I support curriculum for excellence and agree that its principles have widespread support. That is why I would like the reassurance that it will be introduced in our schools as planned, in August. The First Minister has had three years: he has already delayed the new curriculum's introduction by a year. The First Minister talks about the involvement of teachers, but they tell us that they do not know what is happening. Some say that they do not know what they will be teaching first years in secondary school in August. When I was a teacher in the 1980s, I saw plenty of changes in the curriculum, but I never saw a shambles like this. I always knew what I would be teaching before classes arrived at the door. Time is running out.

Here is the question. [ Interruption .] The question is coming now, but we will wait long  enough for the answer. That is for sure. [ Interruption .]

What action is the First Minister taking now to sort out the situation in time for August?

The First Minister needs to pay attention. I, too, am against delay. That is why I ask him whether he can guarantee that he will take the action that is required to introduce the new curriculum in August. I ask that question not just for myself, but for the parents of the 55,000 Scottish pupils who will start secondary school in August. Those parents do not know what their children will learn or how they will be taught. I wonder whether the First Minister knows that. How many subjects will pupils take? How many exams will they sit? In what year will they move to the exam curriculum—secondary 3 or S4?

Once again, the First Minister needs to pay attention to the question. I did not ask how many in-service days there were.

No. For the avoidance of doubt, I will ask my questions again, because I think that the First Minister has no idea. These are the questions that parents are asking. When their children go to high school for the first time in August, how many subjects will those pupils take? How many exams will they sit? In what year will they move to the exam curriculum—will it be in S3 or S4? The Scottish Government has given different answers to those questions and the First Minister has given no answer to them.

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2239)

Unemployment is growing more quickly in Scotland than in Britain as a whole and 16 to 24-year-olds are the worst affected. In two budgets, we in the Labour Party have argued that giving our young people the skills and jobs they need must be the top priority. The situation for our young people is getting worse, not better. What is the Scottish Government doing to give our young people the skills they need?

It is crucial that every penny of the budgets that are allocated to support our young people and their skills should be used to the best advantage but, last Friday, Skills Development Scotland staff in Lanarkshire—an area that is particularly badly hit by youth unemployment—were told that 20 per cent of the funding for the crucial get ready for work programme was unused and unspent. That is £800,000 that should have been helping young people into work. How much of the skills budget throughout Scotland is sitting unused and unspent?

The First Minister clearly does not know how much of his skills budget throughout Scotland is underspent. The invest in an apprentice scheme, one of the schemes to which the First Minister refers and which gives businesses £1,000 to take on an apprentice, proved popular. Unfortunately, it ran out of money in a fortnight, leaving hundreds of businesses and apprentices disappointed. There is plenty of money for some things, though; tomorrow, SDS will spend £20,000 to fly in hypnotist Paul McKenna to give 260 unemployed youngsters a pep talk. Apparently, he will hand out signed copies of his bestsellers "Instant Confidence", "I Can Make You Rich" and, of course, the classic "I Can Make You Thin". Is that really the First Minister's strategy to help our young unemployed?

I presume from that hypnotic recitation of numbers that the First Minister has finally found the right page in his briefing. The point is that the budgets to which he refers are not being spent or used properly. One in five of our young people leaves school with literacy problems. Would it not be better to give them more literacy training, instead of a stage show at Hampden tomorrow? What is Paul McKenna going to do—hypnotise them into believing that they have a job, a future and a chance in life? Twenty thousand pounds could have opened up 20 more  apprenticeships. Alex Salmond is the illusionist here, fooling Scotland and failing our young people. It is time he looked deep into the eyes of the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Mr Russell, and told him to get this shambles sorted out.

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2220)

Figures this week show that 58 per cent of all murders that are committed in Scotland are committed with a knife; an all-time high. Next week, Labour will move an amendment to the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill that would ensure that, if someone is caught carrying a knife, they will go to jail. Will the Scottish National Party support us?

The First Minister should also be aware that the figures that were released this week show that knife murders have increased over the past three years. He must know that the longer jail sentences for knife crime are down to the increase in the maximum jail sentence from two to four years, which was introduced by the previous Scottish Executive. The fact remains that the vast majority of convicted knife criminals do not go to jail. The First Minister should listen to knife crime campaigners such as John Muir. As the First Minister will be aware, Mr Muir's son Damian was murdered in a knife attack. Mr Muir has said that if Labour's policy had been in place, his son might well still be with us. Is the First Minister saying that Mr Muir is wrong?

This is about an overwhelming concern. Over recent months, I have helped to collect signatures on a petition in support of the Labour amendment that will be debated in committee next week and in support of knife campaigners such as Mr Muir. In my time, I have collected signatures on many petitions, but I have never had people queue up to sign a petition as happened with this one. Indeed, 30,000 Scots have signed the petition in support of Mr Muir and Labour's amendment on knife crime. Does the First Minister not think that our absolute obligation to the victims of knife crime and those 30,000 Scots is to listen to them and stand up for them?

The action that we took previously on knife crime was to increase the maximum sentence. I acknowledge that we now believe that that was not enough. I believe that because two thirds of convicted knife criminals get no jail sentence at all and two thirds of those who do get sentences of six months or less. It worries me that the First Minister is planning to scrap all of those six-month sentences. It is no good the First Minister saying that this is party politicisation. The fact of the matter is that he is seeking to end six-month sentences—we will oppose that—and that the policy that he is pursuing will allow more than 600 convicted knife criminals every year to avoid jail completely. That is not being tough on knife crime, is not doing enough and is not what the people of Scotland want. Will the First Minister admit that and support our amendment next week?

Last week, the First Minister said that Ms Sturgeon had an "absolute obligation" to send the letter. That was absurd. Ms Sturgeon's statement makes it clear that, on reflection, she knows that the First Minister was wrong. Under both the ministerial code and the code of conduct for MSPs, Nicola Sturgeon could have chosen to write a far more cautious letter or no letter at all. The Deputy First Minister's decision to intervene on behalf of a twice-convicted benefits fraudster, and how she did so, was always a matter of judgment, as she herself has made clear today—I welcome that. These are not victimless crimes. Scotland cannot understand why the Deputy First Minister would choose to stand up for a criminal. I asked the Deputy First Minister to consider her position. [Interruption.]

I accept that she has said that she will not and that she has apologised for the nature of the letter, but in doing that she has accepted that she made a mistake and should not have written the letter that she did. Her apology is welcome, but she can still put the mistake right by withdrawing the letter—the terms of which she has now disavowed. Will she do that?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2203)

In paragraph 7.7 of the Scottish ministerial code, it says: "in some cases it may not be appropriate for a Minister to provide a reference, even as an MSP." What about the case of a criminal who stole £80,000 of benefits and who had previously been convicted of stealing people's pension and benefit cheques while running their post office? Does the First Minister think that someone who is guilty of that crime should go to prison?

It is a matter of judgment. For the avoidance of doubt, I say that I would not have written such a letter for a constituent who was guilty of such a repeat crime. Is any MSP willing to say that they would have written the same letter for the same man having committed the same crime? Put your hands up! [Interruption .]

The First Minister and his deputy seem to be on their own on this one. I ask a general question: where does the First Minister draw the line? What crime does someone have to  commit not to receive a character reference from the First Minister or his deputy?

For all the people who are watching at home, let us be very clear. No member of this Parliament is bound to vouch for the character of just anyone. The code of conduct for MSPs says that members "should consider issues on their merits, taking account of the views of others." What about decent, law-abiding Scots? What about the pensioners and families who were left with nothing when their cheques were stolen? Did Nicola Sturgeon consider their views when she wrote the letter?

The conflict of interests that lies at the core of this question is between the interests of the criminal and those of the victims of crime. My constituents will judge me on which side of those interests I lie. I spent yesterday standing up for the victims of knife crime; Nicola Sturgeon spent yesterday standing up for a criminal. That is how bad her judgment is, but this is now about the First Minister's judgment. Whose side is he on? I give him one last chance: will he back Nicola Sturgeon or sack her?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2182)

Three weeks ago, the First Minister agreed with me that eradicating illiteracy should be a national priority in Scotland. He said that he would deliver it through his concordat with councils. Indeed, he said that his concordat would "deliver all the other educational priorities and other vital priorities for this nation."—[ Official Report , 14 January 2010; c 22774.] Looking ahead to next week's debate on council budgets, does the First Minister stand by that promise?

It is true—[ Interruption. ]

It is true: everyone knows that there is no such thing as a free lunch, especially when it comes to Alex Salmond. Priorities need resources. At the very moment that the First Minister was promising us that the concordat was the answer to Scotland's literacy problems, just up the road Edinburgh's SNP council was planning to cut 6.5 per cent from the budget that funds its literacy programmes on top of cuts of more than 30 per cent that it has already made to those programmes. In Holyrood, Alex Salmond supports literacy but, in Edinburgh, the SNP cuts it. Was the First Minister trying to get into the "Guinness Book of Records" for the fastest broken promise ever?

I think that it was the First Minister who was struggling with that answer. He either does not know or does not care what is happening in communities around Scotland, but parents and pupils know. While he is playing "Celebrity Come Dine With Me", literacy programmes in Edinburgh are being cut, schools in South Ayrshire are being cut, education jobs in Renfrewshire are being cut and, throughout Scotland, 2,000 teachers and 1,000 classroom assistants have already gone. Surely protecting our schools is one of the "vital priorities for this nation",— [ Official Report , 14 January 2010; c 22774.]  so why is the First Minister failing so badly? [ Interruption. ]

The First Minister will say anything, promise anything and blame anyone just to get through First Minister's questions, but he will do nothing to protect front-line services and nothing to protect our children's future. If it is all Westminster's fault and all the councils' fault and there is nothing that he can do, here is the question that Scotland's parents and pupils will be asking: what is the First Minister for?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2164)

Good news, indeed, which is certainly welcomed across the chamber. There is still difficult news for Scotland on the economy, however. There is hope that we are moving from recession to recovery, but our unemployment rate is still too high. This year, more than any year, the Scottish budget has to be about jobs and the economy. The capital budget is crucial; thousands of jobs depend on it. Will the First Minister publish the full details of current spending plans on capital projects?

On page 38 of the published infrastructure investment plan is the Glasgow airport rail link. The First Minister has torn 1,300 jobs out of the programme by cancelling GARL. Why will he not show us those figures? Andy Kerr has written twice to John Swinney asking for them, the Finance Committee has asked for them, and we have waited four months for answers to parliamentary questions and have had to resort to making freedom of information requests. This week, a joint letter was sent by all Opposition parties asking for the figures. Even the Tory budget buddies, who always support the SNP budget, think that it should be a requirement that current capital budget plans be shared. Why the secrecy? Why will the First Minister not show us the figures?

We are desperate to look at the capital project plans, but the First Minister will not give them to us because his capital spending programme is a shambles. The Scottish Futures Trust was supposed to fix all that. The SNP manifesto said that it would build schools, hospitals and bridges with patriotic bonds. Now, even the First Minister's favourite economists, Jim and Margaret Cuthbert, are telling him that the SFT is a disaster. It has not raised a penny; it has not laid a brick. We are paying that Futures Trust £28 million to have meetings about selling off Scottish Water, while building firms are paying off Scottish workers. Will the First Minister just admit that time is up for his Futures Trust?

If the First Minister has no intention of selling off Scottish Water, why is he spending £1 million on wages for 21 people in the Scottish Futures Trust to discuss it? It is even more of a waste of money than we thought. As for the First Minister's schools, I have a list of them here: two thirds of the schools were under construction before he was ever First Minister. If I look at my own constituency to see which schools he is claiming, I find that Dunbar primary school was completed in 2008. My constituents will be a bit surprised at that: the last time I looked, there was an access road, and building that school had not even started. It was planned under Labour, and the SNP has failed to build it. The truth is that we cannot get details of the First Minister's capital budget because it is a mess. Low Moss prison, the Aberdeen bypass and the Southern general hospital have all been delayed for two years. Scottish companies have been frozen out of the contracts, 1,300 jobs on GARL have been cancelled and 28,000 construction jobs have been destroyed by the Scottish Futures Trust. Will the First Minister get a grip and take the Scottish Futures Trust out of the budget and put GARL back in?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2147)

The Home Office and the police told Roseanna Cunningham not to include two footpaths near the Balmoral estate in a core path network because it would increase the security risk to the Queen. Roseanna Cunningham's astonishing reply was: "I am not persuaded that this amounts to sufficient reason for excluding these two paths from the core paths plan." Does the First Minister agree that the safety of the Queen and her family is a sufficient reason to keep two paths off a map?

The true facts are—[ Interruption. ]

—that the advice was known in 2007, in 2008 and in 2009, and that it was reiterated in the letter that finally resulted in the right thing being done, as the letter makes clear. The truth is that Roseanna Cunningham rejected the advice of the police and the Home Office. She had to be forced to do the right thing by a Home Office threat—[ Interruption. ]

—to overrule her, because what she proposed to do was such "a security risk to the Queen and her immediate family." In these days, when everyone knows that terrorism is a real threat, will the First Minister admit that Roseanna Cunningham was wrong to try to ignore security advice?

There was a request from Roseanna Cunningham for additional information in order to change her mind. The only additional information that was provided was that, if she proceeded in the way that she proposed to do, she would have to be overruled by the Home Office for security considerations. It is good that the right decision has finally been reached, but will the First Minister simply admit that that threat should not have been required in order to reach that correct decision?

My position is straightforward. [ Interruption. ]

The security advice—

I advise the First Minister to take security issues seriously. The security advice was known in 2007, 2008 and 2009 and was resisted until the threat was made that Roseanna Cunningham's decision would be overruled. The First Minister should be big enough to admit that an error of judgment was made and that the threat should never have been required.

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2126)

Labour members—and, I think, all members—will join the First Minister and his ministers in supporting those efforts to respond to the crisis in Haiti. Our thoughts are with those who are struggling to deal with the consequences of that devastating incident. One million adults in Scotland—one in five of the population—cannot read or write. That was one of the shocking conclusions from the literacy commission that Labour set up when it reported last month. The commission called for "zero tolerance of illiteracy". I was pleased to hear the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning support the commission's recommendations this morning; will the First  Minister add his support for zero tolerance of illiteracy in Scotland?

One of the literacy commission's important conclusions was that we know how to resolve the issue. Councils such as Clackmannanshire Council and West Dunbartonshire Council have shown that, if we make literacy a priority, we can ensure that every child learns to read and write. On Monday, I visited the nurture class at Lochview nursery school in Glasgow. Children as young as two were being introduced to books, and parents were being helped to make reading an everyday part of their children's lives. Will the First Minister agree to make that programme happen in every nursery school in all Scotland?

I welcome the First Minister's support for moving forward on literacy. In that spirit, it is worth discussing a little more what we do to make that a reality, because the commission discovered that 13,000 pupils each year leave primary school unable to read or write. Those are 13,000 children whose life chances are threatened before they are even in their teens. Therefore, literacy seems to us to be one of the most important things to which we can turn our minds. The commission says that the money that we spend on schools has to be allocated to reflect the priority of improving literacy levels. What will the First Minister do to target resources on ensuring that every child leaves school able to read, write and count?

There is welcome agreement and a willingness on both our parts to work together to take forward zero tolerance of illiteracy. I welcome that response to our literacy commission. In all seriousness, and in the same tone, there is a problem: the First Minister's concordat with local government means that he cannot deliver national priorities in education. We have seen that on class sizes, teacher numbers and school meals. The previous education secretary could not deliver the objectives that she had been set because of the concordat. Zero tolerance of illiteracy has to mean what it says. The issue has to be a national priority for Scotland. What will the First Minister do to lift literacy above the concordat, make it a national priority and ensure that every child, everywhere in Scotland, leaves school able to read, write and count?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2094)

Under the ministerial code, ministers are expected to behave according to the highest standards of constitutional and personal conduct. The First Minister is the ultimate judge. Two weeks ago, Mark MacLachlan, an aide to Michael Russell, was identified as the anonymous author of a blog with a track record of smears and abuse of political opponents. On BBC Scotland, Mr Russell was asked: "Did you know he was doing it?" He replied, "No." Today, however, Mr MacLachlan says that Mr Russell was not only aware of the blog but even "suggested possible subjects." Is the First Minister undertaking an investigation under the ministerial code to establish whether Mr Russell told the truth to the BBC?

I have already made clear how important I believe the climate change talks in Copenhagen are—frankly, they are rather more important than an attempt at a photo call with Arnie Schwarzenegger. This morning, I have made very clear my concerns about the 800 employees of and the 4,000 travellers with Globespan. However, the First Minister cannot use those job losses to hide behind in order to avoid answering questions about this matter.  If Mr Russell did not know about this "black ops" blog, there is no impediment to his coming to the chamber to set the record straight. Will the First Minister instruct Mr Russell to come to Parliament and confirm whether he knew of the blog?

It is exactly because I care about Scottish politics that I wish to see these anonymous blogs rooted out and got rid of. That is why, six months ago, when one of those blogs was spreading smears and rumours about me and my marriage, I asked the First Minister to take action. He refused to do so and said that those blogs were nothing to do with the SNP, but now we discover that the author of one blog worked for one of his ministers. The First Minister says that Mr MacLachlan resigned, but Mr MacLachlan says that he did not resign and that Michael Russell phoned him to say that he had to go. Mr MacLachlan says that an apology that was issued in his name was written by Kevin Pringle, who is the First Minister's most senior adviser. If that is true, a cover-up has been attempted that involved the First Minister and his office. Did the First Minister order Mr Russell to sack Mr MacLachlan and order Kevin Pringle to draft a resignation statement for Mr MacLachlan?

I condemn absolutely attack blogs from whichever part of the political spectrum they come. I want the matter to be cleared up properly, so I ask: will the First Minister release any documents or e-mails that relate to Mr MacLachlan that any ministerial office or any of his special advisers holds? When did the First Minister, Kevin Pringle and any of the First Minister's other special advisers know about Mr MacLachlan's blog? Just for today, will the First Minister say when he or Kevin Pringle first had sight of the e-mails that were published in The Herald today?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2072)

On 29 October, I told the First Minister that I had written to the chancellor suggesting that he should consider accelerating capital for one more year if, and only if, the SNP sorted out the budget by, for example, reinstating the Glasgow airport rail link and the housing budget. Let us not forget that the chancellor has already accelerated £333 million. What percentage of that went directly to creating new jobs?

Of course, the First Minister could not answer the question. Perhaps that is why he could not make the case. However, Nicola Sturgeon gave the game away at the Local Government and Communities Committee. She admitted that only one fifth of the first tranche of accelerated capital—only 20p in every pound—had directly supported construction jobs. Is it not the truth that the First Minister got the money last year and he had not got a clue about how to use it?

Presiding Officer, I will tell you what humiliation is—it is what the First Minister did to Fiona Hyslop last week to save his skin. In 2007, the First Minister inherited £1.5 billion of reserves from the previous Labour-led Executive. That is all gone. He cancelled the Edinburgh airport rail link, which got him another £1 billion. That is gone. That £2.5 billion, which could have built all those projects that he reeled off, is all gone. What did he do with that money?

The First Minister loves to remind me that I worked for Alistair Darling. He really does not have to—I know that he knows, because I used to bump into him when I was down there. That was when he was hiding in Westminster from Holyrood. The First Minister has more money next year than ever before. The question is: what is he doing  with it? Let us look at his track record. Low Moss prison: delayed. Southern general hospital: delayed. Aberdeen bypass: delayed. Borders railway: delayed. Edinburgh airport rail link: cancelled. Glasgow airport rail link: cancelled. A further £2 billion of projects have been lost because of the Scottish Futures Trust fiasco. How many jobs? Twenty-five thousand Scottish construction jobs have been destroyed. Will the First Minister admit that the real problem is that he could not build his way out of a paper bag, never mind a recession?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2055)

Is it the mark of a man, or the mark of a First Minister, to cast aside one of his own colleagues to save his own skin?

Let us focus on education, which is central to Scotland's future. On 5 September 2007, Hugh Henry said that the First Minister "promised ... that he would reduce to 18 class sizes for primaries 1 to 3", and asked: "Can he confirm that his promise will be delivered in the lifetime of this parliamentary session?"— [ Official Report , 5 September 2007; c 1378.]  The First Minister replied, "Yes, I can". Does he remember saying that?

It was the First Minister who said in the chamber on 5 September 2007 that his  Government would reduce class sizes to 18 in the first three years of primary school. I have in my hand a minute of a meeting of the deans of the faculties of education in Scotland that was held on 2 July 2007. In attendance was senior civil servant Donald Henderson, who revealed the advice that was offered to ministers on the class size pledge: "The scale of the commitment does not allow it to be delivered in the lifetime of a parliament." The First Minister told Parliament the exact opposite two months later. I remember that, and I remember the look on Fiona Hyslop's face when he said it, because she knew that what he said was not true. Did he know that it was not true?

Never mind the council chambers around the country—my question is about the First Minister's words in the parliamentary chamber. The First Minister misled the chamber on 5 September 2007. He made a promise that he knew he could not keep and then he left his education secretary to dangle. How must Fiona Hyslop have felt sitting there, tied to a promise that they both knew they could not keep? She sat there for two long years taking the flak for Alex Salmond and, in the end, she was sacrificed to save his neck. Will he admit that she was just the scapegoat and that he is the guilty man?

I fear that this morning's debate on the position of Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will be slightly less exciting than might have been the case, had the First Minister not blinked on Tuesday and made the change that brings us to Parliament now. I wish Mr Russell well in his new post, although being moved the day after his last major project—the referendum paper—has flopped and having that project removed by his boss must smack rather of his being kicked upstairs. We will not oppose Mr Russell's progress, although I cannot say the same of his referendum, which we will oppose and which is, of course, going nowhere. Let us not forget the seriousness of the task that Mr Russell now faces. Under the Scottish National Party, Scottish education is in crisis—failure to sustain teacher numbers at the promised level; failure to cut class sizes; failure to provide promised free school meals; and failure to deliver the promised physical education in our schools. The curriculum for excellence is in chaos; the Scottish Futures Trust has brought the new schools programme to a grinding halt for more than two years; and new teachers cannot find posts and many are leaving for greener pastures in England or further afield. All of that culminated last Friday in the complete breakdown of relations between the Scottish Government and local authorities on schools. Changing the cabinet secretary is not going to be enough. We need a change in policies and approach, but the auguries are not good. In 2006,  Mr Russell wrote in The Times Educational Supplement that "arrogant councils think they know best" and that "what Scotland needs less of is self-serving, mealy-mouthed advice from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities". Those comments are sure to smooth things over with Pat Watters and our councils. Of course, Mr Russell's support for educational vouchers, which he proposed in his book in 2006, might smooth things over with the Tories, although not with the Scottish public. Neither would the public like Mr Russell's suggestion that they pay for the national health service, so it is just as well he is not the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing—yet. When the  Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture failed, the SNP called Michael Russell. When the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning failed, the SNP called for Michael Russell. The way that this Government is going, it might not be long until Michael Russell is moving again. Until then, let us hope that he at least tries to sort out the mess that his party has made of our schools. Scotland depends on it.

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2038)

In his manifesto, the First Minister promised to maintain teacher numbers at Labour's record level of 53,000. What is he saying now? Is he going to keep that promise?

We have become used to the "a big boy did it and ran away" defence on teacher numbers, but the truth is that Alex Salmond made a promise, and the Scottish National Party has cut teacher numbers by 1,000. When the SNP sneaks out the latest figures tomorrow, the situation is expected to be even worse. Yesterday, Fiona Hyslop came up with a cunning plan—to get rid of 500 more teachers. With teacher numbers dropping, why is Alex Salmond planning to get rid of even more teachers?

I have the figures for 12 SNP-led councils in Scotland, 11 of which have reduced their teacher numbers. Perhaps Alex Salmond will  ensure that they put teacher numbers ahead of vanity projects. I want our young teachers to be given opportunities, but I do not want opportunities to be created by taking 500 of the most experienced teachers out of our schools. That will cost £10 million. Will that £10 million come out of the funding for Alex Salmond's vanity projects, such as his £12 million referendum? No, it will come from councils' school building budgets. Brilliant. If teachers are got rid of, schools will not be needed. No wonder councils have "reacted with fury", to use their words. It is a panic measure. Councils and parents know that we need schools and teachers. When will the First Minister realise that it is Fiona Hyslop, not teachers, who should retire early?

I have indeed looked at third party comment on the proposal to get rid of the most experienced teachers from our schools. A "panic measure", a "desperate attempt", a "shambles" and a "disgrace": outrage has been blasted right, left and centre, and it is no wonder. Let us look at the record. More than 500 primary schools are crumbling, 70 schools are beyond repair, there are 1,000 fewer teachers—[ Interruption. ]

There are 1,000 fewer teachers, and probationer teachers are on the dole. Teacher training has been cut, and the new curriculum is in chaos. The broken promises on class sizes, physical education, nursery teachers and school meals have been condemned by the Convention  of Scottish Local Authorities, and by headteachers, teachers and parents the length and breadth of this country. Is Alex Salmond the last man in Scotland who thinks that Fiona Hyslop is up to the job?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2018)

This week, one of Scotland's leading think tanks reminded us of the First Minister's promise to raise Scotland's gross domestic product growth rate to the United Kingdom level by 2011. Is the First Minister going to keep that promise?

In the First Minister's Brigadoon bunker in Bute house things may not be so bad, but the truth is that in the real world, under his Administration, we face a deeper recession and a slower recovery than the rest of the UK. The promise of matching Scotland's growth to that of the rest of the UK is just another broken promise, is it not? Two months ago, he was still promising to build a rail link to Glasgow airport. Business, trade unions and local government all agreed that that was just what the economy needed, so John Swinney cancelled it. When it comes to the economy, is the First Minister not all talk and no trousers?

If the First Minister presents what is happening in Scotland's construction industry as an example of the success of his Government, he has lost touch with reality to a degree that even I find hard to believe. The ridiculous Scottish Futures Trust has cost 25,000 construction jobs—that is the industry's figure—and cancelling the Glasgow airport rail link will cost another 1,300 jobs. If the First Minister cares in the slightest about growth in the Scottish economy, will he cancel the Scottish Futures Trust and reinstate the rail link?

The fact is this: the Fraser of Allander institute's report says that this is the first time since world war two that Scotland has done worse than the rest of the country in a recession. That is the difference that the SNP is making. If Alex Salmond thinks that the 25,000 construction workers who are looking for work will be impressed by those figures, he is losing it. Indeed, the business community is saying that Alex Salmond is losing it, the trade unions are  saying that he is losing it, economists are saying that he is losing it, his own party is saying that he is losing it and—yes—the people of Glasgow North East said that he is losing it big style last Thursday. Willie Bain, Scotland's newest member of Parliament, is sitting in the public gallery—that says it all. Alex Salmond—

Alex Salmond is losing it. It is time he started listening and it is time he accepted that he is the problem. When will he accept that he is the problem?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2000)

Can the First Minister tell us how much his independence referendum will cost?

The referendum is meant to be the First Minister's flagship policy, but he cannot tell us how much it will cost. The figure, of course, is around £9 million—the Scottish National Party gave the game away earlier this week. For that kind of money, Scotland could have 300 more teachers or 600 more nursery nurses, or two new primary schools. I know what most Scots would rather have. While we are at it, how much is the First Minister spending on his national conversation?

As usual, the First Minister has the Colgate ring of confidence but no answer to the question. In 2007, Nicola Sturgeon said that the national conversation would cost £48,000 and that the rest of the costs would be met from existing resources. I have with me official figures, which add up to £1.8 million. That includes the cost of 13 dedicated staff for the national conversation. A sum of £1.8 million could pay for 58 nurses or a community court to fight crime in Glasgow. It could employ 40 new dentists, with enough change left to be able to have them all round to Bute house to celebrate with a slap-up feed. What about the St Andrew's day party? How much will the First Minister spend on that?

I will provide the answer to my question, as the First Minister does not know it or does not want to share it. The St Andrew's day party will involve £500,000 of fireworks to celebrate an independence white paper that will—frankly—be the biggest damp squib since the joke that he tried to crack a minute ago. Hard-working Scottish families are worried about their jobs and the roof over their heads. Meanwhile, the First Minister spends nearly £12 million of their money on someone to talk to at  dinner, a conversation with himself and a referendum to which we already know the answer.

That is £12 million of Alex Salmond's vanity. Enough is enough—cancel the conversation, cancel the white paper and cancel the rigged referendum. For Scotland's sake, will he do that right now?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1976)

It has been another week of upheaval for our banks. A year ago, the First Minister promised to "strain every sinew" to keep jobs and banks in Scotland. He "called an emergency meeting of the Financial Services Advisory Board". He said that FiSAB was "particularly important at a time such as this."— [ Official Report , 18 September 2008; c 10984, 10988.]  He was to chair FiSAB's meetings. When did FiSAB last meet?

FiSAB last met four months ago, on 1 June, but the First Minister was not at the meeting. He has not met that key body since February. At that meeting and in the report that was published in June, it was said that FiSAB would start to meet regularly. Why has it not met since 1 June?

I have had such discussions with the banks and with the workforce this week. However, the First Minister said: "FiSAB is the key body to look at, promote and enhance the skills of the financial sector in Scotland."— [ Official Report , 15 January 2009; c 14066.]  FiSAB should have met on 29 September, but an e-mail from the Scottish Government's financial services team said: "Hi All We have been contacted today by the First Minister's office advising us that, the First Minister may not be able to attend the agreed FiSAB date of 29 September ... The new proposed date is Tuesday 27 October." That would have meant a month's delay, but a couple of weeks later, an e-mail said: "Sincere apologies in advance—but I'm afraid I am going to have to cancel the next scheduled meeting of FiSAB on Tuesday 27 October at the request of the First Minister." That e-mail rearranged the FiSAB meeting for 9 December, which will be 11 months since the First Minister turned up at a meeting. Will he manage to go along to the next meeting?

I think that the First Minister's problem is that he does not have an answer to my question. Of course Scottish Labour supports any attempts to keep those 1,600 jobs in Scotland. Those are exactly the discussions that I have had this week with the banks and the unions that represent those workers. It is true that the First Minister meets FiSAB throughout the year—he met it in February and he will meet it again in December. The point is that the First Minister promised to strain every sinew for the Diageo workers, but he blew off the chief executive to draw a raffle on television. He  promised to strain every sinew for the bank workers, but he blew off the Financial Services Advisory Board in June, in September and again in October. On 1 June, he was at home in the north-east; on 29 September, he managed to get to a homecoming party at Edinburgh castle; on 27 October, he was at a reception at Stirling castle. He is straining Scotland's patience, but he is not straining his sinews. He has been posted missing again and again. Is the First Minister not the problem—capital T, capital P—yet again?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1953)

I am happy to echo the First Minister's comments about our armed forces and those who serve in them. It is not enough for our First Minister to have a purpose. According to his website, his Purpose—with a capital P—is "to create a more successful country where all of Scotland can flourish through increasing sustainable economic growth." If that is his purpose, why are the Confederation of British Industry, the Institute of Directors, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce and the Federation of Small Businesses all saying this week that the Scottish National Party is doing more harm than good to Scottish business?

I have written to the chancellor to say that he should consider accelerating capital spending, but if and only if the SNP gets its budget sorted out.  It is not just the CBI that says the SNP is getting it wrong, and the disagreement is not just about minimum pricing. The Federation of Small Businesses says that small businesses are receiving much better support from the Labour Government in England than from the SNP in Scotland. The Institute of Directors says that it is disturbed by the cancellation of the Glasgow airport rail link and the cuts to enterprise budgets. When will the First Minister start listening to those organisations?

Labour is already listening to small businesses and we understand their importance in the economy. That is why the Federation of Small Businesses says that small businesses get more support in England under Labour than they get in Scotland under the SNP. This is not just about the public debate about the economy. Today, we read about the First Minister's personal approach to important business meetings. He is "aggressive ... unwilling to listen to reason .... extremely rude"— in fact, those are all the signs of somebody who has lost the plot. That is damning stuff. I do not care whether the First Minister damages his own reputation, but I care whether he damages Scotland's reputation. Does he really think that that is the appropriate way to represent Scotland abroad to companies that employ thousands of Scottish workers?

When the First Minister decides how he is going to answer questions, he should think about the topic—"It's the economy, stupid." It simply cannot be that everyone is out of step except the First Minister. Is it not the truth that Alex Salmond is a banker who got it wrong on the banks; an economist who is getting it wrong on the economy; and a Scottish First Minister who is getting it wrong for Scotland? Never mind "The Purpose"; when will the First Minister realise that he is The Problem—with a capital T and a capital P?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1935)

This week, I have supported the suggestion that the highest salaried public servants should have their pay frozen in 2010-11. I think that the salaries of MSPs and ministers should be frozen next year so that we can lead by example. Does the First Minister agree?

Indeed, it was strongly indicated, but it is good to hear it from the First Minister's own mouth. Three years ago, Alex Salmond did more than strongly indicate—he pledged—that if he was First Minister, he would pay council tax on his first ministerial residence. To fail to do so was to set a bad example. Well, Alex Salmond is First Minister, but he is not paying council tax on Bute house. Why not?

But none of that has changed since the Deputy First Minister described the practice as outrageous. The fact is that the taxpayer pays £22,000 in business rates for Bute house and the occupant pays none of what he promised to. The only tax avoidance that is going on here is the avoidance by the First Minister of paying the tax that he promised to pay. I know that Alex Salmond told voters that he would abolish council tax. Is he doing it one person at a time, starting with himself? [ Laughter. ]

There may be no claim on the parliamentary allowance scheme, but there is a claim of £22,000 on the Scottish consolidated fund. The Prime Minister and the chancellor managed to make that division so that they pay council tax, so I do not understand why the First Minister cannot do so. The rest of Scotland is facing up to the realities of the recession: they are tightening their belts and paying their way. How does the First Minister think they feel when they read that he has dodged the promise that he made on council tax? The week before, they read that they—taxpayers—paid for the First Minister's London hotel suites when he already had a London flat, paid for by the taxpayer, too. The newspapers call that hypocrisy, but is it not just contempt for the Scots who are worrying about their jobs, their pay, their mortgages and paying their way?

First Minister, let us start the debate about the economy and our vision for Scotland. On St Andrew's day, I will debate with you. Why not?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day (S3F-1894)

I thank the First Minister for those words, which I am sure are echoed across the chamber and throughout Scotland. On 5 September 2007 the First Minister was asked a straight question: would he reduce in this parliamentary session class sizes to 18 in primary 1, 2 and 3? For once, he gave a straight answer; he said, "Yes". But that was not true, was it?

Indeed. Twelve out of 13 Scottish National Party-led councils have failed to make progress and have reduced their teacher numbers. That was certainly not the straight answer. Last night on television, Fiona Hyslop was asked five times when the class size promise would be delivered. She could not answer. This morning, Fiona Hyslop did not speak, so Keith Brown was asked when the promise would be delivered. He could not answer. Let us try the organ grinder. Will the First Minister tell us when the promise will be delivered?

As Benjamin Franklin once said, "He that is good for making excuses is seldom good for anything else." The issue is not just about class sizes. A year ago, the First Minister told us that nursery teacher numbers were "substantially increasing". They were not; they were falling. Moreover, in his manifesto, he said that he would "maintain teacher numbers in the face of falling rolls". However, he has cut 1,000 teachers out of our schools. The promises on class sizes, nursery teachers and school teachers—not one of them was true, was it?

I am delighted that we have accurate figures for full-time equivalent nursery teachers in pre-school education. What those figures show is that last year there were 34 fewer nursery teachers and the year before that there were 14 fewer. The numbers are not going up; they are going down.  The First Minister was elected on a false prospectus. In a tight election, he made cynical promises to children, parents, teachers and students—promises that he never intended to keep. Here is how one of those teachers feels: "Think I will send Hyslop a calculator—she obviously does not have one ... and if I could—her P45."—[ Interruption. ]

SNP members can laugh. The teacher continued: "I can just photocopy mine and change the names." The education secretary is making Alex Salmond look like a fool. Will the First Minister make that teacher's day and give Fiona Hyslop her P45?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1870)

The First Minister's budget for next year will rise by £600 million. He chose, for good reasons, to spend some of that budget this year. We all know that he is now trying to claim that there has been a cut. If there is a cut, it is a cut that he has made in his own budget. Is it not time that he took some responsibility for his own decisions and dropped the dodgy accounting for his own purposes?

The First Minister can spin the numbers in any way that he wants to, but the people of Scotland know that he raided next year's budget and is now blaming someone else. [ Interruption. ]

The people of Scotland know that our economy benefited from £37 billion to save our banks, that our budget has been protected from a 10 per cent drop in tax receipts and that the budget is going up, but they also know that we have to tighten our belts. Does the First Minister agree that the first things to go should be programmes that are just not working?

What I heard Gordon Brown say was that programmes that are not working will have to be cut. [ Interruption. ]

Everything has to be looked at. What about the Scottish Futures Trust? Two and a half years and £23 million on, the Scottish Futures Trust has not built a single school or hospital. Today, its chief executive told us that it will be a few years before it is properly up and running. That is about as not working as you can get. Will the First Minister cut the Scottish Futures Trust now to protect front-line services?

There is always somebody else to blame. It is always somebody else's responsibility, and always somebody else's programme that needs to be cut. What is the First Minister's real priority? Is it public services, or his own pet projects? Is it running Scotland, or running a campaign for separation? The national conversation is not working, and support for independence is plummeting, so we should cut that conversation now. I would rather have one more teacher, nurse or apprentice than one more minute of the national conversation. Teachers, nurses and apprentices are our, and Scotland's, priorities. What about the First Minister's priorities?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1855)

Nine hundred Diageo workers—and their families—in Kilmarnock and Glasgow are coming to terms with Diageo's decision to pay them off. Our thoughts are with them. The campaign against the closure involved all parties: trade unions, councils and the communities that are affected. I acknowledge that Mr Swinney harnessed that, to try to create a plan that would change the company's mind. I deeply regret that he was unable to do so. This morning I read widespread criticism of the First Minister for megaphone diplomacy, for grandstanding and for choosing a television appearance over a meeting with Diageo's chief executive. Was the First Minister part of the problem and not the solution?

I agree that the campaign was not lost at the rally. It was lost in the negotiations. The choice to go to a TV studio rather than to a meeting with Paul Walsh must surely have compromised those negotiations. However, let us look forward. What does the First Minister plan to do now to ensure that those men and women have the opportunity to use their skills and experience in new jobs? What will he do to ensure that Diageo contributes to mitigating the damage that it is doing to communities that have served it for 200 years?

I sincerely hope that the Scottish Government will not be found wanting in trying to mitigate the effect of this disastrous decision, but we must ask whether that will be the First Minister's priority. This week, a leaked minute showed Scotland's most senior civil servants totally geared to "meeting the First Minister's aspirations". Are those aspirations to defend and create jobs? No. They are creating "conflict and confrontation" with the United Kingdom Government; "expanding" the national conversation to 14 work streams, each headed up by a director; and making "maximum use of speeches, announcements, summer tours, comms messages and stakeholder engagements" to promote the national conversation. That is not serving Scotland; it is using Scotland.

Here is a simple question. Will the First Minister stop that nonsense now and concentrate on saving jobs and getting our economy growing again?

My question is exactly about how important jobs and the economy are right now, and not only at Diageo in Kilmarnock. A hundred jobs have gone at Alexander Dennis in Falkirk; 350 have gone at Carillion in Tannochside; 300 have gone at T-Mobile in Larbert; 300 have gone at JVC in East Kilbride; 700 have gone at Hewlett-Packard in Erskine; and, of course, 500 jobs are at risk at Bausch and Lomb in Livingston. That has all happened since April, since the civil servants  have been spending their time talking about the national conversation.

All those workers require all our attention and they need their Government's full attention, too. They do not need—on taxpayers' time and money—a campaign for separation that no one wants.

Will the First Minister make his rigged referendum bill redundant now, close down his national conversation and get on with his real job? Then we can all unite behind that effort.

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1827)

The First Minister knows that he has the condolences of the Labour Party to pass on, too. Perhaps members will indulge me in asking them to note that, within the next few minutes, Royal National Lifeboats Institution stations throughout Britain will be paying tribute to the 778 lifesavers lost in the line of duty. Like many others, my constituency, which has stations at Dunbar and North Berwick, owes much to its lifeboat volunteers. Yesterday, the First Minister and his Government were resoundingly defeated in the Parliament over the most important decision that they have had to take. He personally failed to carry the chamber. All the evidence shows that he has failed to carry Scottish opinion. Most Scots believe that the reputation of Scotland has been damaged. Does the First Minister have any regrets about how his Government has handled this matter?

Let us talk about principle and justice. If a single thing characterises what was wrong about how this decision was taken, it is Mr  MacAskill's visit to Greenock prison, which compromised the whole process. Every explanation for it has collapsed. Yesterday, Mr MacAskill said that he did not want a media circus if al-Megrahi stayed in Scotland, so why did he orchestrate one in Greenock? I refer to the Press Association diary from the night before the visit. In between references to the exam helpline and a rehearsal for the tattoo, it states, "Justice Secretary meets Lockerbie bomber", and provides a Scottish Government press officer's contact number. If the First Minister cannot explain—he failed to do so yesterday—why Mr MacAskill had to go to Greenock, can he explain why the media had to go, too?

I am happy to do so because those meetings were not all the same. Although the justice secretary was prepared to go to Greenock to meet the bomber face to face, he chose not to cross the Atlantic to afford the American families the same courtesy. We know that he was prepared to cross the Atlantic earlier this year to go to a Burns supper when he should have been right here with knife crime victims. Does the First Minister now accept that he should have insisted that his justice secretary afforded the same respect to the families of the victims as he did al-Megrahi by meeting them face to face? Would that not have been natural justice?

The issue of principle here is the balance that is struck between compassion for the prisoner, and compassion for the victims, the length of the sentence remaining, and the courts' view of that sentence. At no stage, either yesterday or last Monday, has that issue of balance been addressed. At the beginning of the Lockerbie story is an act of terror. I agree that the principles and integrity of our justice system are exactly our greatest bulwarks against terror, but so, too, are our parliamentary democracy and its integrity. Yesterday, the First Minister lost, in the Parliament. He cannot simply, like the Sid James of minority government, carry on governing, as he said last night he would. Will he at least support my suggestion of a Justice Committee inquiry to look further into the Scottish Government's handling of this matter? We can then find out how, for example, the American families feel about the equivalence of treatment they have received in the process.

It is traditional to begin this response with some amusing words of welcome back from recess, but I fear that circumstances have rather undermined the new-term feeling and I suspect that most of us feel like we have never really been away. Indeed, that sense of one parliamentary term blurring into another might be compounded by the fact that, when we examine the programme for government that the First Minister announced last year, we find that only five of the 15 bills that were announced were taken through the Parliament in that year. Seven of them are still with us and a couple of them have reappeared in this year's programme. Those include the children's hearings bill, which is so incompetent that it has been delayed already—before its announcement in the programme. That must be some kind of record. Looking back, last year's flagship bill was, of course, the council tax abolition bill. It was trailed extensively and with the usual bravado and bluster, but—alas—it was a flagship that was already holed below the waterline. A few weeks later it sank without trace, to the relief of business, trade unions and the families who had faced a 25 per cent hike in their income tax bills. Now that was action to support Scotland's economy. The truth is that this Government's record of delivery on its programmes is poor indeed. It famously brings forward little substantial legislation, and much of that is then delayed, botched or just plain dropped. Therefore, we should take this programme with a large pinch of salt. This year's flagship bill—the referendum bill—was also pre-announced last year. It starts with even less support than the late, unlamented council tax abolition bill had last year. The First Minister's coy hints about multi-options are just game playing, when he should be governing. The test of a Government programme must surely be the extent to which it addresses the crucial matters that face our country. We are in the middle of a recession, so the measure of this year's programme should be how it protects and creates jobs, helps Scots through the economic downturn and prepares us to move ahead when the upturn comes. As lain McMillan of the Confederation of British Industry said earlier this week: "The overriding challenge to our politicians is simple—test all policies against a single benchmark: will it make  Scotland a better place to create jobs and wealth as the economic recovery takes hold?" We should all take that test seriously. The Scottish National Party should take it seriously, but nowhere more so than in the showpiece of this programme for government: the referendum bill. If ever a piece of legislation failed to reach that benchmark, it is that bill. This is about priorities. What good is the referendum bill to the men and women across Scotland who have lost their jobs or live in fear of losing their jobs? What help is it to those who are worried about losing their home? What use is it to the young men and women who fear that they will have no future if they cannot get the apprenticeship or training place that they so badly need?

The action that the chancellor took over the past year to save and preserve our financial services system, including the two biggest banks in Scotland, is the only thing that has given us the opportunity to move forward. We have benefited from it and are part of it, and we should use that to move forward. I will say more about that. As the banking crisis deepened last year, Alex Salmond's analysis and pronouncements became ever more eccentric. From, "Don't panic, our banks are sound," and, "Spivs and speculators did it," to the bizarre claim that the First Minister would extend £100 billion of credit in an independent Scotland—overblown, ill-informed and just plain wrong. It was indeed Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling who took firm and decisive action to reflate the banks and prevent the collapse of our financial system. That action is working. Moreover, it took Labour, on these Opposition benches, to come up with an action plan for how devolution could be used to help Scottish families weather the worst of the global economic storm: fast-tracking capital expenditure; giving more help for home owners facing repossession; restarting public-private partnerships to remove the blockage in public building that was caused by the Scottish Futures Trust; ditching the local income tax; and restoring adult apprenticeship numbers. Those are just five  of the 15 practical suggestions that we made while the SNP stood frozen in the glare of the crisis. That is the core of the economic recovery programme that the First Minister has just boasted about. I am glad that he has implemented it. If he had thought of it, that might have been something to boast about. There is worse, because at every turn the SNP Government has undermined its own economic recovery plans. Yes, it accelerated housing budgets, but it changed, changed again and changed back housing association grant arrangements, so that months went by and housing associations could not build. Accelerated capital investment is a good thing, but the Government then lost another year of school and hospital building in trying to make its Scottish Futures Trust work. In two years, the Government lost £2 billion of public sector infrastructure from the PPP pipeline and tore 20,000 jobs out of the construction industry. The problem is not just in construction, however. Last week, I visited the Borders, the centre of Scotland's textile industry, which employs 17,000 Scots and is worth £1 billion to the economy—and it is paying people off. David Breckenridge, the chair of the Scottish Textile Industry Association, has declared himself staggered at ministers' inability to grasp what is happening and what is needed. Referring to Scottish ministers, he said that "ministers dissemble and refer to an 'economic recovery programme' which is bereft of tangible support for businesses." The First Minister should not have been telling us today what he has done; he should have been announcing new measures on the economy—for example, wage and training subsidies such as those that are already in place in Wales, top-ups for firms that take on new employees, or support for companies that use short-time working to keep staff on through the hard times rather than paying them off. Last week, I also visited Borders College's excellent new campus in Galashiels, where I was told that two thirds of last year's first-year apprentices will not be coming back, because they have been laid off. The First Minister promised that that would not happen. Action should have been announced today to begin to make good the promise made to redundant apprentices that they can complete their training. The adopt an apprentice scheme is just not working.

Accelerating capital investment this year was a good thing, of course—we suggested it. However, the First Minister must first demonstrate that he can turn that money into schools and hospitals; then he can talk about bringing forward further capital investment. I am delighted that the First Minister opened the campus at Galashiels, because it was a Labour-led Administration that gave the college £30 million to build it. That is capital investment doing what it is supposed to do. There are examples of what can be done, and Falkirk Council is showing the way. Its insistence on providing training places for young people with no other prospects, both in a proportion of its own vacancies and in contracts that it lets, is working. It has put 300 youngsters on the path to a future. The Government should be telling us how it will roll that out across councils and across the public sector. Of course, action on the economy does not always require legislation, except when we come to the opportunities presented by the budget bill. Last year, the Government needed two attempts at a budget bill, exactly because it would not agree to measures to support the economy quickly enough. However, in the end, the bill included 8,000 more apprenticeships, £50 million funding for those who lose or face losing their jobs and £60 million for our town centres. We showed last year that we are willing to work towards a budget that serves Scotland's needs. I only hope that, this year, ministers will do that first time round, in good time and in good faith. They should have started today by giving priority to new plans on the economy and jobs. People who face repossession have real fears. Almost three months ago, the First Minister conceded that, yes, Scottish families have less protection from repossession than those south of the border. I offered to bring Labour MSPs back to Parliament over the recess to support the Government and to get the legislation passed as quickly as possible, but that offer was declined. Every day that passes puts more Scottish families at risk and under pressure. When will the debtor protection bill actually become law, not just warm and weaselly words of comfort? Like the First Minister, I spent the summer out and about across Scotland—although I travel a bit lighter and certainly more cheaply. In many towns, I joined knife crime campaigners to collect signatures for our petition. I was taken aback by what I found. Outside one supermarket in  Glasgow, the first three people I stopped all had close family members who had been knife crime victims. The next day in Greenock, the first person I met was the mother of a young man who was murdered a year ago this month. The second was a football team-mate of Damien Muir, who was stabbed by an assailant on bail for a previous knife attack. The programme for government should include action on knife crime, including the introduction of minimum sentences to send the message that anyone who carries a knife will go to jail. That would make Scotland safer. Also during the summer, we had the report on the tragic death of Brandon Muir. I have said that even that tragedy is transcended by that of the 20,000 children who live with drug-dependent parents and the perhaps 100,000 children who live with alcohol-dependent parents. We do not how many children are living the way that Brandon Muir lived. I want us to re-examine the circumstances in which we remove children from harm. I accept that the Government and local authorities are trying to fix the system where there are not enough social workers or procedures are failing, but we also need to change the system. Barnardo's, Professor Neil McKeganey and many Scots agree with me. The programme for government should include action now on that issue. Of course, we will be able to support some of the bills in the programme for government. Colleagues will talk more about those in the course of the debate. On bills such as the budget bill and the alcohol bill, we are willing to look for consensus if the Government is willing seriously to seek it. However, our priorities every day will be: jobs and the economy; crime and support for the victims of crime; and a refusal to accept that children should be at danger in their home in a modern Scotland. Those should be the Government's priorities every day as well.

Today's debate has—apart from a bad start—been wide ranging and often eloquent. The tone has properly been serious, as we are dealing with a serious issue and a serious decision. Many have commented on the various issues that surround Mr al-Megrahi's release, but it is important in closing the debate that we return to the issue at its heart. It is now almost two weeks since the justice secretary announced his decision to release Mr al-Megrahi and return him to Libya. I said then that I believed that that was the wrong decision, and that it was reached by a flawed process. Nothing that we have heard during the past fortnight or this morning has convinced me otherwise. I know that others take a different view, and I respect that, but I disagree with them.

That is quite an important question, to which there are two answers. First, I took a view when the medical evidence had been published, so that I was able to—[ Interruption. ] No—it was in response to the statement. It is also the case, however, that I thought through the decision  seriously in exactly the same way that I believe the justice secretary did, and I came to a different conclusion. All the members who have spoken today have acknowledged that the decision was difficult, but that means that the process by which it was reached had to be unimpeachable. New flaws in the process are emerging every day. The justice secretary took two decisions on the same day: he also rejected the application from Libya under the PTA. I agreed with that decision, and Jack McConnell has made it clear that Labour in Scotland had concerns about the PTA as it was discussed and developed. However, the consideration of the PTA application was dragged out beyond the recommended 90-day period. There was no reason for that, because the application could not have been granted while not one but two appeals—one by al-Megrahi against his conviction and another by the Crown Office against the sentence—were outstanding.

Jack McConnell was clear: those concerns were raised by him as former First Minister and as the leader of Labour in the Scottish Parliament. I have not discussed the issue directly with the Prime Minister. Those concerns were raised properly here in the Scottish Parliament. The issue was compounded by Mr MacAskill's decision to make an unprecedented visit to a convicted murderer in Greenock prison. His justification—that Jack Straw had said that representations must be heard from the prisoner—has proven to be simply false, and a different explanation has appeared every day. However, the documents that were published yesterday made it clear that it was the cabinet secretary who offered to visit the prison and hear representations, as many members, such as Elaine Murray, have quoted chapter and verse to show. The note of that meeting, which has now been released, reveals no argument that could not have been made in writing to the justice secretary, but it clearly shows that the visit compromised the separate but parallel application for compassionate release and the then on-going appeals. Indeed, when Mr MacAskill was talking about that visit today, he clearly stated that he told Mr al-Megrahi that he was considering the two applications together because that was the most efficient way of undertaking the process. The note reveals that Mr MacAskill raised with Mr al-Megrahi the point that his PTA application could not be granted while his appeal continued. It is  impossible to avoid the conclusion that that ill-advised visit compromised the whole process. The prisoner transfer application was turned down because Mr MacAskill accepted that the American families of victims believed that they had been promised that al-Megrahi would serve out his sentence in Scotland. I accept that reasoning, and Jack McConnell has explained why, in his view, it is indeed correct. However, Mr MacAskill has never explained why, if that ruled out transfer to incarceration in Libya, it did not similarly disallow release on licence to freedom in Tripoli. Mr al-Megrahi is still a lifer and is still technically liable to recall. His sentence has not been quashed and he has not been pardoned. There is a glaring logical inconsistency between the two decisions, and it is a cruel inconsistency for those American families in whose name the prisoner transfer application was refused. It could have been resolved by compassionate release in Scotland, but it is clear that Mr MacAskill dismissed that option. It is also clear that Strathclyde Police simply indicated how it would provide security for that option and at no time said that it could, or would, not do so. The option should have been considered. As many speakers have said, compassion is woven into the fabric of our justice system just as it is inscribed on the mace. That is why we have no death penalty, why we have the right of appeal and then further review, why we have parole, and why we have the right of application for compassionate release. However, David McLetchie was right when he said that compassion is tempered by justice, just as compassion and justice are intertwined on the mace. That is why due process requires consideration of the sentence served and any views of the court on that sentence as well as the medical evidence. As Robert Brown and other speakers made clear, we have never heard from the justice secretary that he considered any of those factors, nor have we had any indication of how he balanced them alongside the medical evidence. We can only conclude that he failed to give them due consideration. As for the medical evidence, we know that, at best, it is far less clear-cut than we had been led to believe. The decision was entirely one for Scottish ministers to make. Every document that was released yesterday—even the account of the Libyan minister's statement regarding the Prime Minister and the Foreign Secretary that has Mr Salmond so excited today—made it clear that UK ministers respected the fact that the decision was one for Scotland to make. I have made my judgment on the decision and  the process and I stand by it. I said that the visit to Greenock was unnecessary and I believe I was right. I said that compassion for al-Megrahi had to be balanced against the length of the sentence remaining and I believe I was right. I said that compassion had to be balanced against the enormity of the crime, and the guidance says that I was right. I must admit that I assumed initially that the medical evidence must be incontrovertible and unambiguous, but as it turns out I was wrong about that. On none of those matters has Mr MacAskill convinced the Parliament. The First Minister must address them now. He can use this chance to make the case for his minister's decision or he can use it to make political capital. If he does the latter, it will be because he has lost the argument.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I thank the Cabinet Secretary for Justice for his statement and for making it available in advance. Last week, the Scottish Government made a wrong decision, in the wrong way, with the wrong consequences. The Scottish judicial process has compassion running through it. That is why we have no death penalty, that is why we have the right of appeal and parole, and that is why prisoners can apply for compassionate release. However, that compassion is at every point tempered by justice and by the rights of victims and wider society. That is why the final judgment in this case was rightly the minister's. He had a  requirement to consider an application, but not a duty to grant it. I acknowledge that the decision was a difficult one, but does he understand how much it has angered the silent majority in Scotland? Does he understand how ashamed we were to see our flag flying to welcome home a convicted bomber? Does he understand how astonished we were when he visited a convicted murderer in prison? He quoted Jack Straw to justify that, but what Jack Straw told the Joint Committee on Human Rights was that "A prisoner ... would be invited to make written representations." I have the letter here. Will the cabinet secretary now admit that it was his decision and his alone to visit al-Megrahi? He had no obligation to do so. After that visit, al-Megrahi dropped his appeal. Will the cabinet secretary tell us whether there was any discussion of that in his meeting and—for the avoidance of doubt—will he publish his note of that meeting? How does the justice secretary explain the fact that the media told us a full week before the formal decision exactly how and when al-Megrahi would be released? Surely the prisoner transfer application could have been ruled out because of the two on-going appeals that applied to the case. Instead, however, Mr MacAskill dragged that decision out over the 90-day recommended period and then rejected the application for prisoner transfer because the American families believed that the sentence would be served in Scotland. How does he think those families felt when he acknowledged in one breath that their views that the sentence would be completed in Scotland meant that al-Megrahi could not be released to a Libyan prison, but in the next breath he sent al-Megrahi home to freedom in Tripoli on licence, his sentence not commuted? The cabinet secretary has mishandled the whole affair from start to finish. Between the scenes of triumph in Tripoli and the pain and anger at home and abroad, is there nothing that Mr MacAskill now regrets about his decision and the way in which it was reached?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1805)

This week, a damning report on child protection services in Dundee said: "Inspectors were not confident that all children who were at risk of harm, abuse or neglect, and in need of protection, were identified and received the help and support they needed." We can hardly be surprised at that, given that 23-month-old Brandon Muir was beaten to death by his mother's boyfriend in that city. His mother was a heroin addict and Brandon's short life was brutal and chaotic. What action has the First Minister taken since that tragedy?

As part of the First Minister's answer indicated, cases such as that of Brandon Muir are not one-off cases that happen in one city or another. We can all remember other examples  from the past. We know that 10,000 to 20,000 children in Scotland live with drug-addicted parents and that many more—perhaps up to 100,000—live with parents who are addicted to alcohol. We have heard those same figures from the Scottish Government for two years now. I have been saying for months that we do not need to count those children; we need to find them, and quickly, so that we can protect them. What steps has the First Minister taken in the past two years to find out exactly who those 10,000, 20,000 or 100,000 children are?

The inspection regime, which I think my colleague Peter Peacock introduced and which was agreed by the Parliament—as the First Minister indicated—is an important move forward. It has identified deficiencies in five local authority areas. That said, surely those deficiencies and the fact that 20,000 children are at risk because of their parents' addiction indicates a national problem. Overstretched social workers are doing their best, but something needs to change. That is a job for the First Minister. As the minister with the highest office, he should be working for the most vulnerable children in the country. Will the First Minister support my call for a national inquiry to  devise a new and better child protection system for Scotland?

The First Minister simply misses the point. I do not criticise social workers. I believe that they try—overstretched as they are—to implement the system that we have put in place. The First Minister defends the system with the figures that he cited. My argument is that the system has to change. I will explain. We are about to embark on our summer recess. Scotland's schools are also about to go on summer holiday. Summer is a time for children—as we remember from our childhoods—but not for children such as Brandon Muir. The times in which those children live are brutal, chaotic and joyless—summer or winter. We need to change the balance in terms of leaving those children with their families or keeping them safe. The time has come to challenge and change the orthodoxy that underpins our system and to be quicker to remove and protect. Doing that needs a national debate  and leadership to start it. Does the First Minister agree? If not, why not?

rose—

I agree, as I have already said, that the Parliament has passed much landmark legislation. With the exception of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, which we finally got to yesterday, can Mr Russell point to any landmark legislation that his Government has passed in the past two years?

Will the Scottish Government instruct its civil servants to co-operate with the UK Government in developing the work of the steering group and the Calman commission's proposals?

Ten years ago almost to the day, I had the privilege of being one of the 129 members of the new Scottish Parliament. Whatever happens—and a fair bit has happened in the intervening years—no one can take that moment from those of us who were there. The argument for Scotland to have a greater degree of self-government within the United Kingdom is a political thread that, for Labour, has run from Keir Hardie through J P Mackintosh to Donald Dewar. I am in no doubt about the purpose of the Scottish Parliament. Labour delivered it to be a powerful instrument of social progress, and so it has been. One of the great achievements of our first four years was to launch an assault on the systems of ownership of the land that we love, with the abolition of 1,000 years of the yoke of feudal tenure, the right for communities to buy and manage the land on which they live and work, and the right to roam across the land, which is a commonwealth for all. In only 10 years, the patterns of land ownership have begun to shift away from wealth, privilege and absenteeism towards community ownership and mutualism. Our Parliament was delivered to bring politics closer to the people whom it governs, and so it has done. I remember a young woman telling a harrowing story 10 years ago at a voluntary sector conference. Her husband had been diagnosed with early-onset Alzheimer's and he was incapable of taking decisions with her about the family's finances, so the bank had frozen their joint bank account. Not only did she have to deal with the care of her husband in the face of that most tragic of diseases, but she could not access any of the family's resources. All that, because the laws that  governed such incapacity in Scotland were 400 years old. Even worse, the new law that was required had been drafted 15 years earlier and was ready and waiting, but it had never been enacted because it was Scotland-only legislation and parliamentary time at Westminster had not been found for it. Jim Wallace and I took the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 through the Parliament. The Parliament was able to say, "This is the first piece of major, substantive legislation we will pass." Scotland went from having the most obsolete incapacity legislation to the most modern incapacity legislation in Europe. The law is used by as many as 100,000 Scots every year, so pretty well every family in the country has benefited from it at some time. We could say the same of our world-class homelessness legislation, the first smoking ban in the United Kingdom, and so it goes on. However, closeness means more than just responsiveness in legislation. The public gallery in the Parliament is never empty and surprisingly often it is full. I remember responding to a debate as Deputy Minister for Community Care on the shortage of British Sign Language trainers and hence of signers. I turned up to find hundreds of BSL users from all over Scotland who had come to watch the debate. A watched parliament may still boil sometimes, but at the very least it has to treat the people's issues seriously while they look on. Devolution has demonstrated that it can carry visionary and historic legislation, that it can serve the people's interests, and that it can drive change in Scotland. The Calman report's authors said: "devolution has been a remarkable success". However, they also said: "the present system also has shortcomings." Indeed, our headlines sometimes reveal a Scotland that is lagging behind and not living up to its potential. In primary 5 mathematics and science, we are 20 th and 22 nd respectively in a league table of 36, and we are falling down the list. We are still the sick man of Europe; although we are getting healthier, we are doing so more slowly than is the case in comparable countries. We have more than twice as many drug-related deaths per head as any other European country has. In international reports we are sometimes called the most violent country in the world, with record levels of alcohol abuse, knife crime and murder. It is clear that there is still much to be done. Calman's conclusion was that devolution is lop-sided. All the significant legislative powers that should properly have been devolved to Holyrood were devolved, but the Scotland Act 1998 provided limited devolution of fiscal power.  The Commission on Scottish Devolution represents a remarkable achievement, and I welcome Sir Kenneth Calman to the public gallery. The commission was cross-party and it was driven by the Scottish Parliament, against the will of its executive arm. It was also cross-Administration, with support from the UK Government, and it was cross-sector, with its members' mix of business, voluntary sector and political backgrounds. However, it delivered a unanimous report. At a time when the people's trust in their politicians is as low as we have known it to be, the commission's recommendations are not about giving more power to members of the Scottish Parliament; they are about accountability and giving more power to the people who elect us. The Calman process was characterised by rigour, attention to evidence and the breadth of consensus that the commission commanded throughout the process. To maintain that consensus and momentum, the steering group has quickly established itself and begun to discuss how to progress Calman's proposals. Only the Scottish Government stands aloof and alone, outside the consensus, in defiance of the will of the Parliament—the very body to which it is democratically accountable. We should not be surprised, given that whenever the heavy lifting on devolution is to be done, the Scottish National Party is always posted missing—from the Scottish Constitutional Convention onwards. I paraphrase a saying from that time: when it comes to Calman, the Scottish Government says no, but we are the Parliament of Scotland and we say yes. The Calman process, with its rigour, substance and ability to reach out and build consensus, has simply underlined the emptiness of the vessel that is the national conversation, which has reached out only to the twilight world of the SNP's midnight bloggers. Consultation events are now just platforms for First Minister's speeches of notoriously stultifying length. The national conversation is not even a dialogue of the deaf; it is a monologue of the monotonous—[ Interruption. ]

The national conversation is a national embarrassment and the Scottish Government should put it out of its misery and stop wasting taxpayers' money on it. From the sidelines, the SNP tries to pick and choose elements of Calman to suit itself. A nationalist party is squirming and spinning to avoid proposals that would give the Parliament greater fiscal powers. Perhaps that is because Calman looked carefully at the SNP's core proposal—that Scotland should build its future on oil—and found it to be simply foolish.

Members of this Parliament know that the SNP's core proposal, in fiscal terms, is all about oil—

Calman examined that in great detail and concluded that as oil income can veer wildly from £1 billion to £12 billion per annum in only months, the instability that such a basis would create in the Scottish economy would be an unsustainable risk. The fact is that if we sum all the oil revenues since 1980, they still do not reach one quarter of the funds that were made available last year to our two biggest banks to prevent their collapse. That shows the strength of devolution in the UK—it shares risk and economic instability across the bigger economic unit.

There is no question but that Scotland could go forward as an independent country. The question is whether we would be better or worse off. The answer is clearly that we would be worse off. Calman considered all that at great length and concluded that the fiscal arrangements for the Parliament must balance equity throughout the UK and accountability for spending decisions. That principle led the commission to its proposals on income tax, locational taxes and the power to create new ways of raising taxation. Having clear choices about taxation and expenditure for more than a third of our budget would mean a significant shift in accountability for the decisions that we take in the Parliament. Calman's proposals on income tax are linked to the welcome suggestion that the Scottish Government should have borrowing powers to manage our capital programme. Calman's recommendations would not make politics in Holyrood easier, but they would make it better. Future Scottish Governments would be unable simply to slide by the question of how and to what degree Scots should be taxed. They would be unable to turn any criticism of their budget decisions into a complaint about the settlement that they receive from somewhere else.

I am sorry—I am in the last minute of my speech. Calman's proposals would mean that when Scotland's economy performed well, we would benefit. I began with a reference to our 10 th birthday. Birthdays are not about how big a present we can extract from family and friends. Birthdays are about growing, taking more responsibility, finding our place in the world and giving more back. "This is about who we are, how we carry ourselves." Donald Dewar said that on the first day, and that is what Calman is about: greater responsibility and greater opportunity. The Parliament created the Calman commission and now the Parliament should take forward its recommendations. I move, That the Parliament warmly welcomes the Calman Commission on Scottish Devolution's report, Serving Scotland Better: Scotland and the United Kingdom in the 21st Century , which is based firmly on evidence and engagement with the people of Scotland; thanks the chair and members of the commission for their work on behalf of the Parliament and the UK Government; agrees that the commission's report is a comprehensive response to the remit approved by the Parliament on 6 December 2007; welcomes the establishment of the steering group to take forward the report's recommendations to strengthen devolution and enable the Parliament, through new powers and responsibilities, to serve the people of Scotland better in the United Kingdom; calls on the Scottish Government to make fully available the resources of the Scottish administration to cooperate in this respect, and calls on the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body to continue to allocate appropriate resources and funding to enable the Parliament to support the work of the steering group and consider the recommendations that apply to the Parliament.

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1784)

I would like to start by thanking the Calman commission on behalf of this Parliament for its report "Serving Scotland Better", which was published this week. I look forward to debating the Calman report next week. Today, I want to ask the First Minister about the problems that he seems to have in exercising the powers that this Parliament already has. We have the power to make our bill on climate change the most ambitious in the world. Indeed, the First Minister promised that we would. Has the First Minister not told us that Scotland won the lottery of life in renewables potential and that we are the Saudi Arabia of the seas? The United Kingdom target is to reduce carbon emissions by 34 per cent by 2020. At the moment, the Scottish target is the same. Does the First Minister agree that devolution and our green potential mean that we can be more ambitious than that?

If it is true that, as it stands, this Parliament's Climate Change (Scotland) Bill is the most ambitious in the world, why did Duncan McLaren of the Friends of the Earth Scotland say this morning: "As drafted Scotland's Bill would not lead to tougher targets than the UK's and is therefore not world-leading." He went on to say that "in terms of the key issue of the interim target for 2020, it is the target set under the UK Act that is currently world-leading." That was this morning, after the publication of the delivery plan. Will the First Minister just admit that his climate change bill is following, not leading, the United Kingdom? Then perhaps we can do something about it.

I want to be more ambitious in what we do to tackle climate change but we can do that with the powers that the Parliament already has. This morning, Richard Dixon said: "There is no reason that Scotland should do 34% just because the UK is doing 34%. Devolution is about Scotland being able to play to its strengths and set its own targets." Not only the environmental lobby that thinks that; Ian Marchant, the chair of Scottish and Southern Energy—Scotland's biggest company—today calls for "at least 40 per cent" and says: "every single additional percentage point will see more jobs for Scotland."  The truth is that the Parliament has the power to do better right now. The question is, does the First Minister have the will to do that or is he just all wind?

That is all just bluster and excuse. The First Minister has repeatedly promised us the most ambitious climate change bill in the world, delivered through the Parliament's powers—rightly so, because climate change is the single biggest threat to our future. Churches, students, trade unionists, business leaders, bird watchers, cyclists, gardeners, the Women's Institute and the people at home all look to us to be ambitious on climate change. Many of our schools fly the green environmental flag and our children need us to be ambitious on climate change. This afternoon, the Labour Party will lodge an amendment to the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill that will increase Scotland's target for carbon reduction to 40 per cent by 2020 and direct ministers to seek the advice of the UK's top climate change experts to come up with an action plan for Scotland. Surely we can do better with the advantages that we have in Scotland. Between us, the First Minister and I have the votes to do that deal here and now. Is he ambitious enough for Scotland to do it now?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1764)

Eight months ago, Labour called for specific action to help Scottish families who face repossession of their homes. In England and Wales, Labour introduced a duty on courts and lenders to make repossession absolutely the last resort but, for eight months, the First Minister and his deputy have refused to give Scots the same protection. Only a few weeks ago, a complacent Nicola Sturgeon said: "I simply don't accept the proposition that homeowners in Scotland are any more vulnerable to repossession than homeowners in other parts of the UK." Will the First Minister admit that his deputy was wrong when she said that?

The repossessions group has concluded that Nicola Sturgeon was wrong; that is why it has made the recommendations that it has made. It has been eight months since Labour called for those measures. In only half that time, 500 families in Glasgow alone have lived through the fear and anxiety of a repossession case in court. That is not scaremongering—that is fact. Behind every repossession, there is a real-life story of lives turned inside out, children uprooted  and their education disrupted, and couples struggling to stay together. There are now almost 9,000 families in Scotland in temporary accommodation, which is 11 per cent more than last year. In our newspapers, we see house auctions booming. How many of the properties for auction were family homes? Why has it taken the First Minister and his deputy eight months to act?

It is true that, on the letters page of today's Herald , Nicola Sturgeon finally promises to take some action. I am glad that the lady was for turning, but she has not turned far enough. The letter next to hers, from Mike Dailly of the Govan Law Centre, explains exactly what is needed: free representation for those facing repossession or eviction and changes to the rules of the mortgage-to-rent scheme to make it work. Mr Dailly describes what could be "the best prevention of homelessness service in the world." That would be something to be proud of. Will the First Minister promise to take those measures in addition to the ones that have been promised by Nicola Sturgeon?

I do not know why the First Minister insists on quoting my words back to me. Yes I said it and yes I meant it, but the fact is that we built more social rented houses than he is building. That was still not enough, but it was more. [ Interruption. ]

I am sorry that the First Minister will not see fit to take the best possible measures, which Mike Dailly has suggested, but I am glad that he is now committed to changing the law to give families in Scotland more protection when they are faced with repossession. However, eight months of procrastination means that he has not left enough time to change the law before the end of the current parliamentary term. We can argue about the figures, but every day that we delay means that more Scottish families will lose their homes. I do not want that, and—putting party politics aside—I do not believe that the First Minister wants that either. I want to help. If the First Minister will task his civil servants with preparing the amendments today, Labour members will come back during the summer recess to vote the law through as soon as possible so that we do not have to wait until September. Will SNP members do the same?

Mr Rumbles misrepresents what I said. I said that MPs of all parties were embroiled in the scandal and that some had paid a heavy price, and rightly so. My point was that the claims about the Tories revealed the kind of lifestyle that seems to pass as normal in Conservative circles. That is a different point altogether.

Is Mr McLetchie seriously defending this morning's political posturing on the basis of hypothetical debates that we might bring forward in 2014? How pathetic is that? Why does he disagree with Mr Fraser, who is sitting next to him, who made it very clear two years ago what he thinks about this kind of pathetic posturing?

Presiding Officer, "The reality is that no matter what the Parliament resolves at 5 o'clock, it will mean nothing whatever. This is a massive exercise in self-indulgence ... It means nothing."— [ Official Report , 14 June 2007; c 704-705.]  Those were Murdo Fraser's withering words on parliamentary posturing. He was talking about Patrick Harvie, but today the self-indulgence is all Annabel Goldie's. This debate has nothing to do with Scotland's interests and everything to do with the perceived interests of the Tories. Nye Bevan said in 1951: "The Tories, every election, must have a bogeyman. If you haven't got a programme, a bogeyman will do."  Here is Annabel Goldie: "arises the shadowy spectre of an unelected éminence grise—Lord Mandelson ... omnipotent, absolute ... unchallengeable." What a lot of florid, melodramatic guff—a Mills and Boon of a press release and a bogeyman instead of a programme. The people of Scotland know what the Tory programme is because they have suffered it before.

The answer is absolutely clear, but it is certainly the case that Mills and Boon sells florid, melodramatic guff, and that is exactly what that press release is. The people of Scotland know what a Tory programme is. Thirty years ago the Tories came to power and began to slash and burn our public services. Twenty-five years ago the Tories took on our mining communities and destroyed them: they closed the pits, turned their police force on the miners and tried to starve them into submission. Twenty years ago the Tories imposed the poll tax on Scotland: they set the bailiffs on our people, they pushed them into debt that some Scots still suffer to this day and they would not back down until there were riots in Trafalgar Square. In 1992, Scots were paying interest rates of 15 per cent while one financier made £1 billion in a single day by short selling not a bank, but Britain itself, and the Tories gambled $27 billion to shore up the pound.

Under the Tories the people of Scotland serviced and suffered the consequences of the way in which this country was mismanaged. The Tories dare to talk of a broken Britain and smoking ruins when they scarred Scotland, tore out its heart and set it against itself. The only thing that has saved any Tories in Scotland is this Parliament. There they are, the Scottish Tory survivors huddled together in the lifeboat Holyrood. After 10 years, they think that they have spotted land at last, but for the Scottish Tories there is no safe harbour in Scotland; they are not welcome here. In 12 years their recovery amounts to a single Tory member of Parliament.

No, sorry. That Tory MP has spent thousands publishing thousands of photographs of himself—he is here, he is there, he is everywhere. However, we are not fooled: there is still only one Tory MP in Scotland. Annabel Goldie is right that the MPs expenses scandal has poisoned British politics. Every major party has been embroiled in it, and some MPs have paid a heavy price, as they should. However, it has revealed the everyday concerns of average Tories—their country houses, moats, planting an orchard on their estate, the servants quarters and the ducks quarters. That gives the lie to the story of a changed party that David Cameron has spun. The Tory party is still the party of privilege and of the few—it has not changed. It is no wonder that David Cameron thinks that he can work with that other Margaret Thatcher fan, Alex Salmond. That is all a long way from the hug a hoodie and hug a husky photo calls. Yesterday, the Tories' health spokesman gave the game away. Cuts of 10 per cent would mean cuts of £3.5 billion in Scotland. Will Annabel Goldie tell us what she wants to be cut? Is it schools, hospitals or care of the elderly? What is it to be?

Parties must be judged on their track records. We have a track record of investment in public services; the Tories' track record has always been to cut. Someone once said: "A politician thinks of the next election; a statesman, of the next generation." The debate is about the next generation. In the previous Tory recession, I was a teacher in a school in this city. I saw the spirit, the hope and the life drained from the young people in that school, because they believed that they would never find a job and that society had no place for them. Even the best of them believed that there was no point in trying.

No—I am sorry; I am in my last minute. A whole generation was lost through the politics of doing nothing in a recession, letting industries die and saying that unemployment was a price worth paying.  Labour is doing what is needed in the downturn to save the economy, to protect jobs and to support people who are in debt or who are unemployed. Labour is investing more, not less, in our young people and in their skills and education. Labour is strengthening rights at work, not reducing them. Labour is supporting the economy, not starving it as David Cameron would. This morning, we see from National Institute of Economic and Social Research figures that that approach is working. Scotland needs politicians who are focused on the next generation and not simply on the next election, the next headline or the next parliamentary stunt. Labour will fight to ensure that Scots are supported through the downturn. A general election will come, and then we will fight the Tories and their nationalist acolytes for every vote. That is in the interests of Scotland.

When the Scottish Government asked whether it could accelerate capital investment to stimulate the Scottish economy, did the Treasury say yes or no?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1745)

Last week at First Minister's questions, the First Minister was asked seven times about absconds from the Scottish open prison estate. In seven long-winded and repetitive replies, not only did he fail to answer any of the questions, but he did not see fit to mention what he already knew—that yet another prisoner had gone on the run. Does the First Minister believe that he was being open and transparent with Parliament?

I am glad that the First Minister has seen fit to refer himself on the matter to that independent panel of advisers, although I thought that he did so rather gracelessly. His accusation that my complaint was "publicity-driven rather than procedural"  was not just wrong, but—as is so often the case with the First Minister—it missed the point. My complaint was one of principle: that the First Minister should treat this Parliament with respect. I am not the only one who is concerned. At least one commentator concluded last week that the First Minister's Government "bore the hallmarks of an administration that is not up to the job or cares not a jot for its responsibility to protect and inform the public. Or both." Presiding Officer—[ Interruption. ] I hear Mr Crawford asking, "Only one?" No, I fear that there is not only one such commentator, but time does not permit me to read them all. Many commentators expressed concern about how straight the First Minister was being with Parliament last week. Will the First Minister give a commitment today to treat this Parliament and the public with respect in the future?

It is not the word of the chief constable that I have difficulty accepting sometimes. Tayside Police released the news of last week's absconded prisoner a few hours after my exchanges with the First Minister—a day after Tayside Police and ministers knew that the prison had failed to return. The ministerial code states plainly that  "Ministers should be as open as possible with the Parliament and the public." The First Minister must surely have known that he would be asked about open prisons last week. Did he ask Tayside Police whether it had any objections to his informing Parliament, at First Minister's question time at 12 noon, of the abscondment?

Is operational independence the reason why it took Mr MacAskill from the Monday, when Brian Martin absconded, until the Thursday to try to find out what had gone wrong? That is yet another question to which the First Minister has failed for two weeks now to give an answer. Let us return to the real issue, which is trust. Last week, representing us at the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, the First Minister said: "Trust is an essential quality and once lost it is not easy to rebuild. ... trust is the lifeblood of a decent society and a true currency in a democracy." However, trust is not just a matter of claims for food, home cinemas, moats or duck islands. Does not the First Minister understand that every time he is less than straight with Parliament, he demeans his office, and that every time he defies the will of the chamber, he undermines Parliament? Above all, does not he understand that every time he breaks another promise in the chamber he shows that he just cannot be trusted?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you advise me on the obligations on ministers to provide full information when they respond to questions in the chamber? Earlier today, as you will recall, the First Minister and I had a robust exchange on absconds from the open prison estate. I find it hard to believe that he was not aware at that point that a life prisoner had failed to return to Castle Huntly yesterday. The prisoner had absconded; a fact that the First Minister did not see fit to mention in passing. That seems a clear failure to observe the obligation on ministers to provide comprehensive answers. At the very least, I expect Mr MacAskill to make a statement—very shortly—to explain how this has come about.

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1729)

Last week, I asked the First Minister twice whether the gunman who strolled out of Castle Huntly prison 10 days ago should have been in an open prison in the first place, and the First Minister twice failed to answer my question. In light of the statement by his Cabinet Secretary for Justice yesterday, will the First Minister now answer that question? Should a dangerous convicted gunman with a history of violence and escapes have been in an open prison barely three years into a 10-year sentence?

I was in the Parliament listening to Mr MacAskill making his statement, which—like the First Minister's response last week and his response today—simply reeked of complacency. Yesterday, Mr MacAskill told us that he had contacted the Scottish Prison Service last Thursday to ask it to review the circumstances of Brian Martin's transfer to an open prison. I wonder whether he did that before or after I raised the matter at First Minister's question time. Whatever, Mr Martin had absconded three days earlier, on the Monday. What was Mr MacAskill doing for three days with a dangerous and violent criminal  on the run? Why did it take three days for him to get round to asking what had gone wrong?

As usual, the First Minister is barking—up the wrong tree. The issue is not the number of absconds; it is what went wrong in a particular case. It is groundhog day because of an answer that was read out three times last week and once again this week. Yesterday, Mr MacAskill said: "The SPS has apologised to me for what appears to have been a failure in its information-sharing processes."— [ Official Report , 27 May 2009; c 17836.]  The SPS has apologised to Mr MacAskill. Why is he not apologising to the Scottish public, who naively expect their Cabinet Secretary for Justice to keep violent criminals in jail? What about the First Minister? He was going to resign if we did not stop being nasty to Mr MacAskill. He would huff and puff and blow the house down. We have heard it all before—instead of throwing his toys out of the pram, why does he not throw his Cabinet Secretary for Justice out of his Cabinet?

It is a very welcome improvement. I welcomed it last week—the first time that the First Minister said it, I welcomed it; the second time that he read it out, I welcomed it; I did that the third time that he read it out. I welcome it again today. This is about the complacency of Mr MacAskill's response, the full measure of which we saw when he called the accidental release of a violent prisoner "a glitch in the system". What about the other glitches? Missing the knife crime summit: was that a glitch? Failure to control knife sales: was that a glitch? Hundreds of cases being delayed in our High Courts: is that another glitch? Ditching community courts: was that a glitch, too? Telling Scotland's criminals that prison is "a skoosh": was that a glitch in the system? Look at the headlines: "MacAskill 'on the run'", "MacAskill under fire", "Sack him now." This is not a "glitch", "gaffe", "bungle" or "fiasco". When will the First Minister admit that his Cabinet Secretary for Justice is the glitch in the justice system and do something about it?

I heard "Good Morning Scotland"—I was there, so I know what was said. I have checked how Cathy Jamieson dealt with those issues, particularly the issue of Reliance and prison absconding. I will tell the chamber how she responded: she came to the chamber and apologised. I am willing to listen to the First Minister apologise now.

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1708)

On Monday, convicted gunman Brian Martin got up and walked out of Castle Huntly open prison. He is yet to be recaptured. Why was a man with a long record of violence and of fleeing justice being held in an open prison in the first place?

When he walked out of the open prison on Monday, Brian Martin was just three years into a 10-year sentence for firing a gun during a fight in a house in Fife. His previous offences include a string of armed robberies and threatening police with a sawn-off shotgun. This is a man who was once dubbed the most dangerous man in Britain. Will the First Minister agree with me that Brian Martin should not have been in an open prison in the first place?

I am not entirely sure about the arithmetic there—

Although the figures on the reduction in the number of absconds are welcome, that misses the point. Back in March last year, the justice secretary said: "every abscond is one too many." Surely this abscond, Brian Martin, is the one too many. Two years ago, Robert Foye absconded from Castle Huntly and viciously attacked a young schoolgirl. Following that, Mr MacAskill said that there was now "a clear presumption against returning a prisoner to the open estate if they have previously absconded."— [ Official Report , 26 March 2008; c 7308-9.]  This is not the first time that Brian Martin has gone on the run, is it? He has had previously to be pursued using roadblocks and sniffer dogs, yet he was still housed in an open prison. Is it not the truth that Mr Salmond and Mr MacAskill have not done enough to protect the public since the last such case?

I have already welcomed the improvement shown by the statistics, but the statistics also show that a particularly dangerous violent criminal is on the loose. It would be bad enough if Mr MacAskill let the public down in that way occasionally, but hardly a day goes by without another fiasco: he missed the knife summit to go to a pub in Canada, defied Parliament to cancel community courts and abandoned tough action on antisocial behaviour. We found out this week that hundreds of cases in the High Court are being delayed and that police officers are being trained in the dark at Tulliallan to save on electricity bills. He persists—[ Interruption. ]

Kenny MacAskill also persists with the madness of ending all six-month sentences. He has failed to protect the public from Brian Martin; will Mr Salmond now protect the public from him and admit that his justice secretary is just not up to the job?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1686)

This afternoon, the Parliament will spend time debating Scotland's relationship with the United States of America and Canada. Back on 23 January, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice did his bit by visiting Canada. The visit coincided with the knife crime summit here at home. Does the First Minister think that his Cabinet Secretary for Justice's time was better spent in Canada than at the knife crime summit in the Parliament?

All those things were, of course, discussed at the knife crime summit. The question is about the priorities of the Cabinet Secretary for Justice. Not everyone was sure that the visit to Canada was the top priority. We have secured, under freedom of information, an e-mail from one of the cabinet secretary's civil servants who was involved in planning his Canada trip and getting him slipped—relieved of parliamentary duties. It says: "I am just a little concerned that after all the hassle" that we have had  "getting him slipped we only have a few minor things for him to do on the Friday". Friday was the very day of the knife crime summit and the e-mail was written less than two days before the trip. That Friday, the victims of knife crime were in the Parliament trying to ensure that others would not have to suffer the same pain and loss. Why on earth did the First Minister allow Mr MacAskill to skip that for a junket in Canada?

I thought that Mr MacAskill, as the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, was the minister responsible for dealing with knife crime. It is fair to say that, in the end, Mr MacAskill managed to fill some of his Friday in Canada: he made an official visit to a pub. It was the Duke of Somerset in Toronto, and he met Steve MacTavish, the clan chieftain of Toronto. He then got in a decent three hours' rest before his appointment with the "Great chieftain o' the puddin-race" at a Burns supper. He would have needed his rest because the organisers warned in the e-mails that, on arrival, he would be "plunged instantly into a very crowded cocktail party". No worries, though, because after the formalities "the evening lapses into informal jollity. It's going to be fun." For too many Scots, the word "plunge" evokes not cocktail crowds but death or injury by a blade. Mr MacAskill should have been at the knife crime summit. Will the First Minister apologise for the fact that his responsible minister chose jollity and junketing instead?

It is true that I was not at the knife crime summit. Mr Salmond was invited to the summit too, and he was not there either. I assure him that Labour members take the issue very seriously. Some 45 per cent of homicides in Scotland involve a blade, but 71 per cent of convicted knife thugs do not go to jail and 65 per cent of those who go to jail get less than six months—and the First Minister wants to set them free. This is how seriously we take the issue: Labour believes that a person who carries or uses a knife should go to jail. The Tories believe that, too. If the First Minister agrees with us—right here, right now—then knife criminals will know that they are going to jail. It is his call. Will the First Minister support mandatory jail sentences for knife crime, so that we can deliver what the people of Scotland want?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1668)

We in the Labour Party echo those words of celebration of the 10-year anniversary of the institution. However, the First Minister and his Cabinet also found time this week to slap themselves on the back for their mid-term report. They said that it was "a fantastic record of policy delivery". We can picture the scene: "Well done, John Swinney; great job, Kenny MacAskill; great job, Fiona Hyslop—terrific job." Did they find time to think about the 1,000 teachers who have been cut from our schools, the 1,000 apprentices who have been made redundant and who are still waiting for their training guarantee or the 20,000 construction workers who are on the dole because of the First Minister's failure to build schools and hospitals? Some of those people might be watching today, because they are certainly not at work. Can the First Minister look them in the eye and tell them how well he is doing?

Was that the answer? I have the First Minister's list of so-called achievements. It probably looked good when he was writing it down, but it does not bear much examination. Number 30 states that the Government has  "Reviewed modern apprenticeship" programmes—he means that he cut them. I like number 41, which states, "Developed North Sea super-grid". How did I miss that? Where is he hiding it—in the basement of Bute house? Not so much wired to Norway—more like wired to the moon. Number 28 states that the Scottish Futures Trust has been "achieved". Now he really is having a laugh at our expense. In two years, the SFT has delivered two meetings, one e-mail and not a single school or hospital. Does the First Minister really consider the Scottish Futures Trust to be an achievement?

The First Minister missed out the first-time buyers without their £2,000; the students with the debt that the SNP promised to ditch; the carers who are still waiting for their funding; and the children in classes whose size the SNP promised to reduce. He did not mention the teachers on the dole or the pensioners means tested out of the central heating programme. He did not mention his local income tax that has just been ditched. So many promises broken in so little time; I do not have time to go through them all. Is that not why one of our papers today asks of the First Minister's record whether it has been "just all big talk from a wee man"?

There are two signs of desperation in politics. [ Interruption. ]

One sign of desperation is to tell the electorate lies in order to get their votes; that is what local income tax is about. The second is when the First Minister is reduced to reading out poll results, especially when he bought and paid for the polls. Let us go back to what really matters to the people of Scotland. The Scottish Building Federation says of the achievement that is the Scottish Futures Trust that it has destroyed 20,000 jobs. Ron Hewitt of the Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce called it a "scandal" and said that it could cost another 15,000 jobs. Labour is doing all that it can: 15,000 jobs for young Scots in the budget package and, yesterday, 11,000 jobs secured and 1,000 more created on the Clyde. Thanks to the First Minister's Futures Trust, he is destroying Scottish jobs faster than Margaret Thatcher did 30 years ago. Does he really think that that is something to be proud of?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1646)

Yesterday, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing outlined to Parliament how Scotland's national framework for responding to an influenza pandemic is being implemented and is working. I agree with the First Minister: it is clear that the United Kingdom is one of the best prepared countries in the world. However, as he said, last night the WHO raised its alert level to phase 5. Yesterday, the health secretary reported that 32 cases in Scotland remained under investigation. Will the First Minister update us on that figure and on the status of those cases?

Some cases in Scotland have remained under investigation for several days; I appreciate the update on those from the First Minister. What is the timescale for a determination to be made? What is the difference between a possible case and a probable case? Containment is serving us very well, but at what point does that strategy have to move on in a situation which is fast moving, as the First Minister says.

Yesterday, the health secretary gave strong and very welcome reassurances with regard to the stockpiling of antivirals throughout the UK. Given the change in alert level to phase 5, will those antivirals now be moved from central stockpiles to more local distribution points?

We can be pleased that the framework has worked, as the First Minister has indicated, and we hope that the outbreak has been contained. The framework requires preparations to be made, and those have served us well. The First Minister referred to a meeting that is to be held later today of the Scottish Cabinet committee on civil contingencies. With the alert level now at 5, what plans, beyond the direct health measures that are in place—which he outlined today, as his health secretary did yesterday—are now being made for wider civil contingencies?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1623)

The whole country wants to see all politicians, all parties and all sectors working together to help hard-working families through the global economic downturn. Yesterday's United Kingdom budget included £400 million for Scots seeking work, pensioners paying their fuel bills, and families bringing up children. It included new support for Scotland's oil and gas industry and for our renewable energy industry. It also showed that the Scottish budget will, in the teeth of a recession, grow by £2.2 billion over the next two years. Can the First Minister confirm that?

Last week, the First Minister was caught out by the old trick question: what do you get if you divide by zero? The correct answer is that the question is meaningless—and so is his budget arithmetic. Since November, I have been saying that the First Minister's budget would in the next year increase, and that in the year after that it would increase. So—let us do a bit of reckoning, and let  us keep it simple. The First Minister's budget is £33.3 billion in 2008-09, £34.8 billion in 2009-10, and £35.5 billion in 2010-11. Is his budget going up, or is it going down?

The First Minister can play around with his annually managed expenditure, his total managed expenditure and his departmental expenditure limit until he gets the figure he wants. However, any honest appraisal of the figures shows that his budget is still going up year on year, increasing by more than £2 billion in two years. The real question is this: What choices will the First Minister make with that budget? Labour at Westminster has promised to safeguard front-line services and to maintain budget increases of 5 per cent for local health services and 4 per cent for schools. Will the First Minister make the same promise for Scotland?

Were we to cancel Trident, we would cut 11,000 jobs in the west of Scotland. Is that really the First Minister's brilliant idea to save the Scottish economy? We know the choices that the First Minister makes because he has been making them for two years. There have been cuts in teacher numbers—his cuts—and cuts in school building programmes, which are his cuts. Twenty thousand construction jobs have gone already and there have been cuts in housing completions—his cuts. There have been cuts in apprenticeship programmes—his cuts—and pensioners have been cut out of the central heating programme by means testing. Those are his cuts. Those cuts have nothing to do with next year's budget, the year after's budget or the budgets in 2013 and 2014. They have got nothing to do with Westminster; the person who is responsible for them is right here. The First Minister's budget is going to grow by £2.2 billion. When will he grow up, take responsibility and get on with the job?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the week. (S3F-1601)

The Labour Party, too, sends its condolences to the families, friends and workmates of those who have been lost in the tragedy, and we join the First Minister in thanking those who have been involved in the rescue and recovery operation. We often debate the oil and gas industry in the chamber. We argue about its future, its price, who owns it or who should own it, how it should be taxed and how that tax revenue should be spent or saved. We even argue about the extent to which oil and gas should be replaced by cleaner or less finite sources of energy. Meanwhile, we expect the tens of thousands of people who work in the North  Sea to continue to deliver oil and gas day in, day out. Perhaps we would do well to reflect more often on the difficult conditions in which they do that work and the risks that they take, in an industry that is at the heart of our economy, to produce a commodity that flows pervasively throughout our society. That we do not do so is testament to an astonishing safety record in the industry, which makes tragedies such as yesterday's rarities. Of course, offshore travel—usually by helicopter—is an intrinsic part of the work of the men and women who work in the North Sea, and their helicopter journeys have always been recognised as one of the most hazardous aspects of their jobs. I have travelled offshore just once; others in the chamber have done so more often. Anyone who has done so knows how meticulous and how relentless is the approach to health and safety in the oil and gas industry. That, however, is no consolation at all to those who have suffered the loss of a loved one, and our thoughts and prayers are with them today. Those who lose their lives just doing their job are special to us all. We remember them each year on workers memorial day, later in this month. Thirty-two workers lost their lives doing their jobs in Scotland last year, so the scale of this tragedy is indeed very significant. Does the First Minister agree that, beyond the immediate recovery, the important thing is to find out definitively what happened yesterday and why the crash was so catastrophic? Will he ensure that all concerned can do everything in their power to support that objective? How quickly does he think that findings or interim findings might become available?

I thank the First Minister for allowing early sight of his statement. This afternoon it is surely most important to welcome the fact that the assets of the customers, savers and mortgage holders of the Dunfermline Building Society have been protected. Secondly, we welcome the guarantees that have been given to branch staff, and, finally, we welcome the continuation and, we hope, development of the Dunfermline brand in the mutual sector. We agree with the First Minister that the responsibility for the Dunfermline's position rests with the management of the institution. However, the First Minister persists in suggesting that there could have been a better outcome. Exactly what that outcome would have been remains unclear. We know that the Scottish Government was willing to make £25 million available, but the judgment of the Bank of England, the FSA, the Treasury and commentators was that even with a capital injection of £60 million the society would not have had a long-term future without the backing of a larger society and the removal of its toxic debt. As we now know, the net financing required was £1.6 billion. The First Minister seeks further details of the value-for-money case for the FSA's solution. Will he also publish details of the range of proposals that the Scottish Government made, the mechanisms that the Government proposed and legal advice that it was given in that regard? In recent days the First Minister suggested that financing should have been made available to enable the Dunfermline Building Society to continue. Was he arguing that £1.6 billion should have been made available to the very management that had got the society into the mess that it was in? It might be the case that most of the net financing will be recovered in the long run, as the First Minister said, but does he acknowledge that this is a rescue package that,  once again, was made possible only by access to the larger resources of the UK Treasury?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1574)

I did get a letter from the First Minister a few minutes ago, and I am happy to have a look at it, but I make no apology for standing up for a young apprentice last week. I am delighted that, on Friday, he heard that he would be able to complete his apprenticeship. So is his dad—he thanked me at the weekend. There are dozens of people in the position that Lewis Doig was in last week, with an uncertain future, and we need the apprenticeship guarantee to be made good for them all. Today, I want to ask about another of the First Minister's promises. The SNP manifesto said: "We will maintain teacher numbers in the face of falling school rolls to cut class sizes". Why has the First Minister not done that?

This is not a question about England, Wales or Northern Ireland; it is a question about a promise that was made in Scotland to the parents and pupils of Scotland. The man who promised to maintain teacher numbers is right here in the chamber, and he is the one who is breaking that promise. Will he tell us what he is going to do to put that right?

If the First Minister is not blaming Westminster, he is blaming councils. However, this is not about a promise made by council leaders in Glasgow, Aberdeen, Renfrewshire or anywhere else; the man who promised to maintain teacher numbers is Alex Salmond, and Alex Salmond is breaking that promise. When will he put it right?

We are not making progress on the promise. In four years, Labour increased teacher numbers by 2,000; in half that time, the SNP has wiped out half of that progress. We are going backwards. I do not know about the concordat, but the First Minister's school report is certainly a disaster. Teacher numbers: failed. Class sizes: failed. School building programme: failed. Physical education in schools: failed. Free school meals: failed. Nursery school teachers: failed. The buck stops on the SNP front bench. Who will take the blame—the First Minister Alex Salmond or his hapless cabinet secretary Fiona Hyslop?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1547)

During the budget negotiations, I suggested to the First Minister a summit of apprenticeship providers as part of a Labour package of support in the economic crisis. I welcome the announcement earlier this week that that summit will take place on 28 April. Sadly, a further increase in unemployment was reported yesterday. Does the First Minister agree that that simply means that we must redouble our efforts to ensure that everyone—and especially our young people—is given the skills to make their way in life?

It is true that we must strain every sinew. The better, or less bad, employment situation puts us in a good position to make good another promise that the First Minister made during the budget negotiations—the apprenticeship guarantee. That is a personal guarantee to every apprentice that, if they are made redundant, they will still be able to finish their training. My constituent Lewis Doig from Tranent is in exactly that situation—he is to be made redundant and he does not know what to do. He is not alone. Lewis needs that guarantee now. Where should he go for it?

I very much welcome the guarantee, of course. I have already written to Fiona Hyslop, who is the responsible cabinet secretary, about Lewis Doig. In her reply, which I received yesterday, she said that he should contact his training provider, then Skills Development Scotland and then partnership action for continuing employment, then visit a website and then ring round his local colleges. All those bodies and institutions existed before the First Minister gave the guarantee. Lewis is 19, has spent almost four years as an apprentice and is three months away from being a qualified joiner. However, next month, he will be out of work and his efforts will be wasted. He and all those like him do not need call sheets of places to go; they need someone whose job it is to set them up with the places that they need to finish their training. Can I tell Lewis that the First Minister will sort that out so that he can finish his training as promised?

My question is exactly about how quickly a promise that was made in the Parliament is being introduced—not quickly enough for my constituent. It is exactly about the respect that we have for young Lewis. The measure of our response to the economic crisis will be the extent to which we protect the jobs and futures of people such as him. Today, Lewis is very close to being a qualified tradesman with a future of his own and a big contribution to make to Scotland's future. I do not want him to be part of next month's unemployment figures and I do not believe that the First Minister does either, but he will be unless the First Minister makes good his guarantee now. The First Minister has 5,000 officials; will he give just one of them the job of matching such young apprentices with the opportunity to finish their training?

I will say to my constituent that, when the First Minister was given the chance to lift him up, he chose instead to try to put others down.

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1526)

I note, too, that the Scottish budget will continue to grow next year and the following year. I want to ask about the use to which the Scottish Government puts that money. I admit that I do not know Ellon academy, although the First Minister does. I read in one of today's newspapers that the buildings at Ellon academy are past their sell-by date, that pupils will not eat in the cafeteria and that they have to cross a busy road to get to classes, because the school has a split campus. I also read that a new school would have been built under the plans of the previous Labour-led Scottish Executive. The First Minister's fiscal dogma is putting Scottish kids in danger in his constituency. Does he think that that is okay?

The First Minister is good at taking credit for other people's work. The schools to which he refers were commissioned under the  previous Executive. A plan to refurbish Ellon academy was made under the previous Executive. Official figures make clear that it takes at least three years to get a school built from the date it is commissioned. To date, the First Minister has not commissioned a single school. Even if he says that he will pay for a brand new Ellon academy this very afternoon, it will not be built until 2012. Is not the First Minister's promise to match Labour's school building programme brick for brick now past the point of no return?

I am delighted that the First Minister has seen fit to repeat his promise to deliver 250 schools by 2011. If I understood and accept his answer, he said that, far from commissioning no schools in two years, he has commissioned one. When will he rebuild Ellon academy?

The business cases for some of the schools that the First Minister mentioned were agreed by the previous Executive. Some have been built by local authorities, using their own resources. None has been planned, commissioned, developed and built by the Scottish Government. The Government's position on this issue is just like its pledge on class sizes—it has made progress towards the target and will get there by 2099. The First Minister has broken every promise that he has made on education. He broke his promise on nursery teachers. This week, another pledge—to provide two hours per week of physical education in schools—was broken. The pledge on teacher numbers has been broken. It will take 90 years for the pledge on class sizes to be met. The pledge on school building has also been broken. Every one of the Government's promises on education is collapsing, brick by brick. The truth is that 832 of our schools need to be rebuilt and refurbished. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning is failing Scotland's children. When will the First Minister finally realise that she is past the point of no return?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1500)

Will the First Minister remind us why he decided to drop his bill to introduce a local income tax?

The financial reason that the First Minister gave is now his single transferable excuse for every failure on his Government's part. Let us return to the other reason, which the Scottish National Party made clear when it ditched the local income tax. Mr Swinney said, "we cannot put together a stable majority ... to steer" the plans through the Parliament. He continued: "Indeed, Parliament's vote in December last year made it clear that"— [ Official Report , 11 February 2009; c 14896.]  the Parliament does not support the local income tax. Tonight, the Parliament will reject the First Minister's referendum bill in exactly the same way. Will he respect the will of the Parliament again and kill the referendum bill too?

The First Minister is absolutely right: in May last year, Labour offered him a chance to hold his referendum, fair and square. He lost his nerve and slipped away from that opportunity. When the chance was offered, he was found wanting; the chance has gone. I believe that, right now, Scotland wants us all to concentrate all our efforts on protecting jobs and supporting Scottish families and communities through the global economic downturn. Does the First Minister really think that his referendum bill is a good idea during that downturn?

I remind the First Minister of his answer to our offer a year ago of a referendum, fair and square. His answer was no. He always puts narrow party politics ahead of what is best for Scotland, and never more so than in these times. He has failed on so many issues: local income tax;  the Scottish Futures Trust; class sizes; police numbers; house building—the list goes on. On this issue, however, he will not accept his failure, and so diverts the energies of his Government away from the real concerns of Scots, who worry about their jobs, their mortgages and their children's future. Right now, Scotland needs the referendum bill like it needs a hole in the head. I ask the First Minister again whether he really thinks that a referendum bill is a good idea during these times. If he does not, will he put Scotland first for once, and drop the bill?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1472)

Indeed; probably no words can express a parent's pain on the loss of a child, but the thoughts and prayers of Labour members are certainly with David Cameron and his family today. This morning, the Royal Bank of Scotland announced the largest loss in Scottish and, indeed, British corporate history. We also discovered today that the outgoing chief executive of RBS is already, at 50 years old, drawing a pension of £650,000 per year. Does the First Minister think that that is right?

It is, indeed, the case that Fred Goodwin's contract probably entitles him legally to that bumper pay-off, although morally surely it  does not. However, the person who appointed him and who presumably put those contractual arrangements in place in the first place is Sir George Mathewson, the man whom the First Minister appointed as his key economic adviser. Is the First Minister still happy with that appointment?

I do not seek to examine George Mathewson's reputation, but I think that the views that he has recently expressed bear some examination. George Mathewson is the First Minister's adviser on the economy and it was he who defended short selling—he said that the First Minister's views were "ignorant". It was he whose hedge fund made millions out of the disastrous RBS-ABN Amro deal. It was he who said that bankers should not apologise and "I don't believe in all this sorry bit." It was he who said that his £2.5 million bonus would "not give you bragging rights in a Soho wine bar." It is he who still draws a large salary from RBS. Is the First Minister really still happy with his appointment of that adviser with those views?

Let us examine the First Minister's views. The regulatory system that he criticises is the one that he previously criticised for gold plating, which he said he would replace with light-touch regulation. However, the First Minister has changed his mind. At the weekend, the First Minister's spokesman said of banking: "The first minister believes that ... a different set of values is required." I think that the people of Scotland agree with that, but the First Minister's key economic adviser does not. George Mathewson is still defending short selling, big bonuses and obscene pay-offs. The First Minister should decide which side he is on. Is he with Sir George and the bonus bankers or the people of Scotland?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1446)

That will be a change from yesterday, when the First Minister threw the Government's programme for Scotland into reverse. Yesterday, when he dumped his flagship local income tax, he was caught redhanded selling short Scottish voters—his own definition of a spiv and speculator. This week, even the bankers had to say sorry. Will he say sorry to the Scottish voters for the way that he conned them?

Sorry truly is the hardest word. As usual, the First Minister, in a crisis, blames everyone, blames early and blames often. As the First Minister retreats in the snow from his local income tax, like Napoleon from Moscow, he is still shaking his fist and declaring that local income tax will be back. However, we all know that LIT is just a bad policy. It would damage the Scottish economy and destroy local services. Even the Tories have told the Scottish National Party that, and they know all about bad taxes and destroying services. The First Minister conned the voters once with LIT; it would be shameless to try to con them again. Will he dump this unwanted and unworkable tax for good?

Let us see what position the First Minister is in to lecture us about competence. Two weeks ago, the Parliament threw out the First Minister's budget, because it was not up to the job. This week, the First Minister threw out three of his ministers, because they were not up to the job. Yesterday, he threw out his flagship policy, because it is not up to the job. The First Minister's credibility is shot to pieces. Is it not Alex Salmond who is not up to the job?

Here is the manifesto that Mr Salmond was talking about. Paying off student debts—that is gone. A replacement for public-private partnership—that is gone. Replacing the council tax—that, too, is now gone. The only flagship policy in the SNP manifesto that is left is independence—tearing Scotland out of the UK. Business does not want that. Trade unions do not want that. It would ruin Scotland's economy. Not a single opinion poll has shown that the Scottish public want independence—not one, not ever.  There is no majority in the Parliament for independence. If that is good enough for LIT, it is good enough for independence. Let us finish the job of tearing up the SNP manifesto. Will the First Minister dump independence, as well, right now?

Here is what David Bell, the adviser to the Parliament's Finance Committee, said: "The effect of the changes announced in the 2008 PBR on Scotland's DEL resource allocation coming through Barnett consequentials will not be significant." This is a fig-leaf to cover up a U-turn on a policy that would not work.

I am grateful for this opportunity to extend the sympathies and condolences of every Labour member of the Parliament to the family of our colleague and brother Bashir Ahmad in this, their time of loss. I also express our support for our SNP colleagues in their bereavement. We all feel sadness for the loss of Bashir, but to lose one of your own number is a special hurt indeed, as we know from experience in this part of the chamber. It is a truth that, when someone whom we know dies, we often find out things about that person that we did not know before, but wish we had known. I learned from the published tributes to Bashir that he began his working life in this country as a bus conductor. I did, too. I wish I had known that, because we ex-bus conductors consider ourselves special people indeed, with a particular bond. I wish that I had had the chance to compare notes. Bashir used that special start in life rather better than I did, becoming a very successful businessman who was highly regarded in his adopted home city of Glasgow and beyond. Those of us who were privileged to be at his funeral on Saturday were left in no doubt as to the affection with which he was regarded by all of Glasgow, especially the Muslim community of that city, and how profoundly his passing is felt by it. His time in the Parliament was all too short. Like, I suspect, many members here, I wish that I had known him better. When one met him in the corridors or lobbies of Parliament, the warmth of his smile and the generosity of his greeting lit up the whole place. Bashir has a special place in the story of the Scottish Parliament. He was the first Asian Scot and the first Muslim to be an MSP. At the opening of the Parliament, another who was to be taken suddenly from us, Donald Dewar, spoke of the echoes of Scotland and its past that could be heard in the chamber. He said: "This is about who we are, how we carry ourselves. In the quiet moments ... we might hear some echoes from the past. The shout of the welder in the din of the great Clyde shipyards; the speak of the Mearns ... the discourse of the enlightenment". When Bashir Ahmad took his oath as an MSP in Urdu, he wove into that tapestry of "who we are" another of Scotland's authentic voices, which had been missing until that moment. Its cadence was never strident—indeed, Bashir's was perhaps the gentlest voice in this place—yet it will echo through the chamber for as long as men and women meet here to seek a better future for the country that Bashir clearly loved so much. That is a fine legacy for a good man.

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1425)

That is exactly what I would like to explore with the First Minister. Yesterday, the Parliament put aside political differences to pass the Budget (Scotland) (No 3) Bill. The money is in place, but what will the First Minister do to turn it into schools, hospitals, houses and jobs for construction workers?

I agree that the money is in place, but it is a matter of what is done with it. Despite the sound and the fury of the past week, we should not forget the Finance Committee's advice in its budget report that "the Scottish Government should consider all available funding models" for capital investment. We have waited two years for the Scottish Futures Trust, and it has built nothing. Will the First Minister now give up on it and get Scotland building?

Professor John Kay said that the not-for-profit distribution method that the Scottish National Party dreamt up was "PFI with window dressing". There is no difference there at all—we should look back to before the recession. I do not think that the First Minister understands his responsibility in this matter. Government figures for projects that are in the investment pipeline show that in 2007, under Labour, construction projects were worth £1.3 billion. Last year, under the SNP, that plummeted to £300 million. In one year, £1 billion worth of construction was lost to the Scottish economy, along with 20,000 jobs, while Mr Salmond fiddled with his futures trust. In Scotland, the credit crunch comes on top of the Salmond slump. How many more jobs have to go before the Government wises up and starts building something?

The First Minister does not seem to be in command of his Council of Economic Advisers—John Kay was criticising the Scottish Futures Trust. It is true that he was criticising PFI, but he was saying that the SFT is exactly the same as PFI. That £1 billion is the measure of the projects stopped by the SNP Government—supposed to be replaced by the Scottish Futures Trust, but not replaced by the Scottish Futures Trust. The First Minister can bluster as much as he likes, but in the real world, Harry Frew of the construction workers union says that there is a crisis in the construction industry and that it is losing confidence in the SNP Government. In the real world, Michael Levack of the Scottish Building Federation agrees. He says that Scottish Government funds are  "taking far too long to get to the coalface. This year is going to be horrendous ... If we don't have the jobs coming forward we will lose more and more as the weeks go on." Michael Levack is blaming this Government. That is the Salmond slump. When will the First Minister stop costing jobs and start creating them?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1398)

Yesterday morning, John Swinney said: "The duty for me is to put forward a budget that convinces Parliament." I agree. Last night, he acknowledged that he had failed in that duty. He failed because the Scottish National Party approached the serious matter of the Scottish budget with reckless brinkmanship and arrogance. Hubris indeed. It chose to seek narrow political advantage rather than broad, constructive consensus. That approach must not be repeated. I welcome the First Minister's meetings today, and offer him the opportunity to explain to Scotland how he intends to change his approach to secure support for the resubmitted budget bill.

Einstein defined insanity as doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results. There is little sign of the Government having learned any lesson from yesterday. One editorial does not the news coverage make—I suggest that the First Minister reads the editorials in some of the other newspapers—nor does one proposal constitute constructive discussion. Labour has a series of sincere proposals that we believe will help Scotland through the global economic crisis. A young person in Scotland has less than half the chance of an apprenticeship place that a young person in England has. We want that corrected. Most people would consider that a reasonable and compelling objective. In a budget of £34 billion, no one would believe it to be too much to ask. However, last night the SNP described that constructive dialogue as Labour "playing games". We have heard more of the same today. Will the First Minister learn the lesson of yesterday, and promise to set aside such language and give an assurance that he will enter into discussions seriously, responsibly and in a spirit of good faith?

The First Minister's responses demonstrate exactly the narrow party advantage that he has brought to and seeks from the process. Let us examine his responses. In his first answer, he talked about the consequences of last night's vote, although he seems to have learned little about the consequences for his own standing. For some time now, the SNP and its loyal servants in the matter, the Tories, have claimed that £1.8 billion would be lost to Scotland if the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill fell and that there would be no increase  in funding next year. In fact, the Tories are claiming today that that has already happened, but it is not true. I am sure that the First Minister would not wish to allow the Parliament or the people of Scotland to be misled, so let me read from an e-mail from the assistant clerk to the Finance Committee: "If the Budget Bill for 2009-10 was passed at some point after 1 April and only came into force on, say, 1 June 2009, then the Government would get the full allocation of circa £34 billion". [ Interruption. ]

Yesterday, the moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland reminded us of Burns's words "an honest man's the noblest work of God". Is the First Minister honest enough to admit that the claim that £1.8 billion will be lost is just gratuitous scaremongering?

Mr Swinney made it clear last night that the Government intends to seek consensus and lodge a budget bill that the Parliament can support. That is what the Government requires to do in order to avoid the kind of disruption that has been mentioned. That is its responsibility. [ Interruption. ]

The process has to be about the SNP Government responding to the scale of the economic challenge that we face. Yesterday's gross domestic product figures simply emphasise the seriousness of the challenge in Scotland. Last night, when Mr Swinney was asked how much of  his budget he had changed, he answered, "£82 million." That is one quarter of one per cent.

We know that more can be done. We have been saying that since October. Our door is still open to discuss the budget that Scotland needs. Can the First Minister promise the same, and can we believe him?

On a point of order.

I welcome the cabinet secretary's point of order, which—initially—was not dissimilar to mine. There has been much wild talk of the consequences of a no vote this evening, and we have now arrived at that point. Presiding Officer, will you give further clarity on what the standing orders say on the introduction of a new budget bill and exactly how quickly that can happen? My second point is similar. Will you clarify what the standing orders say on the lodging of a motion of no confidence in either ministers individually or an Administration collectively?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1375)

Tomorrow, the Parliament will host the knife crime summit that our Public Petitions Committee has organised. The summit is a response to the 15,000 people who signed the petition organised by John Muir, who lost his son, Damian, in a senseless knife attack. The petition called for mandatory jail sentences for knife crime. Last June, the First Minister said that he was considering that measure and others, and that a criminal justice bill would be forthcoming. The document "Revitalising Justice: Proposals to Modernise and Improve the Criminal Justice System" lists what the proposed bill will contain. It does not mention knife crime once. Why not?

Those statistics are true and welcome, but we should not close our eyes to the fact that Scotland's murder rate remains one of the highest in Europe—it is significantly higher than  that of, for example, England and Wales—and that half those murders are knife related. A response to that should be up-front and centre, and rapid. The problem is that waiting will sound too much like an excuse to the knife crime summit tomorrow. The First Minister does not have to wait for further legislation. In April 2007, the Parliament legislated to control by licence the sale of non-domestic knives. The First Minister's Government has never implemented that measure. It says that it might do so in September, by which time it will have waited for two and a half years. Why does the First Minister not simply order his Cabinet Secretary for Justice to go to the knife crime summit tomorrow and say that he will stop dithering and start controlling knives?

I do not demean the efforts that are taking place in Scotland's communities; I argue that they should be matched by urgency and action by this Government. Of course legislation has to be implemented properly, but is the First Minister saying that his Government requires two and a half years to do that? The truth is this: no one needs to carry a knife on our streets, and everyone who does so has the potential to use their knife. Mr Muir learned that lesson in the hardest way imaginable when he lost his son; so did Mrs Paton, whose 17-year-old son Adam was stabbed to death in Montrose. We owe it to them to learn the lesson, too. At the very minimum, when someone is charged with knife crime, even for the first time, they should wait for their trial on remand or at least under supervision, with an electronic tag or a curfew, for example. I think that most Scots would agree with me. Does the First Minister also agree? If he does, will he act now to make that happen?

I say once again that I do not decry others' efforts to address knife crime; I question the urgency of the efforts of the First Minister and his Government. We will have a criminal justice bill that ignores knife crime, and we have a law to control knife sales that the Government cannot get round to using. Of course knife crime is prosecuted, but here is the thing: 81 per cent of knife criminals—four out of five—who go to jail get a sentence of six months or less. However, the First Minister wants to abolish sentences of six months or less. Every single year, that will leave around 850 convicted knife criminals on our streets—on every high street in the country—free to carry, free to cut and potentially free to kill. Is that really the First Minister's message to Mr Muir, Mrs Paton and the victims of knife crime?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1348)

Like the First Minister, I am old enough to remember the recession of the 1980s. I was a teacher in this city then, and I remember watching hope drain away from every youngster in the school in the face of that recession. That must not happen again. Now is the time that we must show confidence in our young people. In recent days, Labour ministers have announced thousands of new apprenticeships; bonuses for teachers in the most deprived communities; more help for students from poor backgrounds to go to and get through university; and an aspiration to reduce the number of unskilled workers in this country from 5 million to 500,000. However, that has not happened here in Scotland, under the Scottish National Party. What action will the First Minister take?

The trouble is, what the First Minister says seldom reflects reality—just ask the Scottish Inter Faith Council. The SNP will not tell us what is counted in the 50,000 training places that the First Minister mentioned. The equivalent number south of the border is 7.5 million—a far higher rate.  Ask the tourism industry. Recently, the First Minister said: "We need to take advantage of economic circumstances to give a substantial boost to the Scottish tourism industry, which is the greatest industry in Scotland." That is what he says, but the reality is that the SNP has done away with adult apprenticeships in tourism—not just some, but all of them. The message to anyone over 18 is that there is no future for them in the "greatest" industry. Will the First Minister reinstate those training programmes now?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. In his answer, the First Minister moved on to some of the traditional trades, so let us deal with those. Yesterday, Michael Levack of the Scottish Building Federation told the Parliament that, last year, it had more than 2,200 apprentices in trades such as joinery and plumbing. This year, the projected figure is just 1,500, with 250 of those facing redundancy. This morning, I was contacted by a worried father of two apprentices. He told me of a company in Tranent and another in Musselburgh, in my constituency, that are laying off apprentices who are already in the third and fourth years of their time. In Northern Ireland, the Executive has given redundant apprentices a guarantee that they can complete their training. If my young constituents were in east Belfast rather than East Lothian, they would have a guarantee that they could serve their time and qualify. Can I phone that father back tonight and tell him that the First Minister will give the same guarantee?

This is a global recession. What matters is the response that we make. In Northern Ireland, the guarantee that I mentioned has been given; I hope that my young constituents are watching so that they can see our First Minister ignore their plight. We should go further in showing our confidence in Scotland's young people. Under Labour in England, every young person who is qualified for one and wants it will be guaranteed the right to an apprenticeship. Under Labour in Glasgow, every young person who leaves school this year with the appropriate qualifications will be entitled to an apprenticeship. Wherever it can do so, Labour is delivering a future for our young people, but here it is up to the SNP. Will the First Minister match Labour and guarantee an apprenticeship to every 16-year-old who qualifies for one and wants it, or will he let Scotland's youngsters down?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1322)

Concern has been growing—quite rightly—about how the First Minister will pay for the new Forth crossing. In the past he was unequivocal that it was a job for the Scottish Futures Trust. He said that "If we have a new bridge, a bond issue is definitely the way to do it", and as recently as last May, his finance secretary agreed, when he said: "Of course that's the type of project that could be taken forward under the auspices of this model". What happened? When did the First Minister finally realise that his Scottish Futures Trust would not work and could not build a bridge?

When the First Minister and the finance secretary said that the Scottish Futures Trust would build the Forth crossing, did he not realise then that it was the biggest capital project in Scotland and that it needed certainty and a timetable? The truth is that the Scottish National Party wasted two years on the Scottish Futures Trust fantasy, and when that all fell apart it gave the Treasury two weeks to consider its daft alternative, which was to bring money back from the future to spend now. The most basic understanding of public finance tells us that that is not credible.  The First Minister is right that his Government announced in December how the bridge would be built. The most basic rules of integrity in Government tell us that we do not announce how we will spend money that we do not have. What on earth did the First Minister think he was doing in bringing the single most important transport project in Scotland—"in a lifetime", according to Mr Swinney—to Parliament without there being a financial package in place?

The trouble is that the Government has demonstrated its inability to build anything, even using traditional public procurement. Only yesterday, the Low Moss prison project was delayed for two years. That £100 million project is far smaller and far more straightforward than the new Forth crossing, but the Government has been unable to take it forward. The Government has a track record on iconic transport projects. One of the First Minister's first acts was to cancel the Edinburgh airport rail link, which came to more than half a billion pounds—£650 million was saved. He certainly has not used that money to build any schools or hospitals. It would be a start on the new bridge, however. What has he done with that £650 million?

The SNP inherited a budget that had the money for the M74 in it. It also had the money—[ Interruption. ] It also had the money—

That budget also contained the money for the Edinburgh airport rail link. What has the Government done with that money? It has not built schools or hospitals with it. Somebody once said: "He that is good for making excuses is seldom good for anything else." The First Minister always has plenty of excuses, but we do not want to hear them. We want to hear how he will deliver what Scotland needs with the powers that he has and using the £30 billion at his disposal. That is the business of a serious Government, not penning fan mail to Sean Connery. Scotland needs schools, hospitals and a new Forth crossing, but the First Minister needs a fight with Westminster to hide behind. When will the First Minister start putting the interests of Scotland first, instead of the interests of the SNP?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1294)

Those of us on this side of the chamber wish to be associated with the First Minister's remarks regarding the people of Lockerbie and that anniversary. A year ago, on the day on which we rose for Christmas recess, the First Minister sneaked out his consultation on the Scottish Futures Trust. A year later, the Finance Committee has published its report on capital investment and has said that there is insufficient information to judge whether the SFT will be a mechanism for improved value for money, to judge its role in managing a pipeline of projects, or to comment on the accountability and governance issues relating to the SFT. A year after the consultation was launched, we still do not know what the SFT is or how it will work. Does the First Minister still believe that it is ever going to build anything? If he does, does he believe in Santa, too?

The First Minister's Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has admitted that the non-profit distributing model is a version of PPP. The difference between PPP and the Scottish Futures Trust is that PPP actually builds schools and hospitals. The First Minister said that the trust would build bullet trains, roads, super ports and a Forth bridge, and that patriotic Scots would buy patriotic bonds for those patriotic projects. Last week, the Scottish Government published its strategic transport priorities for the next 20 years. The document was 3,000 pages long, and the Scottish Futures Trust was not mentioned once. Not one of the 29 projects will be built by the Futures Trust; the Futures Trust is dead. Will the First Minister do Scotland's parents, pupils, passengers and builders a favour, and bury the Futures Trust once and for all?

For 10 years, PPP not only built schools and hospitals, but created tens of thousands of jobs for Scottish workers. The Futures Trust debacle is costing Scotland jobs. The construction industry says that 25,000 jobs have gone already and 100,000 more are at risk, and yet the Government still plays politics with infrastructure. In last weekend's B-movie, John Swinney played a poor man's Jimmy Cagney, reduced to threatening that schools and hospitals will "get it" unless funds are forthcoming for his Forth crossing. That might have been a potent threat if anyone in Scotland believed that the Government was ever going to build any schools or hospitals in the first place. The Futures Trust—[ Interruption. ] I can wait all day.

The Futures Trust—with no future—has £23 million against it, which could build new homes for almost 300 families. Will the First Minister take that money away from the Futures Trust now and use it to create some of the construction jobs that Scotland so badly needs?

We have all seen the First Minister's I M Jolly, but really he should be starring in "Only an Excuse?" It is not just his Futures Trust that is dead in the water; it is his local income tax, which no one wants, and his concordat, which councils want to renegotiate. It is also his energy policy, which even his economic advisers say is wrong. It is a response to the economic crisis that will culminate tomorrow in his launching a commemorative shortbread tin—nice, but not nearly enough. As Scots face the challenges of 2009 and circumstances change faster than ever before, the First Minister must raise his game, because he looks more and more like a rabbit caught in the headlights, paralysed by policies that do not work but that he will not drop.

I will come to the question—the answer will be much longer coming. The Government has run out of ideas and is fast running out of excuses. Will the First Minister admit that after only 19 months he has run out of steam?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1270)

In September, Fiona Hyslop said, with regard to new teachers, that the General Teaching Council for Scotland survey "does not show that an increasing number of post-probationers are not getting permanent jobs."— [ Official Report , 11 September 2008; c 10704.]  The latest GTCS survey came out yesterday. Will the First Minister tell us whether the number of new primary teachers in permanent jobs is up or down? While he is at it, what about new secondary teachers in permanent jobs? Is that number up or down?

The latest GTC survey bears further examination. It shows that one in five new teachers has been unable to find teaching work—down almost 9 per cent on last year. The number of primary teachers in permanent jobs is down on last year, and the number of secondary teachers in permanent jobs is down from 70.9 to 58.1 per cent. New teachers on supply lists are up—they are included in the percentage that was quoted by the First Minister—to 30.2 per cent from only 18.7 per cent last year. After the first full year with the Scottish National Party in charge, this is what the Educational Institute of Scotland has to say:  "The rate of unemployment among new teachers has risen dramatically, and the quality of employment for those who do find work has deteriorated." The EIS believes that that is an alarming situation and that it needs urgent action. What urgent action does the First Minister plan to take?

Teachers have always retired during the course of the year; even when I was a teacher—30 years ago—they retired during the course of the year. The point is that, at this stage of the year, far fewer new teachers are in permanent jobs than was the case last year and many of the jobs that the First Minister says have been advertised are, of course, promoted posts that newly qualified teachers cannot apply for. There are more than 700 new teachers and every one of them has a story. Lynne and Cara McAllister are sisters and both are newly qualified teachers. One is a secondary teacher and one is a primary teacher, and both are unable to find permanent teaching jobs that use their skills and talents. Cara went on the supply list, as the First Minister suggests people should do. She has had six days' work in six months, and is now looking for jobs outside teaching. GTC Scotland says: "We are currently producing some of the most talented teachers we have seen in Scotland". Those are talented teachers who, under the SNP, are going to waste. What hope does the First Minister offer Lynne, Cara and the hundreds of  other young teachers like them? When will they get the chance that they want to play their part in building Scotland's future?

I cannot answer that question. I cannot explain, for example, why Perth and Kinross Council—under SNP control—is cutting teacher numbers by almost 6 per cent. Why would that be? The problem is not whether I support the First Minister's or his education secretary's working group; the problem is that young teachers are not convinced by that working group. Lynne McAllister, after a first-class honours degree and a year of teacher training with nothing to show for it, is going to Canada to see what prospects there are there. Her sister Cara is looking abroad, too. Next year, 2009, is meant to be the year of coming home to Scotland, but for Lynne and Cara it could be the year of giving up on Scotland. They do not want to go, but they need to hear more than a  celebrity chorus of "Caledonia" from the First Minister. They need to hear him say that they have a future here in Scotland as teachers. We cannot afford to lose the brightest and best of our young people. What action will the First Minister take today to convince Lynne and Cara that they can find a job as teachers here and stay in Scotland where they want to be?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1241)

There was widespread concern in April when the Scottish Government suddenly announced the extension of First ScotRail's contract to 2014. There was no consultation with passengers or with the workforce or with trade unions. Indeed, there was no consultation with anyone at all. Audit Scotland was scheduled to review the operation of the franchise, but ministers could not be bothered waiting for that either. Last week, Audit Scotland produced its report, which raised concerns and led to the resignation of a senior Transport Scotland official. Why did the First Minister fail to consult on the franchise review and on the extension options? Why did he not wait for Audit Scotland's report?

That is true. And I remember the lengthy consultation process we went through to award the franchise. The Audit Scotland report says positive things  about First ScotRail's performance and about the management of the franchise, but it says some scathing things about the Scottish Government's handling of the franchise extension. It states: "The lack of consultation created practical difficulties." Those practical difficulties will cost the taxpayer £1.5 million for closed-circuit television cameras in Strathclyde stations because the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change did not bother to ask where that money would be found between 2011 and 2014. Clearly, Audit Scotland believes that there may be other financial holes that will also need to be filled. Will the First Minister admit that the failure to consult key stakeholders in advance was a serious and costly omission?

The contract involves £2.5 billion of taxpayers' money. The 215,000 passengers a day who depend on the service have just seen their fares soar. The contract was extended with no consultation, no assessment criteria and—most damning of all—no business case. Audit Scotland states: "Transport Scotland did not provide the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change with a fully documented business case, taking the view that presentations to the minister were more appropriate." That is public spending by PowerPoint. Perhaps the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change did not feel the need for a business case, but did the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth not ask to see one? Did the First Minister not ask to see a business case? Did no one in the cabinet ask what the business case was? Did the First Minister sign off the decision? If he did, on what basis did he do that?

I am challenging an approach to government that too often poses too many questions about the way in which the Government goes about its business. What about the First Minister's cack-handed intervention in the Trump affair, or five ministers involving themselves in a planning application in Aviemore? What about the headlines alleging cronyism when it comes to handing out grants? And now we find that a multi-billion pound contract has no business case and a conflict of interest at its heart. There are too many questions and no answers. The Government clearly believes that the normal rules of transparency and good governance do not apply. It clearly believes that a nod and a wink will do, but it will not.

The question is coming; do not worry. The Parliament's Audit Committee will want to consider Audit Scotland's report. Will the First Minister volunteer to appear before that committee and answer its questions about how the decision was made?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1215)

The First Minister knows that he can count on Labour members' solidarity with those who are caught up in and dealing with the atrocity. Monday's pre-budget report was described in the media as the biggest budget statement since world war two. All eyes were on it. Is that why the Scottish National Party Government chose to publish on Monday its response to the consultation on Mr Salmond's so-called local income tax? Did the First Minister think that no one would notice?

The First Minister is not normally known for his shyness. He is always happy to turn up to the opening of an envelope or, better still, one of the schools that Labour planned and built. However, when it comes to his Administration's  flagship policy, he sneaks it out the back door of Bute house under the cover of darkness and the PBR. Why? Perhaps it is because so many of the organisations that replied to the consultation roundly condemned his tax: the Confederation of British Industry, the Scottish Trades Union Congress, the Institute of Directors, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, Unison, the Federation of Small Businesses, the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy, and the Law Society of Scotland. Let us be fair. Some organisations supported the tax, including Dumfries and Galloway Council's SNP group, East Dunbartonshire Council's SNP group and South Lanarkshire Council's SNP group. Not all those organisations were SNP branches—the Association of Scottish Liberal Democrat Councillors was in there, too. Will the First Minister listen to his own consultation and dump his discredited tax plan now?

The First Minister really needs to read his opinion polls and consultations more carefully. He well knows that the most recent opinion poll evidence showed that a minority of Scots supported the local income tax proposal. That is almost exactly what his consultation showed: fewer than half the individual respondents were in favour of a local income tax; and only 34 per cent of the group most likely to be in work—34 to 54-year-olds—supported it, which is not surprising, as it is a tax on work.  On Monday, a Labour chancellor put £2 billion into the pockets of Scotland's working families. On the same day, the SNP Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth insisted that he would go ahead with his plans to take £1.5 billion in extra income tax out of those self-same Scottish pockets. Labour has taken strong, decisive action to put money into the pockets of hard-working Scottish families and to help us weather the global economic storm. The First Minister talked about a mistake that I said we had made. Alistair Darling made a mistake too on Monday—a mistake on whisky duty—but he fixed it in 48 hours. The First Minister is making a far more damaging mistake with his local income tax. Will he fix his mistake and drop the policy now?

That £500 million—it may well be less than that, as we know—

:—follows naturally from the belt tightening that will happen throughout the United Kingdom, and Scotland must take its share of that. However, the First Minister's local income tax proposals would take £900 million out of the budget in Scotland for no reason whatever. The First Minister told us his engagements for the rest of the day. We read that his finance secretary will meet the big six business organisations of Scotland this afternoon. They will tell him that no one wants the local income tax. They will plead with him not to make Scotland the highest-taxed part of the United Kingdom. This is a seminal moment for the First Minister. Will he step in, overrule his finance secretary and do what is right for Scotland's economy and working families, or will he continue to put his own  party interests before the national interest? Is he First Minister for Scotland, or First Minister for the SNP alone?

To ask the Deputy First Minister what engagements she has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1190)

Perhaps this is a game that we can play another day—I want to ask questions about Clostridium difficile. The outbreak of C difficile at the Vale of Leven hospital was the worst ever in the United Kingdom—18 people lost their lives. Yesterday, world-renowned epidemiologist Hugh Pennington warned that the real number of deaths may have been substantially higher, because C diff is not always recorded on death certificates. In September, the Parliament voted for a public inquiry into the C difficile outbreak, to ensure that all of Scotland learns lessons from the Vale of Leven. Last night, the Deputy First Minister did not rule out a public inquiry. Will she confirm today whether a public inquiry will be forthcoming—yes or no?

The Deputy First Minister is hiding behind due process. Any lawyer will tell her that there is nothing to stop her holding a public inquiry now. The due process to which she refers is based on a report with which she says she is satisfied, but the report has been condemned by the families of those affected and criticised by the experts; it has now been disowned by its author. Britain's leading patient safety specialist has called the report the worst that he has ever seen, "not fit for purpose under any circumstances" and "appalling". Even the report's author said that it "didn't get to the bottom of every aspect". Of the 30 people who were interviewed, only six were front-line staff, and not one ward nurse was spoken to. Is the Deputy First Minister seriously saying that she is satisfied with the report?

The problem is that due process cannot be based on a report that is so fundamentally flawed. Michelle Stewart's mother-in-law died in the C diff outbreak, and here is why she thinks that a public inquiry is so important: "We're just skimming the surface ... We've not learned enough about what happened during the outbreak for them to learn every lesson ... We don't want any other family across the whole of Scotland to have to go through what we went through and think their family died needlessly." The families of those who died want a public inquiry now. Britain's leading epidemiologist wants a public inquiry now. This Parliament voted for a public inquiry in September. Ms Sturgeon has admitted today that there is no reason why that cannot happen. She herself is the only obstacle. How many people need to tell her that she is wrong before she calls a public inquiry?

Of course the issue is of the utmost seriousness, but it is of the utmost urgency, too. It is not just at the Vale of Leven—there have been C difficile outbreaks at Hairmyres, at the Queen Margaret hospital in Dunfermline, at the Royal  Alexandra, at Stobhill, at the Victoria infirmary and at Woodend hospital in Aberdeen. Under the health secretary's watch, the number of C diff cases in Scotland has increased by more than 9 per cent. Under her watch, the key budgets for hospital cleaning and maintenance are being cut in real terms in most hospitals. The relatives of C diff patients are still taking laundry home—although the health secretary seemed not to know that last night. This is not getting better; it is getting worse. When she was in opposition, the health secretary called for public inquiries with monotonous regularity but, now that she is in government, she resists doggedly. What is she afraid of? What is she trying to cover up? She is the only obstacle to the inquiry that we need. In the interests of the families, will she change her mind now?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1165)

The First Minister's Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning was in my constituency yesterday to open a beautiful new primary school. I believe that she is opening four schools in a fortnight, and every single one of them—like Sanderson's Wynd primary school in Tranent—was commissioned, planned, funded and started by Labour—[ Interruption. ]

What is Ms Hyslop going to do when she runs out of Labour schools to open? What are our construction workers going to do when they run out of Labour schools to build? We have yet to see a single school project initiated on this First Minister's watch. When will his education secretary be able to open a school that has been commissioned, planned and built by the Scottish National Party?

The First Minister should check his facts: the school that his education secretary opened yesterday—just like the other one in  Tranent that he opened last year—was not a PPP or PFI school and it was certainly planned and built by Labour. Last Thursday, the First Minister was in Glenrothes saying, "Yes we can," and the people of Glenrothes said to him, "Oh no you won't." When it comes to building schools, today he is trying to say, "Yes we are," but parents, teachers and councils are saying, "No you are not." The people know who has built their schools. The problem now is this Government and its unworkable Scottish Futures Trust. The Government should listen to Glasgow City Council, which has said that, since last year's election, no new schools have been commissioned anywhere in Scotland. Glasgow had intended to consult on the next phase of its primary school investments using the SNP's preferred Scottish Futures Trust. Unfortunately, it says that the Scottish Futures Trust has proved to be "an embarrassing let-down". Will the First Minister admit again this week that he has got it wrong, ditch the Scottish Futures Trust and allow Scottish councils to start building schools?

The trouble with the pipeline of schools that the First Minister describes is that it stretches back to before May 2007 to the previous Administration. The 30,000 pupils will have new classrooms in new schools that Labour set in motion. Of those who are trying to build schools, let us consider North Lanarkshire Council. Previously, the council built 26 schools. It would like to build more. The plea of the council's education convener to the Government is:  "I would ask the Scottish Government to reconsider their plans for the Scottish Futures Trust. If they cannot find a way to make it work quickly, I would urge them to return to other funding mechanisms"— yes— "such as PPP. The alternative is that we continue to teach pupils in buildings which are no longer fit for purpose. I do not find this acceptable". None of us finds that acceptable. I ask the First Minister again: in the interests of Scotland's schoolchildren, will he stop messing with his Futures Trust and start building schools?

To tell the truth, I have little interest in the First Minister's putting one councillor on a board. I am interested in the First Minister's lack of ability to put our schoolchildren in new classrooms. As for London, let us talk about it. The newest parliamentarian in Britain, Lindsay Roy, is here today. He has been the MP for Glenrothes for only one week, yet he has already seen—[ Interruption. ]

In one week, Lindsay Roy has already seen Labour in Westminster give the go-ahead for the rebuilding of 1,500 primary schools in England and he has seen councils in England being given £1.75 billion of additional support to make that happen. That is real money to build real schools, which will provide better conditions for hundreds of thousands of pupils and jobs for tens of thousands of construction workers when those jobs are needed most. Why cannot Scotland have some of that? The First Minister has had 18 months. He already has Scotland's share of that money. When do we get our schools and our jobs?

Throughout Scotland, local authorities are struggling with the budgets that the Scottish Government has given them. Let us look at Fife Council, for example. Home care charges are up from £4 a week to £11 an hour; £51 is now being charged for a home alarm whereas, previously, everyone who needed it got one free; and charges of £7 for shopping deliveries have been introduced for the first time and that service is no longer free. Is that what the First Minister meant when he said that he had given local government the flexibility in funding to meet the priorities of our people?

It is true that other councils levy home care charges. In Glasgow, for example, the average charge is around £10 a week—not £11 an hour—and that is for home care and shopping services. This is about change—abrupt overnight change for the worse when the Scottish National Party takes power. Rose Ritchie of Cardenden uses a wheelchair because a spinal condition has left her unable to  lift her head. With some support, she manages to live alone; her community alarm is—literally—her lifeline. However, the SNP has changed that. On her tight budget, she simply cannot afford the new bill of £51, so the SNP Fife Council has set its debtor team on to her. Will the First Minister take some responsibility for the plight of Rose Ritchie and others like her in Fife and tell his council to call off the bailiffs?

Earlier in this exchange, the First Minister mentioned events in the election in America. I have to say that the First Minister is no Barack Obama. [ Interruption. ]

Indeed, the First Minister is less about the audacity of hope and more about the effrontery of hype. One thing is certain sure: with the power that Barack Obama has taken on comes enormous responsibility. Always with power comes responsibility for those who are big enough to accept it. The SNP leader of Fife Council has taken responsibility. He stands by his cuts. He said this week on the "Today" programme: "I've no problem taking responsibility for everything the council has done". That must include the council's cuts. Will the First Minister now accept his responsibility for the SNP cuts in Fife and throughout Scotland?

That is exactly the effrontery that the First Minister deploys. In Fife, £300,000 has been cut from the budget for classroom assistants, £500,000 has been cut from the budget for teachers, and £460,000 has been cut from the budget for transport for disabled pupils. The cuts in Fife are unfair and unjust; they are being made to services for the elderly and the disabled and in Fife schools, too. Will the First Minister stand alongside his council and his candidate and say that he, too, has no problem with the council's cuts? Is he with Peter Grant, or is he with Rose Ritchie? Today, he cannot be both. Whose side is he really on?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1086)

I welcome yesterday's decisive action by the Prime Minister and the Chancellor of the Exchequer, when they launched what the First Minister called a "substantial package of stabilisation." Nonetheless, Scots are still worried about what the effects of the current crisis will be. We must consider in this Parliament what we can do in that respect. The First Minister has talked of the importance of using "Scotland's financial resources fully to help reflate our economy." What are his plans in that respect?

I agree that accelerating investment in infrastructure is vital at this time. We welcome the bringing forward of £100 million from the affordable housing investment programme, but only £9 million of that has been allocated and £40 million of it depends on local authorities, whose budgets are under pressure. Is the councils' £40 million agreed yet? How will the Scottish Government quickly move to allocate the  remaining £91 million to actual development in order to protect jobs and boost the economy?

I welcome that announcement. The other night, the First Minister made the point that, as far as this issue is concerned, it would be a good idea to suspend normal interparty politics. He also reserved the right to make suggestions constructively. In that spirit, will he now act decisively to bring forward other projects, such as trunk-road maintenance programmes, Scottish Water improvements and the Bishopbriggs prison? Will he act quickly now to boost investment in reskilling and retraining in order to prepare for any job losses that we may face soon? Last week, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee heard powerful evidence that delays in the development of the Scottish Futures Trust are creating a black hole in infrastructure investment. This week, Homes for Scotland told us that 100,000 construction jobs are at risk. In the national interest, will the First Minister set aside the Scottish Futures Trust for the moment to release funding for schools, hospitals and transport?

The problem with the First Minister's reply is that the construction sector has made it clear that the hold-up in infrastructure investments is because of the lack of detail around the mechanism for funding those investments. The economist Keynes said: "When the facts change, I change my mind. What do you do, sir?" The facts have changed and Governments are changing their minds. The chancellor did not expect to be nationalising banks, but he has done what had to be done. The First Minister, too, must know that the economic facts have changed. The models to which he has looked no longer work: Ireland is in recession, Iceland has been bailed out by Russia and Norway has effected an emergency draw-down of billions of dollars from the United States federal reserve. The price of oil is as volatile as bank shares and now sits at about $85 a barrel. The First Minister should be prepared to change his mind. Will he rethink his economic strategy, restart investment in infrastructure and begin to reskill Scotland to meet the challenges of the difficult days ahead?

I thank the First Minister for his statement and for allowing me early sight of it. I associate the Labour side of the chamber with his comments on the work of the commission, and especially those on the life and work of Ray Michie. When the commission reported a month or so ago, the Scottish Labour Party welcomed its conclusions. We are not surprised that the commission says that Scotland has undoubtedly benefited from being part of the overall broadcasting ecology of the United Kingdom. We also agree with the commission that broadcasting should not be used as a surrogate for the constitutional debate. The proposal for a new Scottish channel and the recommendation that the BBC and Channel 4 should increase commissioning from Scotland are particularly welcome. By their nature, many of the commission's recommendations are not for the Scottish ministers, but three important ones are: the requirements for Scottish Enterprise to produce an action plan; for Skills Development Scotland to realign its activities; and for creative Scotland to ensure a thriving creative content sector. In his statement, the First Minister committed to all of those. I ask him now to provide more detail of how he plans to do that, what specific requirements he will place on those bodies and what new financial capacity he will provide to allow them to meet the requirements without deprioritising their other responsibilities. In particular, what funding does he expect Scottish Enterprise to have to establish support for the broadcasting sector, as the commission recommends?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1057)

A few hours ago, along with many colleagues from the chamber, I met a large delegation of young people who were here to protest about the First Minister's proposal to stop 18 to 21-year-olds from buying drink in a shop, while allowing them to drink in a pub or club. They think that the proposal is unfair, unworkable, ineffective and, frankly, daft. Will the First Minister listen to Scotland's young people and drop the idea?

We agree that Scotland has a problem with alcohol and, as parliamentarians, we want to debate in the Parliament what we should do about it. Labour wants an effective, mandatory proof-of-age scheme, tougher action on agents who buy drink for under-18s, and the removal of licences from those who are found selling to under-18s. We want strong enforcement of the existing legislation. The problem is that that debate is being drowned out by an idea that no one else wants. Will the First Minister drop an idea that no one agrees with so that we can start to explore actions that we can all get behind?

The First Minister is trying to hide the fact that he has not even convinced his youth wing, the ultra-loyal student nationalists—[ Interruption. ]

I beg your pardon, Presiding Officer. I meant to say the usually ultra-loyal student nationalists. He has not convinced his usually ultra-loyal Health and Sport Committee convener, Christine Grahame, either. She said on television that the proposal would alienate communities, traders and decent young people. He has not even convinced his cyber-nat midnight bloggers, and they would swallow anything. Will the First Minister listen to his own supporters and drop the idea?

No one takes antisocial behaviour more seriously than our party. We must look seriously at the pilots, but the fact is that the validity of those statistics has been questioned by Professor Bird. Indeed, Chief Inspector Bob Beaton, who led the crackdowns in Stenhousemuir and Larbert, said: "It's difficult to separate the different strands to say which have been most successful." This week the First Minister made his Colemanballs debut in Private Eye : "That is not just a legacy, it is there for the future", as he said himself. If he keeps coming up with policies that are as daft as the one that we are discussing, Private Eye will have to rename the column "Salmondballs". If the proposal were to go through, an 18-year-old could work in, run or even own an off-licence. They could sell drink in that off-licence all day, but at the end of the day the one thing that they could not to do would be to walk round the counter and buy a drink for themselves in their own shop.

It is a daft idea, which Parliament will reject tonight. Will the First Minister listen to Parliament and drop the idea?

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1028)

I am happy to associate the Labour Party with those remarks. Once again, Scotland's economy and the importance of corporate headquarters lead the news. Fortunately, the First Minister's Council of Economic Advisers meets next week. Unfortunately, it seems to be entirely at odds with him: Frances Cairncross praised the United Kingdom Government's action on HBOS, John Kay said that the takeover was not caused by spivs and speculators, and Sir George Mathewson said that the First Minister's views are ignorant. Who is right: the First Minister or his advisers?

The First Minister ran that line in the debate yesterday, but it had no impact then and it has had none again today. I went on to say that there were many other factors in the takeover, but the First Minister is right that I agreed that we must pull together to ensure that corporate headquarters are retained in Scotland. When he told EDF Energy that he wanted to keep British Energy's headquarters in East Kilbride but drive its  industry out of Scotland, did EDF think that he was being ironic or, as The Sun has it, hypocritical or, as the Daily Record says, bonkers?

Let us talk about consensus and retaining jobs and headquarters. With HBOS, the First Minister promised to "strain every sinew" to keep its headquarters here. To achieve that, we have to make Scotland as attractive as possible, but there is consensus that his Scottish national income tax plan will do the opposite. Listen to the Confederation of British Industry, which said that local income tax "could undermine the Scottish Government's avowed purpose of growing the economy ... and ... attracting talent and corporate headquarters to Scotland". All business organisations and the trade unions agree—there is consensus. [ Interruption. ]

Will the First Minister strengthen Scotland's case for the HBOS HQ right here and now by committing today to ditch his damaging local income tax plans?

The First Minister well knows that the most recent polling evidence says that only 46 per cent of the people support his tax proposals. I repeat this statement because it matters: thousands of jobs are at stake. Those workers are concerned that if we fail to keep those jobs here in Scotland, they will not pay any tax—certainly not income tax—because their jobs will have been lost. I say to the First Minister, think of the signal that his proposals send to Lloyds TSB and those workers about how serious he is about making the case for those jobs. Does he care enough? Is he big enough? He said that he would "strain every sinew", but in reality he is standing idly by. I ask again: will he drop the discredited local income tax now?

There is consensus that the local income tax proposal damages the case for keeping the headquarters here. I ask the First Minister to join the consensus and show that he is serious about that case.

I am pleased that the Parliamentary Bureau agreed to amend our business to schedule this important debate on a topic that is of concern to people throughout Scotland, from savers to home owners to bank staff. Such is the importance of HBOS to Scotland that few Scots will not be directly affected by the proposed takeover. I suggest that no one will be unaffected by it in some way as a result of the potential impact on the Scottish economy of changes to the bank. That is why last week Labour suggested a broad meeting of all political parties and representatives of wider Scotland to strengthen our common advocacy for Scottish jobs and Scottish decision making, and to leverage consensus into the most powerful case we can make to Lloyds TSB. That meeting happened on Monday. Using the Scottish Council for Development and Industry to facilitate and host such an event was a good idea, and I was pleased to participate in those discussions. For one thing, the gathering revealed that HBOS has an even greater reach into Scottish life, commerce and society than I think we in the Parliament had realised. Looking beyond the primary concerns of people with jobs, mortgages, savings or investments with HBOS, takeover of the company will impact on our construction industry, our voluntary sector and our cultural and sports sectors. For example, HBOS holds a significant portfolio—around £4.5 billion—in the housing association sector and on Monday, BAA talked about concerns for air routes that are dependent on the Edinburgh business market, of which HBOS is a big part. A quarter of a million people enjoyed the Bank of Scotland fireworks concert at the end of the Edinburgh festival, and 140,000 youngsters benefit from the Bank of Scotland's support for grass-roots football, while many of the company's staff engage in a volunteering scheme that benefits many projects throughout Scotland. The Bank of Scotland's contribution to Scotland's history is profound, but the company's contribution to the Scotland of today runs deep and wide. If HBOS is to be taken over by Lloyds TSB, we must—in addition to protecting jobs and sustaining HBOS as a key part of the Scottish economy— ensure that the communities across Scotland that benefit from such initiatives continue to do so. Clearly, the issue of protecting jobs in HBOS and Lloyds TSB is paramount—not only in today's debate but in the coming weeks as the situation develops. Obviously, the threat lies at the retail, back office, and corporate elements of the combined operation, so we must ensure that jobs there are protected as best we can. Customers must be protected too: we must ensure that access to banking services is not threatened but enhanced, and that customers do not suffer from a lack of competition in the retail banking sector. The interests of customers and staff are connected. Many Scottish businesses, large and small—the First Minister has referred to some of them in recent days—use HBOS corporate banking services. I was pleased to hear Susan Rice, the chief executive of Lloyds TSB Scotland, make the point that those customers will still be there—indeed, they are a big part of the asset that Lloyds TSB seeks—and so the jobs will still be needed. Susan Rice is also a symbol of another source of hope: Lloyds TSB does not just have Scottish roots, it also has a strong Scottish presence, powerful Scottish brands and a Scottish board. However, it would be naive to imagine that, in such a takeover, there will not be a search for synergies and perceived duplication, which will lead to job losses. In the past, Lloyds TSB as a business has offshored jobs in order to cut costs. Unlike HBOS, it does not have an agreement with trade unions on there being no compulsory redundancies. However, Lloyds TSB has made positive statements in the announcement of the deal, with a focus on retaining jobs in Scotland, a headquarters on the Mound, and continued printing of Scottish banknotes. In my meeting yesterday morning with Archie Kane—who is the Lloyds TSB Group executive director of insurance and investments, and chief executive of Scottish Widows—I was encouraged by our positive discussions. However, we need positive statements to be turned into guarantees as details of the deal are worked out. A myriad of professional services support the bank, and they are also at risk in the merger. Again, the stakes are high. However, underpinning all that are the facts that the sector has done well in Scotland for good reason, and that we continue to offer the same attractive opportunities, highly skilled workforce, good connections to further and higher education, good transport links and excellent quality of life. The message that Scotland is open for business and is a good place to do business has to go out loud and clear.

In recent years, one of the great strengths of the financial services sector in Scotland is that a critical mass has been built up. The growth of the sector has shown that that is the case. However, Margo MacDonald is quite right to suggest that the great danger—were we to lose some of the functions that may be at risk—is that that critical mass could begin to disappear. That would be very serious, especially for the cities of Edinburgh and Glasgow. In sending out the message that Scotland is open for business, and in arguing for jobs, I am happy to stand alongside the First Minister. However, when it comes to his analysis of how we got to this point, he really is on his own—in fact, he is out on a limb. Last week, he argued that HBOS's position was due solely to the short selling by "spivs and speculators". He resiles from that position now and talks only of naked short selling. However, that was not his position last week. He was wrong. I agreed with the First Minister last week that regulation of short selling should be considered. Within hours the Financial Services Authority had, as he has pointed out, suspended the practice in financial institutions. However, I also said that there were clearly problems with HBOS's business model, its exposure to the mortgage market and its reliance on the wholesale money markets. I also said that the global liquidity crisis was a major factor in its weakness. HBOS is a global player in global markets—it has never been just a Scottish institution. Pre-union, 36 of its 172 founding shareholders were based in London. It was its exposure to wholesale money markets that left it vulnerable to the global liquidity crisis. With every day, and from every commentator, it has become clearer that although short selling might have exacerbated the position, there was a problem with the fundamentals of the bank, for which those who run it must take responsibility. Far from standing idly by and failing to give the institution the backing that it needed, the Prime Minister and the Chancellor of the Exchequer moved decisively to remove competition barriers to the Lloyds TSB deal. The alternative last Wednesday might well have been a run on HBOS and the loss of the whole bank with all the jobs, all the savings and all the mortgages. The First Minister says that he would have extended a £100 billion credit line, which would have saved HBOS. Leaving aside the question of where he thinks he could have got those funds  from, he misses the point that a credit line was available to HBOS, but it did not access it. I watched the First Minister expound his imaginary scenario on television on Sunday. He was seated by a picturesque stone bridge and a babbling burn. It reminded me of nothing so much as Brigadoon—a strange alternative reality where miracles are possible.

We must do everything we can to protect the jobs. Monday's meeting was a good start and yesterday's meetings were encouraging. Scotland expects us to stay on the case and work together for the best outcome that we can achieve.

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1008)

I thank the First Minister for his kind words of welcome. Indeed I will cherish them in the sure and certain knowledge that such words will probably be few and far between in the weeks ahead. I also welcome the news from Rosyth. The First Minister is right—this is a bad day. We are in the midst of a global financial crisis and the past 24 hours have demonstrated that Scotland is far from immune. There are three key aspects to the HBOS-Lloyds merger that I wish to explore with the First Minister: the implications for employees, the implications for customers and the implications for the economy.  This morning, I met trade union representatives of the workforce. Tens of thousands of jobs are under threat. Many people in the workforce are shareholders too, and they are worried not just about their jobs but about their savings and pensions. I am pleased to hear that the First Minister has arranged calls with the trade unions involved, and indeed with the two banks. I ask that, in making those calls, he uses his offices to ask the new Lloyds-Halifax bank to meet the trade unions as a matter of urgency. That has not happened yet. It must happen today. Will the First Minister make it happen?

I very much welcome the First Minister's assurances and I have every sympathy with his anger at speculation and short selling. Frankly, anyone who is today celebrating a profit from what has happened should go to the fire. We must be honest. There is more. HBOS was highly exposed to the mortgage market and there is a liquidity crisis, which is global. The First Minister has said a great deal during the past 24 hours about the crisis that faces the banking sector but, a year ago, in his role as chair of the Financial Services Advisory Board, he noted that the recent liquidity problem was "a good example of the type of issue which FiSAB should be discussing" and instructed that the matter be a standing item for discussion at all future FiSAB meetings. I think that FiSAB has met twice since then. What further discussions have taken place and what action has the First Minister taken?

I agree that the regulatory regime with regard to short selling should be reviewed. Indeed, as the First Minister knows, the FSA was given additional powers when new rules on short selling were introduced in June, and new powers will be legislated for in the autumn. What other regulatory changes does the First Minister propose?

The First Minister is absolutely correct to talk of the importance of the financial services sector to Scotland and its wider economy. Earlier this week, on television, he talked about the importance of confidence in the success of the financial services sector. He was right to do so. I therefore welcome his announcement that FiSAB will meet next week to consider these matters, but  I believe that the circumstances are such that, to ensure that we are doing everything possible to sustain confidence and protect jobs, savings and mortgages, the discussion should be widened a little. We propose an urgent summit that involves all parties—trade unions, business leaders and the industry—to examine whether we are doing all that we can. Will the First Minister take such action, so that we can all play our part in this crucial matter?

The Council of Economic Advisers also recommended the commissioning of an independent assessment of the relative costs of different electricity generating technologies, including nuclear. When will the Scottish Government commission that assessment and who will carry it out?

I had a draft of this speech that began along the lines of, "It is traditional to begin this response by welcoming those aspects of the Government's programme on which we can find consensus and common ground." However, I fear that a nagging doubt drove me to the Official Report , in which I found that I was sadly mistaken and that Ms Sturgeon in opposition usually opened with a paragraph dripping with vitriol and then went negative from there. Perhaps I was thinking nostalgically of the first session of the Scottish Parliament, in which we passed historic legislation on, for example, land reform and the abolition of 1,000 years of feudalism, embedded the International Criminal Court in Scots law and gave Scotland the best incapacity legislation in Europe and the best homelessness legislation in the world. All those measures were taken through the chamber by the building of consensus, and they were amended and improved throughout the process on a cross-party basis. There are bills in the Government's programme that can be welcomed if they are approached in that way, such as the climate change bill, the marine bill and the flooding bill, which are not only welcome but overdue. The test will be whether the Government gets both the principles and the practice right, and whether they will be taken forward in partnership with the Parliament and the rest of the United Kingdom. Those legislative measures will have to be matched by decisions that complement them, including those in the budget. Particularly on the issue of flooding, the concerns of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee on funding for flood protection measures must be listened to. There is a determination across the chamber to tackle tobacco and alcohol misuse, but on this side of the chamber we will not support some of the measures in the consultation paper on alcohol, particularly a higher age limit for sales in off-licences. We want stronger enforcement of the 18 age limit, with stronger sanctions against those who ignore the legislation. One bill that the Government is of course obliged to introduce is the budget bill. If we want to know what the Government really thinks is important, that is where we must look. In the same way, if we want to know what the First Minister really thinks, we should look to what he says in his relaxed, off-guard moments, perhaps in a  comfortable summer interview. That would be when he told a magazine that Scotland did not mind Margaret Thatcher's economics, just her social policy. In the same piece he said that he did not like saying sorry. Well, like it or not, he should say sorry to Scotland for that crass comment. The problem is that the SNP actually believes that it can separate economic policy from social policy. That is why last year's budget bill was prepared to ditch everything else—every promise, every investment and every protection for the vulnerable—in order to deliver two tax cuts. Those economics are already having social consequences that become clearer every day.

The question is really why Mr Swinney was not able to introduce a budget that the whole Parliament could support. The budget that he introduced was unsupportable and, on that basis, we did not support it. The reasons that we gave for not being able to support it, which were that it failed to invest in Scotland's future and that it would lead to cuts in local services, have been demonstrated day by day. School pupils are back at school this month in unrefurbished schools.

No. Their classes are not smaller but bigger, and many more pupils are in composite classes. In secondary schools, course choices have been narrowed and closed down rather than opened up. Probationary teachers now face the scrap heap. No sign can be seen of the £34 million for families with disabled children. That money was campaigned and fought for by disability groups and won for the whole of the United Kingdom, but it has disappeared in Scotland. In Aberdeen, projects for the homeless have been closed down, as have services for the disabled. In Fife, the council leader is standing for Parliament on his proud record of raising home care charges from £4 per week to £11 per hour. However, those who seek solace in the words of the song "The First Cut is the Deepest" are in for a rude awakening, because the worst is yet to come. One cannot have Margaret Thatcher's economics without her social consequences. If the budget bill again attempts to do that, the price will be paid by the elderly, the disabled and schoolchildren in every part of Scotland. Instead, this year's budget bill should begin to reinvest in Scotland's future. Skills and education  are the bridge between prosperity and social justice. Increased opportunity and access are the keys to unlock the economic success of the country and to provide for the economic wellbeing of Scotland's families. In the face of global economic turbulence, the programme for government needed to demonstrate urgent measures to invest more in Scotland's skills set. In the past year, apprenticeship programmes have been cut back; they need to be expanded and opened up, but there is no sign of that. The SNP knows that the Parliament believes that the Government's skills strategy is inadequate, as we have rejected it more than once. If the strategy was inadequate a year ago, how much more serious is that now in the light of changed economic circumstances? To talk of the year of homecoming as a major boost for the tourism industry would make more sense if the Government had not just cancelled all adult modern apprenticeship programmes in the tourism industry. The sector has also been left floundering in a reorganisation of the enterprise network that is still generating more questions than answers. If the lack of urgency on raising Scotland's skills levels is an omission in the programme and damaging to economic growth, the SNP's insistence on pressing forward with its discredited local tax proposals and its unworkable futures trust is a damaging inclusion. The Government's chief economic adviser recently identified low business confidence as the greatest threat to Scotland's economic growth. One might think, then, that the Government would think twice about its cuts-and-higher-income-tax bill—that is what it is—given that the tax has been identified as a threat to the Scottish economy by the Confederation of British Industry, Scottish Financial Enterprise, the Institute of Directors, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, the Federation of Small Businesses, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland and PricewaterhouseCoopers. The proposed tax has been described as "unworkable" by those who would administer it and "unfair" by the Scottish Trades Union Congress. The tax would bring students, student nurses and single pensioners who live on £8,000 a year into its net, but it would let someone living on shares and investments in a mansion house escape scot free. Such a tax would not only undermine the economy but decimate local services with a shortfall of at least £800 million. Slashing services and trying to dress it up as a tax cut is another Tory trick that Scotland knows of old and will not forgive another time. Frankly, a tax that would undermine the economy and destroy local  services begins to look less like an act of Parliament and more like an act of sabotage. To boost business confidence, that discredited idea should be junked—and junked now. The Government should have taken the further opportunity today to provide relief to the economy by dropping its unworkable and inexplicable Scottish futures trust. That is yet another flagship policy that is sinking under a tidal wave of criticism, with industry, local government and the trade union movement united in opposition to it. Although we heard warm words today about school building programmes, earlier this week John Stodter of the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland stated clearly: "There's a lag in the time scale for more investment in school buildings ... waiting for the Scottish Government's decision on the Scottish Futures Trust." The problem is that our children cannot wait for the school buildings that they need and the construction industry will not wait. The industry is already coming to the conclusion that Scotland is closed for business. If construction companies leave, they will leave lay-offs and redundancies behind them. Even the First Minister's Council of Economic Advisers has told him to get a move on. That was just before it pointed out to him that the Government's energy strategy is wrong too, when it added its voice to the anxiety that has been expressed by the business community, the trade unions and the entire scientific and engineering community, which are worried about the security of future electricity supply. The Government is succeeding in uniting Scotland in complete opposition to its flagship policies. Just in case higher taxation, a hiatus in infrastructure development and an insecure energy future were not enough to undermine business confidence and the prospects for jobs and prosperity, the SNP has its very own sword of Damocles hanging over Scotland's future—a referendum on independence two years down the line. One place where I spent the summer where there is a palpable air of optimism is Rosyth dockyard, where investment has already started in dock 1 in preparation for the carrier contract. The new contract will raise employment at the dockyard, which was facing closure, back up to the highest levels that it enjoyed when it had thousands of skilled jobs and apprentices were taken on in their hundreds. All that work and all that optimism are a direct result of Scotland's place in the United Kingdom. Every one of those jobs would be placed in jeopardy by the uncertainty of the constant desire for separation.  The SNP's programme for government is a programme for a Government determined to carry on regardless—regardless of the economic circumstances, regardless of the worries of the business community and regardless of the cost to the elderly, the disabled and our schoolchildren. The SNP is careless of Scotland's future. The First Minister has prayed Keynes in aid several times today, but Keynes said: "When the facts change, I change my mind". The SNP should face the facts now and, for the sake of Scotland's future, change its mind on its discredited local income tax, its unworkable futures trust and its unwanted separatism.

rose—

I am sorry that I was unable to attend the national conversation event in Inverness, but I have read interesting press reports on it. Those reports said that the public contribution to the event showed no interest whatsoever in independence or a referendum.

To ask the Scottish Executive what advice it has received regarding the suitability of heavier types of portable oxygen cylinders. (S3O-3922)

The minister will be aware that many people have been provided with PD cylinders, which are not only heavier, but have a lower capacity than other cylinders. That may be acceptable to the cabinet secretary, but I have been contacted by a growing number of constituents whose mobility has been severely compromised. In one case, a constituent is now housebound. I simply ask the minister to make a priority of finding a resolution to the issue as quickly as possible, given that it has run on for some months now.

The First Minister has appeared in the press this morning boasting that he negotiated an arbitration procedure at the joint ministerial committee. Given the level of grudge and grievance that is the daily currency of the Scottish Government, it is no wonder that an arbitration procedure might be required. Will he undertake unequivocally to accept the decisions of such procedures when they find against him, as they inevitably will, given the weakness of so many of his claims?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance sight of the breakfast edition of his statement.  Underspend in the Scottish Executive budget has, of course, been on a downward trend for some time. It would be churlish not to congratulate the cabinet secretary on continuing that trend. Recent practice has been for finance ministers to report the full underspend, not just the DEL underspend, in order to avoid any suggestion of hiding any of it. In this case, that would be £216 million rather than £42 million. Does the cabinet secretary accept that that sum demonstrates a rather more modest improvement? Is that why he has reverted to using the DEL figures? Can he explain why, on previous occasions, he believed that the higher figure was the important one but, on this occasion, he argues that the lower figure of £42 million should be the headline? Given that the cabinet secretary has allocated allowed EYF draw-down in his spending plans—indeed, he has made a virtue of that—can he explain what measures he has taken to allow for contingency and flexibility by way of reserves, central unallocated provision or money that is available under any other heading? How will he deal with the unforeseen? The cabinet secretary referred to proactive budget management. What plans does he have for routine autumn budget revisions this year?

One way of reducing energy costs is to install more efficient heating systems in our homes, so will the Government reconsider its ill-timed and ill-advised decision to restrict access to the successful central heating initiative?

Does the cabinet secretary agree with his colleague in Westminster, Stewart Hosie, who has made it clear that no one wants to reintroduce the 10p tax band and that the important thing is to take measures to compensate those who have lost out? Does he therefore welcome the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s change to the tax code, which will do exactly that?

I am puzzled by the point that the minister is making about town centre funding for tackling matters such as energy efficiency. I am not aware of that funding. Perhaps he could elaborate on what he said.

I start by dealing with the red herring that it was entirely predictable that a number of members would indulge in, which is that the failure of Labour members to break out the bunting, hold street parties, or call for statues of Mr Swinney in our town centres in celebration of rates reductions for small businesses somehow demonstrates that we are against them. Nothing could be further from  the truth. As Elaine Murray pointed out, we reduced business rates in 2000, 2003, 2006 and 2007, and our manifesto for last year's election promised a doubling of the small business rate relief scheme. Over the piece, we delivered more in rate relief to small businesses than we ever promised, unlike the SNP, which has delivered rather less than its manifesto promised, even with the acceleration that was introduced at the time of the budget.

No. The difference is that all those reductions took place in the context of increasing investment in schools and housing, in the national health service in relation to which the growth outstripped that in the rest of the UK and, crucially, in skills budgets and apprentice opportunities. None of those is true today. The idea that we are somehow opposed to reducing the rates burden on small businesses is rubbish. It is right and proper to assess the measures against the Government's wider programme. As David Whitton said, from the word go we have said that the scheme is a missed opportunity. The relief—or some of it at least—could have been used to incentivise desirable outcomes. The Government is keen on outcomes—it tells us that it will be measured not by inputs but by outcomes; outcomes, not inputs, are what matter. However, today's motion asks us to celebrate an input. Of course, such an input has many potentially virtuous outcomes, which members such as Roseanna Cunningham have described. As several members have mentioned, the FSB briefing states that businesses report that they have used this year's SBB to make larger one-off investments, for example in double glazing, refurbishment, waste disposal and so on. All of those are good outcomes, and I do not doubt that other examples could be found of businesses investing in staff training, upgrading their information technology or other equipment or even feeling secure enough to recruit an extra member of staff. Our point is simply that such a scheme could have aimed to provide particular benefit to those businesses that wish to make investments in people, in innovation or in energy efficiency. Those are desirable outcomes for a variety of reasons: not only are they good for the individual business, but they are good for our communities and wider society—and they could have been incentivised or rewarded. I have some sympathy with the desire to avoid bureaucracy, which was given as one argument against the use of such targeting, but the small  business bonus scheme is already an application scheme. Given that some form filling is required in any case, incentivising or rewarding businesses as I suggest need not have led to a significant increase in bureaucracy and none of the knock-on local benefits on which many members elaborated—Roseanna Cunningham did so quite eloquently—would be lost. Improving energy efficiency or taking on new staff would still bring benefits to the local economy, because additional local work would be provided either directly or through the supply chain. In today's debate, we have seen the Tories again tripping the light fantastic with the SNP in a faint reprise of their budget tango. The SNP motion coyly fails to mention the acceleration of the business rate relief scheme so that—oh, what a surprise—the Tories' self-congratulatory amendment can complete the picture, like matching his-and-hers towels. In fact, their actions this afternoon have had a little bit of the air of a couple reaffirming their vows. No doubt that gives the smug marrieds a warm fluffy feeling, but it leaves the rest of us somewhat underwhelmed and wondering why we have been dragged out again. At least the SNP has kept its word to the Tories on the small business bonus scheme; the same cannot be said of its promises on police numbers. We very much support the second half of the Tory amendment, which calls on the Government to ensure that businesses are informed of the scheme's existence so that they receive the benefit to which they are entitled. Of course that is essential and important. The first part of the Tory amendment refers to the acceleration of the scheme's implementation. In one sense, that is fine, because there is no doubt that, at the time of the budget, the SNP was ready to break yet another manifesto promise by phasing in the increase in rates relief, contrary to what it had promised. However, in the context of a budget in which resources for housing, higher education and enterprise support were cut, in which local authorities were not provided with the resources necessary to avoid school cuts and in which growth in health service spending was set to lag behind that in the rest of the UK for the first time since devolution, we found it hard to see business rate relief as a top priority for any additional resources. We did not support that during the budget, nor will we support it today. For the avoidance of doubt, I repeat that we have not argued, either then or today, against the small business bonus scheme per se. All taxation decisions are decisions about balance and priorities. Even the Tories recognise that they faced a choice. Mr Johnstone owned up to the fact that other things could be done, but he was not at all clear on the point at which it would be better to  support other measures to help small businesses instead of business rates relief. He simply implied that other things could be done. For example, the Tories could support the town centre renewal fund, which was proposed in a similar form in their manifesto, or the use of the extra resources to abolish water rates for pensioners. A number of members have spoken about the importance of our town centres and the help that the small business bonus scheme will provide to businesses there. There is no doubt that that is true—representing East Lothian, I know that as well as any other member. However, our town centres also need other kinds of help. I can think of town centres in my constituency that are blighted by empty and derelict properties that the owners have no interest in improving or maintaining. A town centre turnaround fund would allow local trusts to do something about that problem—to buy the properties, if necessary, to refurbish them and to turn them over to community use. Our town centre businesses need life in their high streets, to give them the footfall that they need. The lesson of the successful business improvement districts—Bathgate is an especially successful example—is that they are even willing to pay a little for that. Businesses recognise that public realm improvements are needed and sometimes do not mind paying for them, especially if they have a say in what those improvements are. We see the Lib Dem amendment as eminently sensible, and I am glad that the SNP has indicated that it will accept it. The SNP is much more interested in outcomes than in inputs, so the amendment makes sense. The output that the small business bonus scheme is supposed to deliver is economic growth. It may help in that respect, but the evidence is questionable, to say the least. When advising the Finance Committee, Professor David Bell made it clear that it is not self-evident—as Mr Brownlee said—that cuts in small business rates will give us the economic growth that we seek. The trouble with the relationship between the small business bonus scheme and the Government's economic strategy is that the scheme seems to be the only club in the bag. Even when the First Minister spoke to businesses in corporate America, he gave the small business rate relief scheme as an example of why they should come to Scotland. I do not argue—nor does our amendment, as Alasdair Allan tried to claim—that small business rate relief cannot support economic growth, but rather that it cannot do so alone. More support for our economy is needed. Our amendment does not oppose the business rate cuts but calls for a realistic, considered approach that places this economic measure in  the context of the wider economic picture. That is simply good sense.

I am genuinely puzzled by that. Like Mr Brown, we very much hope that many businesses will benefit from rates relief, perhaps to help them to take on another member of staff. Surely, however, they will not be able to do that wholly through the benefit if its average size is £1,040 a year. How does that allow the employment of one full-time or two part-time members of staff?

Hemingway used to tell would-be writers to start by writing one true sentence, so here is one true sentence from the cabinet secretary's statement on infrastructure investment last week: "My priority as Scotland's finance minister is to get best value and the best deal for Scottish taxpayers ... whether the investment comes from private or public sources."— [ Official Report , 28 May 2008; c 9005.]  Surely that is true, but that was also true of all of Mr Swinney's predecessor finance ministers.  When previous Executives undertook eight major hospital projects, four were built with traditional public sector finance and four were built by public-private partnerships, because delivering the service was always more important than any dogmatic adherence to a financial model. That is why, in my constituency of East Lothian, six high schools were refurbished under public-private partnership but two brand-new primary schools were delivered through traditional finance. That is how a new or refurbished school was delivered every week between 2003 and 2007. The best deal was obtained, whether the investment came from public or private sources. Mr Swinney's statement places him squarely in the same infrastructure procurement camp as all his predecessors, no matter how he tries to pretend otherwise. The Scottish futures trust's purpose is to allow him to pretend otherwise. The Scottish National Party told us that it would end PPP and that it would build schools and hospitals with public, not private, money. The SNP said that no one should make any profit from vital infrastructure for health and education services. Now, that means only no excessive profits and obtaining the best deal, wherever the investment comes from. Mr Swinney tells us that the non-profit-distributing model is at the core of the Scottish futures trust, but that is simply a version of PPP, which Argyll and Bute Council used first to build schools and which was agreed to, facilitated and launched by Mr Peacock. Last week, the cabinet secretary told the Finance Committee: "NPD models are part of the family of public-private partnerships".—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , 27 May 2008; c 578.] He tried to say that PPP is a generic term that covers PFI, which is bad, and NPD, which is good, but that is rubbish. The Bank of Scotland has said: "the projects, on which this assertion is based, are those ... amongst the first PFI projects ... when the market was embryonic ... The current PPP market is significantly different. It ... has attracted ... numerous bidders and investors who, in order to remain competitive in bidding projects, reduced their return target levels". PPP schemes were a vast improvement on PFI projects and NPD is a version of PPP that builds in the profit at the start. If it looks like a duck, walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it is a duck. However, the NPD model might be an ugly duckling. As far back as 2003, the Institute for Public Policy Research said that the NPD model would generate more profits, not less, because banks and subcontractors would charge more for assuming risks that the special purpose vehicle would handle in other models.  As recently as this year, the Bank of Scotland said: "it is less clear ... whether this model will attract sufficient numbers of potential" bidders "to ensure that there will be competition". That situation is happening now. Mr Swinney has used NHS Tayside's mental health developments project as an example of his NPD model in action, but he has not mentioned that one bidder for that project has withdrawn. In evidence to the Finance Committee, Canmore Partnership Ltd stated: "Not only do we regard the Government's position as unfair, it is also inconsistent". It also stated that the Government's NPD model would "limit bidders' appetite for such projects." It pointed out that the project now has only two interested parties and drew a comparison with a similar scheme in East Sussex that had far less attractive project fundamentals but 11 bidders.

It says that there may be a shared problem, which is not surprising, because the cabinet secretary's model is a PPP model. We must make projects more attractive to attract more bidders. The Scottish futures trust is PPP. The only people who are fooling themselves about that are SNP members. It is for them that the whole charade of the past year has taken place. It is for them that Mr Swinney is still ducking and diving, trying to pretend that the Scottish futures trust is what it was meant to be when the SNP promised it in 2006. At that time, the SNP leadership was in no doubt. Nicola Sturgeon told us that finance would be raised through bond issues, which would crowd out PPP. It took Mr Swinney the best part of seven months to turn that statement into a consultation document, which, when it appeared in December, was not widely welcomed, as he has sometimes claimed, but widely laughed out of court. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities said that the model would not work; the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers said that local authorities could not afford it; the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy said that it would cost more; Audit Scotland was worried that it broke accounting rules; and investors said that they were  baffled as to why anyone would invest in it. They all said that it made no sense. When the follow-up document "Taking forward the Scottish Futures Trust" appeared, we discovered that "details of how investment will be raised ... has not been explored in any detail" and that bonds are just one of 14 possible ways in which finance might be raised. The SFT is not moving forward but is in full-scale retreat. That would matter little if the future of Scotland were not at stake. Here is another true sentence from last week's statement. The cabinet secretary said: "Infrastructure investment is vital for Scotland's economic growth and the provision of excellent public services." Amen to that. However, we have seen the rail link to Edinburgh airport cancelled, the Aberdeen western peripheral route delayed, the Waverley line delayed and calls for investment in digital infrastructure rejected out of hand. Last week the cabinet secretary said: "the certainty of our investment plans is a particular strength in these times of ... troubled markets."— [ Official Report , 28 May 2008; c 9005, 9006.]  That is just complacency. The Bank of Scotland states: "The current situation means ... that there is, in effect, no Scottish market to speak of." It goes on: "current lack of clarity over infrastructure delivery in Scotland has caused a number of the major PPP players to view Scotland as a place where it will be increasingly difficult to do business. Some have already stated they will not seek to bid any more projects here". According to The Sunday Times , "Salmond trusts plan will drive out Scottish firms". The cabinet secretary comes before us to excuse the inexcusable. It is inexcusable that, while he thrashes about, schools, hospitals and transport infrastructure that should be built are not being built, capital investment on which economic growth depends is stuttering, and the investment and construction communities are losing patience and interest. Nothing symbolises the Government's confusion more than the Forth bridge project. The Liberal amendment is right to draw attention to the matter, because it is an iconic project. The First Minister knew that when he promised that it would be built using patriotic bonds. We know that it will not, but we do not know how it will be built. We suspect that Mr Swinney does not know either. I am old enough to remember the days when people crossed the Forth in a small car ferry. If Scotland must wait for the Government to sort out one or  other of the 14 possible ways in which it might finance the bridge, we could find ourselves taking to the Forth in boats again. Scotland's investment community will be looking to invest in small roll-on, roll-off ferries rather than the construction of a new bridge. After all, at least the ferries floated—the Scottish futures trust does not. It is not just holed below the water line—the ship has sunk, and captain Swinney and his crew are in the lifeboat PPP. They should admit that, get over it and get on with building the schools, hospitals and bridges that Scotland wants. I move amendment S3M-2057.3, to insert at end: "notes the comments of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth acknowledging that his priority is to get best value and the best deal for taxpayers whether that investment comes from private or public sources and welcomes the statement on page 7 of the strategic business case which provides for guidance, structuring and compliance for ongoing non-profit distribution (NPD)/PPP programmes, firmly placing PPP at the heart of the Scottish Government's strategy, and believes that in the interests of Scotland and its people it is now time to end the confusion surrounding the SFT, admit that it is based on the same principles as those proven financial models which have delivered new schools and hospitals and that it is time to restart the building of schools, hospitals and the transport infrastructure."

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking with regard to the listing of the Coeval building in Prestonpans. (S3O-3544)

Prestonpans has a proud industrial history, which involves mines, potteries, soap works and—of course—the salt pans, but little remains of that history's physical manifestations. Fowler's brewery's old headquarters is the sole remaining historical industrial building in the town. It is a strange kind of inverse parochialism that says that because the building is only of local historical interest, it is not worthy of being listed. The local community and, in particular, the local arts festival have many ideas for saving the building and thereby enhancing the town. I hope that the minister will reject the advice that she has received against the listing of the building and will instead listen to Panners who wish to see this bit of their past preserved.

The cabinet secretary's statement contained little mention of the idea of local authority bonds. However, when the business case was launched, that idea seemed to be central. Local authorities have had the power to issue bonds since 1975, but none has chosen to do so. If no council has chosen that route to build infrastructure for which it is responsible, why on Earth does the cabinet secretary believe that councils will choose that route to build national infrastructure for which he is responsible?

A few minutes ago, Mr Mather correctly described Scotland's good record on inward investment. However, a concern about the Government's plans for a local income tax is that employers might find that they have to absorb the financial pain that their work forces suffer, thus raising their cost base, which could be a disincentive to potential inward investors. Will the cabinet secretary commission and publish an independent assessment of the likely impact of his income tax plans on Scotland's  competitiveness in the foreign direct investment market?

The First Minister made a couple of passing references to energy efficiency in his statement but none in his answer to Mr Stephen's question. At no time did he explain how a year of saying no to nuclear, no to wind and "not really" to microgeneration is moving Scotland forward in any sense. A year ago, on 4 June, the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism promised an energy strategy for Scotland "in coming months". His MEP colleague Alyn Smith has now written to him to complain that projects the length and breadth of Scotland are floundering because of the lack of a national framework. Eleven months have passed. How many more months will it be before we have a coherent energy strategy?

It is traditional to say that the debate has been interesting. That might slightly overstate the case, but it has certainly been a debate with different views. We and the Tories agreed only once all afternoon, when Alex Johnstone agreed with Michael McMahon that the SNP's motion is unambitious. Perhaps that is why we have heard from SNP members a fair bit of repetition of the same dubious claims of progress. I exclude two SNP members from that statement. Michael Matheson talked about the need for culture change to improve public services—for more openness, transparency and engagement, instead of public bodies thinking that they can do what they want and ignore the consequences. I agree with that important point. However, I also agree with Charlie Gordon that the Scottish Government has failed to show those qualities: not only has it reduced the budget detail that is available to the Parliament and refused requests for more information, it has—as Robert Brown said—taken many decisions first and consulted after. The latest example of that is the extension of the ScotRail franchise well before it had to be done, without any consultation such as that on the original letting of the franchise. Mr Don talked about how to improve front-line services for their users. He mentioned the in control system. That is an important and powerful concept in care that—as he said—builds on direct payments, which are not available widely enough in any case. Such moves should be supported. The rest of us probably spent too much time arguing about how many quangos there are or are not, so I will carry on with that. Many members talked about the SNP's pledge to cut the number of quangos by 40 per cent, on which the SNP has  claimed great progress, but not all of that progress bears examination. In several cases, the suspicion remains that two or more quangos have simply been merged and that they retain all their functions and costs. That might reduce quango names, but it hardly qualifies as streamlining. Derek Brownlee and other Tories have made that point eloquently in the past, but they did not get round to it today. I presume that that is because, once again, they held us to account and let the Government off the hook. Gavin Brown was in the final minute of summing up before he mentioned the SNP Government. The Tories really miss the point. As several members have said, in the past year, the Government has by our last count established 39 all-new consultative committees, groups, councils and other bodies. Mr Crawford seems to believe that giving those organisations a different name means that they do not count, which is a pretty strange way to operate. That is not an example of the left hand not knowing what the right hand is doing. It was claimed that reorganising the enterprise network cut 21 local enterprise companies, but they have been replaced by 48 new national, regional and sub-regional organisations. I acknowledge the help of Tavish Scott in calculating that; he has pointed that out several times. That arrangement is not as streamlined as it was presented to be. As Jeremy Purvis eloquently showed, the system in the Borders is not more effective either, and other, similar, examples exist. No one could argue with the principle of the Government's seeking greater focus on the outcomes that it wishes to achieve, but we are entitled to consider the effectiveness of its progress, which is central to the premise. Only yesterday, Mr Mather said in the chamber that he was told—in Canada, I think—that "Cash may be king, but focus is queen."—[ Official Report , 7 May 2008; c 8332.] That is another inspiring slogan to go above the ministerial desk, but I fear that there is still no space on any ministerial desk for Truman's famous plaque that said, "The buck stops here." More of that later. The Government's key instrument of focus is the national performance framework, in which we find five strategic objectives, one purpose, seven purpose targets, 15 national outcomes, 45 national indicators and targets and 11 local government spending priorities. On top of that we are promised 32 single outcome agreements. Tavish Scott is right: we have hankered after a sighting of a single outcome agreement for a long time. After all, we signed off £11 billion on the promise of those agreements. I have before me  the City of Edinburgh Council's single outcome agreement, which runs to 62 pages. If every council is equally assiduous, we can expect about 2,000 pages of single outcome agreements. After the famine will come the feast; we can be pretty sure that this is not really streamlining. The motion mentions not only focus but alignment. It is certainly the case that there is not much point in having outcomes to aim for if efforts are not aligned with them. The inescapable fact is that investment is a major element of those efforts. The Tory amendment tries to bodyswerve that, but although its words are innocuous Derek Brownlee rather gave the game away when he claimed that councils have been overfunded. The amendment may be innocuous but it hides a harsher analysis that we will not support. The City of Edinburgh Council agrees with my point about investment: the common theme that runs through its single outcome agreement is the lack of finance available to achieve the outcomes.

I am sorry, but I am struggling for time. A particularly interesting example is: "Class Size 18—additional funding for both accommodation ( ... £16m) and teachers ( ... £7.45m) is required to address the financial implications of meeting the national outcome." That is a national outcome with no money to deliver it. The truth is that only the rhetoric of this Government is aligned with its outcomes—resources are not. That applies not only to local government, but across the piece. We know, and we have heard, how some savings will be achieved. They will be achieved through measures such as those described by Mr Purvis. His experience mirrors mine in East Lothian, where headteachers are struggling to find savings in next year's budget and many are proposing teacher reductions, bigger classes and more compositing. East Lothian parents are pretty clear that their education service will be reduced. That is not an efficiency saving; it is a cut. There are two defences. One is the Lord Nelson defence, which was used by the Deputy First Minister last week when she put the telescope to her blind eye and said, "I see no cuts—they are not happening." The other is the Pontius Pilate defence, when hands are washed and we are told that it is a matter for councils and is nothing to do with the Government. Mr Crawford came up with a new one today—the Dr Who defence. Whenever a cut is found, they get in the TARDIS and go back through space and time until they find a Labour Administration that they can blame it on, no matter how long ago that was.  I mentioned the plaque on Truman's desk that stated, "The buck stops here." The other side, which faced Truman, said: "I'm from Missouri—show me." That must be this Parliament's approach to the Government's claims of effectiveness in public services: it has to show us, not just tell us.

Does the member acknowledge that the Prime Minister and the Scottish Labour Party are as one in believing that David Cameron as Prime Minister would damage the country irrevocably?

Mr Mather stated that the agenda of the SNP and Mr Swinney is being supported in the polls. However, we have seen a poll this week that shows that their ultimate objective of independence—or is it separation? We are not sure—is supported by only 19 per cent of Scottish people. That seems to contradict his point.

The member must allow me to intervene on that point.

I have with me figures from the Scottish Parliament information centre for the number of central heating installations carried out in the past four years. In 2006-07, there were 14,425. In the two years before that, the figures were 16,002 and 15,207 respectively. In 2003-04, the figure was 16,788. In order to spin the figures, the SNP Government is not counting central  heating systems that are installed in the social rented sector.

I well recall the SNP Government's reluctance to debate its own budget, yet it has brought to the chamber a debate on a budget for which neither it nor the Parliament has any responsibility whatsoever. Despite Derek Brownlee's rather tortuous justification for the debate, the UK budget is a reserved matter and we do not intend to vote on it, just as we did not vote on identity cards, defence or a European referendum.

Our position is exactly as we have set it out. The Tories' problem is that discussion of the UK budget sits properly in a Parliament in which they have a single Scottish MP and therefore no voice. The Scottish Parliament is a legislative body, not just a debating chamber. I remember that, in its early days, it undertook historic legislation on land reform and abolition of the feudal system, and cutting-edge legislation on incapacity and homelessness. The SNP Government's legislative  programme is so light and so slight that the Government has to revert to Opposition tactics to construct its business, posturing where it does not have power rather than delivering where it does. I do not argue that the UK budget does not have a significant impact in Scotland—of course it does, which is why it has been extensively debated and scrutinised by Scottish MPs at Westminster. Indeed, those MPs are passing more legislation that is relevant to Scotland than the Scottish Government is producing here. The legislation at Westminster includes legislation to protect whisky—our national drink—in global markets. My colleague Jackie Baillie will deal with whisky later, but the whisky industry is doing well, with record exports and new distilleries opening up. There have been no job losses in that industry—quite the reverse. In other industries, however, 2,000 jobs have gone in the past year, to the sound of silence from SNP ministers. Perhaps we should have debated that today, on May day.

I say to Mr Neil, who was not present on that occasion, that I said neither of those things. His informant is incorrect. Many of the measures in the budget will have a positive effect in Scotland. Some 600,000 families will benefit from increased child benefit, 300,000 families will benefit from increased child tax credit, 750,000 households will benefit from additional winter fuel payments and 87,000 workers will benefit from the increase in the national minimum wage. John Dickie of the Child Poverty Action Group said of the budget: "This is excellent news for Scotland's poorest children and children facing poverty across Britain." However, a mistake was made in the abolition of the 10p tax band. The extra support in the budget leaves most of those who paid only or mostly the 10p rate better off. However, it is clear that the abolition would have a detrimental effect on those who are low paid but childless and on pensioners under 65 years. That is wrong, and it should not be allowed to happen—nor will it, because a commitment has been given to compensate those groups and to backdate that compensation to 1 April. Many Labour Party MPs voiced their concern and said that they would reflect it in how they voted. The United Kingdom Government listened and responded. Mr Swinney is right—we should compare that with what happened with the Scottish budget. Concerns were expressed that budget decisions  would have a detrimental effect on some of the most vulnerable groups in society. Every day brings more evidence that those concerns were well-founded. Amendments were moved to stop pensioners paying water rates, to protect women suffering domestic abuse and to support families living with disability. Were those concerns heard? No. Were those concerns responded to? No. Did those concerns come from any of the Government's back benchers? No. SNP members turned up like the claque at the opera and applauded whatever was put in front of them. When the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth found additional resources, did the SNP back benchers argue that the money should be used to alleviate poverty or to benefit low-paid workers or hard-pressed pensioners? No. They demanded that it be handed out to small businesses as a quicker, bigger rate cut. The 10p rate and the impact of its abolition have been exhaustively debated in Westminster. Here is what one MP said about it: "No one is going to reinstate the 10p band at a cost of £7 billion; we are looking for mitigating procedures".—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 28 April 2008; Vol 475, c 106.] That is a fair point. It was made by Stewart Hosie of the SNP. So SNP London does not support the position in the motion. SNP MPs recognise the compensation that is on offer. The First Minister went all the way to London to vote for it, not a reinstatement of the 10p band. On fuel poverty, too, the motion fails to recognise what has happened since the budget. On 9 April, the UK Government concluded an agreement with energy suppliers, in line with the budget announcement, to increase support through social assistance programmes by £225 million over three years. On 23 April, the Government, the energy industry and the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets met and prepared further concrete proposals which will be announced when election purdah in England ends. Meanwhile, the fuel poverty forum in Scotland has not met for a year; the SNP housing consultation ignored fuel poverty altogether; the SNP oppose Sarah Boyack's energy efficiency bill; and fewer central heating systems were fitted last year than in any year since 2003, and the waiting time has doubled. Those are the figures, Mr Swinney. What vow of silence have the Scottish ministers taken that has stopped them bringing forward a fuel poverty action plan? The truth is that Labour in Westminster has taken more action on fuel poverty in the past month than the SNP has taken in the past year. Whether we discuss jobs, child poverty, pensioner poverty or fuel poverty, we should debate the lack of action here, where we can make changes, rather than debate the real action  that is happening elsewhere, which we can only applaud by comparison.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to support Scotland's tourism industry. (S3O-3130)

We support the 50 per cent growth target, which is shared between Government and the industry. In the minister's discussions and meetings with the industry, surely everyone will tell him that raising skills levels in the tourism workforce is central to achieving the growth that we want. However, how can that possibly be achieved by the sudden ending of adult apprenticeships in hospitality, travel and tourism, with no programmes to replace them?

I fear that the First Minister may, uncharacteristically, have underplayed the agreements that were reached in the United States. His Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change has a blog that I found this morning in which he describes his location as: "Banffshire: Scotland: United States Minor Outlying Islands". Nonetheless, visitors from the rest of the United States will still, we hope, come here and visit these "minor" islands for next year's year of homecoming. The First Minister simply did not explain how ending training programmes in hospitality, tourism and travel, at the very time when he is promoting the tourism industry in the United States—which we support—will ensure that those visitors get the welcome that they deserve and which we hope they will have. Will he explain that now?

In his meetings with representatives of the financial services sector, what does the First Minister say about their  very real fears regarding the damage to their industry and its competitiveness that is threatened by his plans to make Scots pay at least 15 per cent—probably more like 25 per cent—more in income tax than the rest of the United Kingdom?

I share Mr Brown's concern about the failure of single outcome agreements to appear. The difference between us is that he was willing to sign off £11 billion of public expenditure without knowing what the single outcome agreements were, whereas we were not. Does he now regret that?

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government will take to ensure that charities and voluntary organisations currently funded by the new futures fund will not be adversely affected by the ending of that funding. (S3F-637)

The First Minister's response provided no answers for bodies such as the Aberlour Child Care Trust and the Salvation Army, which tackle addiction and support vulnerable families, particularly in Glasgow. The replacement funding to which he referred will not be available to such bodies until September, by which time projects will have folded. Will he order emergency transitional funding, to save jobs and preserve vital work?

I thank Patricia Ferguson for giving us this opportunity to mark Fairtrade fortnight with this debate. It is appropriate that we do so, as Scotland has a proud record in the fair trade movement and played a more important role in its origins than is often remembered. My involvement with Fairtrade fortnight goes back to 1986, when I joined Oxfam as a campaigns organiser. As several members have said, at that time there was really only one product, which was campaign coffee. A few enthusiasts would buy a share in a container of  coffee from Tanzania or, latterly, Nicaragua—often in partnership with the Max Havelaar Foundation in Holland—and, incredibly, that coffee would be shipped to a flat in, if I remember correctly, Stockbridge in Edinburgh, where volunteers would pack it by hand before hawking it around any outlet that would take it. Promoting fairly traded coffee was a centrepiece of Fairtrade fortnight at the time, and I spent many evenings persuading Oxfam campaign groups to ask their local supermarkets to stock it, even if it was only for that fortnight—breaking out into the main stream in such a way was our holy grail. That was a truly thankless task. I well remember the jubilation when our group in Alloa succeeded in talking the local Co-op into taking a small supply. It was trumpeted as a national success—so much so that, a year later, we sent them back to repeat it, only for them to be told not to worry because last year's coffee was still on the shelves. To have got from that position to today, when Fairtrade sales have reached nearly half a billion pounds in the UK, and one in every four bananas sold in Britain is fairly traded, is astonishing. The key was to commercialise the quality and the presentation of Fairtrade products without compromising the ethical principles behind the idea. Edinburgh-based Equal Exchange was a leader in that field, and it still is. Cafédirect—the coffee that finally laid to rest the idea that drinking fairly traded coffee was only for those with a strong stomach—led its assault on the coffee trade from Edinburgh. I pay tribute to Lorna Young, Cafédirect's first sales director—her life was cut tragically short in 1996, but her work lives on, and Cafédirect is now the sixth-largest coffee brand of any type in the UK. The Fairtrade mark that she, Equal Exchange, Oxfam and Christian Aid helped to create now endorses more than 3,000 different products. Aileen Campbell was right to say that Fairtrade still depends on volunteers and their commitment. In my constituency, I pay tribute to the work of the Fairtrade shop in Prestonpans. During Fairtrade fortnight, I went to a very well-attended screening of the documentary "Black Gold", about the global coffee trade, which was organised by Earth Matters, a local Fairtrade shop in North Berwick. As a result, a steering group is now working towards making North Berwick a Fairtrade town. Patricia Ferguson was right to say that the most important thing in all of this is the benefit that Fairtrade brings to producers. In the case of Cafédirect alone, that means that more than 1.5 million farmers and their families benefit from a fair price and from investment in their communities. Fairtrade is of course the lever and the example that drives wider trade justice, but I celebrate the  fact that a handful of enthusiasts in a basement flat in Stockbridge can take on the market in the world's second most-traded commodity, and bend it to their will. That is the lesson and the promise of the fair trade movement: that there is no supply chain so long that it cannot be bridged; no cartel so closed that it cannot be broken; and no trade that cannot be made fairer by people of good will in the determined pursuit of justice.

In his budget statement yesterday, the chancellor announced new money to improve the quality of science education and expand apprenticeship programmes to tackle skills gaps in industry. Indeed, apprenticeship opportunities in England will rise to around 500,000. Will the First Minister commit to matching that with 50,000 apprenticeships in Scotland before Scotland and Scottish industry are left behind?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether, following its statement to the Parliament on its waste strategy, reports that energy-from-waste plants will only be permitted if they have a capacity of up to 100,000 tonnes per year are accurate. (S3O-2412)

I think that my constituents in East Lothian will find that reply disappointing. The cabinet secretary's comment in his statement that the Scottish Government would not support the building of large-scale energy-from-waste plants was welcome, and the press appear to have been briefed that that would have had the effect of halting the construction of any plant with a capacity of more than 100,000 tonnes per year. For the sake of clarity, it would be helpful if the  cabinet secretary would indicate whether the proposed scheme near Dunbar, which includes plans for an incinerator with a 450,000 tonne capacity, is unlikely to go ahead under the waste strategy.

Does the member agree that, following last night's announcement, another consequence is that we would lose the First Minister? Of course, the Parliament would have 28 days to choose a new one. Will Mr Neil consider putting his hat in the ring?

rose—  [ Laughter. ]

In order to return the compliment, I say that I hope that Mr Brownlee is in charge of the Conservatives' election campaign, given that there cannot be a Conservative voter in Scotland who believes that there is any longer any point in supporting the Conservative party—they might as well vote SNP.

I grant that this first budget of the third session of the Scottish Parliament makes a little history, as it is the first driven by a minority Government. Eisenhower said: "The history of free men is never really written by chance but by choice; their choice!" This budget is about Mr Swinney's choices. He had a choice when he set out on the budget trail. He could have chosen to construct openly, through the institutions of the Parliament, a budget that every side of the chamber could support and welcome. That would have been a great parliamentary triumph. It would have been the bigger prize and the higher road to take. However, that road was not taken, and no amount of protesting too much from the cabinet secretary or his back benchers can hide that fact. They chose instead to seek a backroom deal or two that would scrape them through budget votes at every stage. They have chosen the lesser prize, sought party—not parliamentary—triumph and pursued not consensus but a charade. We have had to watch the faltering dance steps of the nationalists and the Tories—a kind of strictly come budgeting, without the revealing behind-the-scenes shots of any mis-steps, tears or tantrums, much as we would all love to see them. This has been a tartan Tory tango, which has stretched from November to today. The partners—Mr Swinney and Mr Brownlee—have pulled apart sometimes and looked away from each other. There has been some stylised, petulant head tossing from Mr Brownlee, signalling that more demands need to be met before the deal is sealed. There has been the odd bit of ritual foot stamping from Mr Swinney to let us know that every inch he gives will have a cost elsewhere. However, every time the music swells to the climatic moment of a vote, the partners spin back  into each other's embrace and all is well—and so shall it be again today, I do not doubt.

Absolutely. I am ready any time. There is more: like all true romances, this one is strictly exclusive. Not only have the Tories been required to vote with the SNP at every stage but they have also had to vote against improvements to the budget from any other party, even when that meant voting down amendments that would achieve their core demand: funds for additional police recruitment. Of course, the reason that was given for their failure to support amendments that reflected their manifesto—police numbers was not the only one; they voted against vocational courses in schools and help for pensioners with their water rates—was that they could not agree with where we got the money from.

I accept Mr McLetchie's point, but I put it to him that our proposal would have given more help to more pensioners than the Tory proposal, so it was surely superior. The Tories' reward for their support is an amendment that gives extra funding for police recruitment of almost exactly the same amount that they voted down repeatedly and takes money from budgets from which we suggested shifting money with one exception: some of it has come from the prisons budget. That was one of the red lines that the Tories were not prepared to cross, but they will cross it today. The tactical choice that the SNP made was never to seek consensus but rather to seek narrow party advantage. It culminated last night in the unedifying pantomime of a First Minister threatening resignation from behind the safety of deals that were already done. That was an act of vacuous bravado that sums up his Government's approach not only to the budget but to government in general.

No. It is bad enough to choose the low road of partisan political tactics but, at its heart, the budget contains a far more serious strategic choice— another wrong choice. The budget is driven by a coarse and discredited economics that says that economic growth and social justice can be fuelled by tax cuts alone. That is not social democracy. Again and again we are told that economic growth is promoted in the budget through the business rate cut—which the cabinet secretary today announced would be accelerated—but, to achieve that, the Government is cutting in real terms spending on education, transport and enterprise, including skills and training. Those are all key programmes that support economic growth.

All those issues are contained in the terms of that reasoned amendment. If John Swinney reads it, he will see that it mentions two particular areas in which we wish to see improvements. Similarly, we are told again and again that the budget promotes equity, solidarity and cohesion solely through a freeze in council tax. However, it cuts spending on housing and regeneration, concessionary travel, deprivation and educational maintenance allowances, which directly target poor families. Many of the services on which the most vulnerable depend are delivered to them by local authorities, but the budget does not provide councils with enough to deliver those services. After inflation and the council tax freeze, our councils share only £175 million for service growth—0.5 per cent.

No. Those are serious choices with serious consequences for the country's future, and they are wrong. That is why we have brought to the table at every stage in the process—in subject committees, in the Finance Committee and in the chamber—amendments that would mitigate the budget's consequences and broaden its benefits to those who seek to make a future for themselves and their families and contribute more to our future prosperity. Those amendments would also help pensioners with water bills, families caring for disabled children, the homeless and victims of domestic abuse. We proposed more than 20 costed amendments, which is 20 times the number of budget improvements the SNP managed to stir itself to offer in eight years of opposition and 20 more than the zero that the Tories ever managed in eight years in opposition. We chose those amendments to reflect not only our core concerns but the concerns of the  voluntary sector and trade unions and the concerns of the business community on issues such as the route development fund and skills. All those amendments would have shifted resources to skills, training or education, to support for vulnerable groups or to the protection of funding for vital environmental measures on areas such as waste management and flooding. I do not understand the point about waste management and flooding: either local authorities have ring-fenced money that is allocated for those priorities or Mr Swinney cannot come to us and say that he is investing more or less in those priorities. They are simply one part of the £11 billion that we are asked to sign off as part of the budget. At no stage have we lost the argument on those proposals. They were simply blocked as part of the backroom deal. At no stage did the Government offer alternative improvements in those areas. Our purpose has never been to block the budget or bring it down. We leave such brinkmanship to others. Of course the budget contains things that we support and welcome—how could it not, given that it represents more than £30 billion of expenditure? Our purpose has always been to improve and strengthen the budget and to protect better the future of our country and our people, especially those who need our protection the most. That is a greater purpose in every sense than the Government's objective, which is just to get the budget through. Had we achieved our purpose, the real winners would not have been Labour members in the chamber but thousands of future apprentices; hundreds of thousands of school students with access to skills and vocational training; tens of thousands of disabled children; and tens of thousands of families fleeing abuse. The Government's approach to this budget round has let down and diminished the Parliament. It has defied the Parliament's scrutiny and disrespected its structures. The budget itself lets down so many of our people and diminishes Scotland's future. That is why, whatever happens at decision time, our scrutiny of the budget will continue day by day, with the purpose of bending it towards social justice. That is the promise held open by our amendment, which I commend to the Parliament. I move amendment S3M-1296.1, to insert at end: "but, in so doing, calls on the Scottish Government to continue throughout 2008-09 to seek ways to expand programmes of skills and training generally and modern apprenticeships specifically; to secure national minimum standards of service for vulnerable groups and to make a statement to the Parliament outlining how it will achieve this."

Does Mr Swinney acknowledge that one factor in that might have been that, in its eight years in opposition, the SNP managed on only one occasion to lodge an amendment to the budget bill?

The cabinet secretary said that the 25 per cent limit for energy-from-waste technologies will be included in the national planning framework, both nationally and regionally. East Lothian Council has before it a live planning application for an energy-from-waste plant. Without, of course, commenting on the specifics of that proposal, can he say whether, in principle, the new limit would be a material consideration in determining the outcome of an application that has already been submitted?

To ask the Scottish Executive why it intends to change how low and intermediate-level radioactive waste from the civil nuclear industry is dealt with. (S3O-2005)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his answer and for the written answer from him in similar vein, which I received today. At Torness nuclear power station, in my constituency, low-level waste is not currently stored on site; instead, it is managed at Drigg. Can the cabinet secretary assure me that his answer means that there are no plans to seek to store low-level radioactive waste at Torness, whether it originates from Torness or from elsewhere?

I rise to support the principles of the Government motion and to move the amendment in Jackie Baillie's name. No doubt the idea of a dormant bank account is a novel one for most of us, expect perhaps the minister. Throughout my life, my bank accounts have tended to be not so much dormant as near death. However, it has been well known for many years that a great deal of money is lying unused and unclaimed in dormant bank or building society accounts. The UK legislation to which the LCM relates is a welcome solution, as it will release those resources so that they can be used for the greater good. It is entirely appropriate that the resources released be distributed to the nations of the UK and that in Scotland the Scottish ministers and this Parliament decide on their distribution. After all, the resources must be used for social and environmental purposes, which are devolved responsibilities, so any other arrangement would have been perverse. I note the assurances that the minister gave the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee and which he repeated today, that the income from this source will be separate—or, dare I say it, ring fenced—in the Big Lottery Fund. I also note his assurances to the committee and the Parliament about addressing concerns that committee members expressed about the fund's application and decision-making process. Our amendment seeks to acknowledge the requirement for consultation about the distribution of funds, but also the widespread view that particular consideration should be given to the  provision of youth services throughout Scotland. I doubt that there is a member present—whether they represent a constituency or a region—who cannot cite examples of the fact that youth-work facilities and services often struggle to compete with other causes for funds. Equally, every one of us can certainly describe the turning around of a young life or lives through patient care and selfless support and work, which is often done by volunteers and which usually reaches out beyond the formal structures of the education system. Every young person who is supported thus to find their way in life becomes a driver of a better future for our country. That is important, because although the bill will create a revenue stream, it will begin with a windfall of the order of £40 million or more. Rather than simply being spent, a windfall should always be invested in something that gives us a future return, and investing in our young people would do exactly that. That is why we believe that there should be a presumption in favour of using the funds in that way and why we have great sympathy with Mr Purvis's amendment and the amendment that was lodged but not moved last week. We are still inclined to the view that the legislation requires a stronger acknowledgement than Mr Purvis's amendment provides, which is why our amendment seeks a balance. However, we will see how this morning's debate progresses. I repeat that we believe that there should be a presumption in favour of using the funds to support youth work. We seek an assurance on that from the Minister for Schools and Skills, when she closes the debate, to allow us to decide how to vote at the end of the day. Whether the legislative consent motion is amended or unamended, the bill is good legislation and considering the matter is a good, if short, morning's work. I move amendment S3M-1200.1, to insert at end: "and, in so doing, calls on ministers to ensure a full and open consultation involving all interests with a social or environmental purpose and, in particular, organisations providing services, facilities or opportunities to meet the needs of young people; notes that a further vote will be required in the Scottish Parliament, and calls on ministers to return to the Parliament at the conclusion of the consultation exercise for further consideration of the distribution of the funds not later than September 2008."

We have had this discussion before. Our amendment calls for an additional 15,000  modern apprenticeships, which would take the number of modern apprenticeships, not training places—that number is greater—to 50,000. Is the cabinet secretary guaranteeing that he will do that at some point in the future and, if so, when?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I appreciate Mr Neil's point. According to the same logic, does he therefore agree that those who vote against the Labour amendment will be voting against 15,000 apprenticeships; 20,000 nursery places for vulnerable two-year-olds; support for 40,000 homeless people; and vocational opportunities for 300,000 secondary school pupils?

Throughout the budget process, we have tried consistently to find ways of holding the Government to producing the number of additional officers that we all know it promised in May—1,000. On how many police officers have the Conservatives done a deal with the Government?

We consider today the principles of the budget bill. That takes us to the heart of the debates that we have had in the chamber and in committees over recent weeks. We know what the express purpose of this budget is: we are told—the cabinet secretary repeated it today—that it is the single purpose of the Government to create a more successful country with opportunities for all Scotland to flourish through increasing sustainable growth. We accept that, we agree with it and we support it. In fact, the aim contains a fundamental truth to which we hold fast, which is that we cannot build prosperity—certainly not sustainable prosperity—without fairness and opportunity for all. As we face the unprecedented challenges of climate change and globalisation, which we have seen in recent days, we ask ourselves where we will find the capacity to rise to those challenges and make Scotland's future better. The answer can only be by releasing, nurturing and investing in the potential of our people. That is the bridge between the need for economic growth and the desire for social justice. Constant expansion of access to education, skills and training, and through that to work in enterprise of ever greater value, productivity and return; the promise of progress both individually and collectively for us all; a relentless refusal to accept the loss or leaving behind of any Scot through poverty, disability or disadvantage of any kind, because the diminution of the future for any one of us diminishes the future that we will all come to share: that principle should be at the heart of Scotland's budget, but it is not. We hear that it is—the cabinet secretary says so, but to will the end is not enough if the means do not follow. The idea of investing in skills is in the budget document and in the Government's skills strategy, but the resource to back it up is not apparent in the budget. The enterprise lines in which funding  for skills is to be found are falling. I know that those lines contain other expenditure too, but at best that means that skills investment is static. Despite asking repeatedly, we have received no assurance, for example, that more apprenticeships will be created to match the expansion that is happening elsewhere in Britain. The recent Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development report that was debated in the chamber last week praises a great deal in our education system, but it also specifically suggests that vocational opportunities in schools should be widened. The cabinet secretary mentioned that today, but the budget targets not a single penny at that objective. It has been reduced to a single sentence in the local government concordat and is unsupported, so far, by local government sign-up or by any resource. Meanwhile, the inadequacy of the allocation for higher education, especially in the year that is covered by the bill, has been well articulated and is now well known. The likely cost in loss of competitiveness in our universities is clear, and there will be no increase in places for Scottish school leavers in our universities. We cannot look for comfort, either, in investment in infrastructure, which can also drive economic growth. We have already seen the Edinburgh airport rail link project go, and we hear that a Europe-compliant replacement for the air route development fund is apparently beyond the wit of the Government—although I note that the cabinet secretary declined to rule out absolutely a marketing-based alternative to the fund. We might even have expected a Government that loves to brag of its vision and its aspiration to look for and find the resource to invest in an updated digital fibre-optic network. That would give us a competitive advantage for the future—the kind of competitive advantage that the cabinet secretary talked about today when he commented on the gross domestic product figures—as the previous Executive's investment in increasing broadband accessibility in Scotland to among the highest levels in Europe did. The budget also falls short when it comes to social justice principles. We simply do not know the extent to which services for those whose potential will be lost without early intervention, extra respite, protection from violence or support through mental illness will be protected or improved. An assurance about that is promised to us when single outcome agreements with local authorities are agreed in April, but we are in January. Today, Parliament is being asked to agree to more than £11 billion of expenditure without knowing what the Government will agree to deliver come April. That is not good financial accountability.  We have been accused of not trusting local government. That is not true—it is the Scottish Government that we do not trust, and we have plenty of reasons not to trust it. The local government settlement might well have been the best on offer, but it is not enough to cover inflation, to compensate for there being no rise in local taxation or, for example, to reduce class sizes in primaries 1, 2 and 3 by 2011, as was promised in this chamber by the First Minister. Labour-led Glasgow City Council demonstrated this week that it can be trusted on services. It introduced dramatic plans to improve care of the elderly. It is also pioneering skills academies, which will provide the vocational opportunity that we want for school students throughout Scotland. In Scottish National Party and Liberal-led Edinburgh, home care services are being reduced. In SNP-led Fife, home care charges are rocketing and people are stranded in hospital. In Grampian, there is the warning that front-line police budgets may be required to plug a gap in the pensions fund. In SNP-led East Lothian, schools have to contemplate not just efficiency savings but cuts in teacher numbers.

My examples are of preparations that are being made for next year's budget. That is why, in East Lothian, schools are looking at cutting teacher numbers. Those are early signs of how the SNP budget might play in SNP local government. In mathematics, there is a curious object—the Möbius strip. It turns and twists back on itself, it seems to have a dimension missing, and its topology is such that, if we trace its contours, we always end up in the same place. The SNP budget is missing the dimension of investment in prosperity and social justice. It twists and turns in on itself, with hundreds of budget lines folding into each other and then magically reappearing when ministers come under pressure in the chamber or committee. We are constantly told that the resources exist but we just cannot see them. If we trace the contours of the budget, we always end up in the same place: the priority is always the tax cut. The Government has broken promise after promise to achieve just two promises—the council tax freeze and the business rate cut. Promises on police numbers, class sizes, first-time buyer grants, support for special needs pupils and, of course, dumping student debt were all ditched. That is the principle at the heart of the budget; it is not a social-democratic contract. That is the  priority that takes precedence every time, even at the cost of failing Scotland. That is why the principles of the budget, unamended, are unsupportable.

If Mr Neil checks the record, he will find that Labour members abstained on that decision. The Government will try to argue that the council tax freeze is fairness and the business rate cut is enough to drive economic growth, but they are not. Mr Chisholm was right—that was the evidence to the Finance Committee, not least from Professor Bell. No one believes that a cut in small business rates is, in and of itself, sufficient to drive economic growth in a developed 21 st century economy—especially if it is at the cost of driving forward on skills and education. No one, that is, except the Tories—or the Scottish Tories, I should say, because even David Cameron does not believe that one any more. The Scottish Tories, however, have taken the SNP's hand and helped it through every stage of the budget process. They helped the SNP to avoid the need to debate its departmental budgets. They helped it to avoid providing proper detail on the budget. They ran interference for the SNP on every debate that we have had. They voted against skills and training, against help for pensioners and against specific higher police numbers. They even voted against the union on one occasion. Today, the Tories will claim a great victory. They will get the SNP to promise that it might consider thinking about whether it could perhaps do something at some point in the future—something that it should have been doing in the first place, because it was in the SNP's manifesto.

Now I know what the phrase "a shiver looking for a spine to run up" means. In a previous debate, I called the Tories the "useful idiots" of separatism: I gave them too much  credit. This is a pyrrhic victory for them. If their deal is on police numbers, it had better be for 17,261 officers, because when we return to ask in 2011 whether the promise has been delivered, we will ask that of the SNP and of the Tories, too. The budget can be improved by relatively small adjustments—the cabinet secretary agreed that they were—to invest properly in our young people, so that more of them can benefit from apprenticeships. With the will, we can reduce the number of school leavers who drift away and lose their chance of a future. A small amount of money in the route development fund kick-started more than 40 air routes to Scotland and money could be spent on promoting further new flights in different ways to build up clientele in the early years. To build their confidence, our universities could today be guaranteed the first call on future end-year flexibility. Instead of heaping scorn on the worries of organisations that work directly in the most difficult circumstances with vulnerable and disadvantaged people, the Government could find a way to provide the assurances that they seek. We have proposed all that and more. We have suggested where resources could be redirected, by trimming growth in budgets that were increasing and by redirecting lines that are always underspent. None of that would cut baselines and the hysterical reaction is frankly juvenile, especially from a party that, in eight years in opposition, did not have the guts to construct a single costed budget amendment, with one exception. Yes—we suggest that the Government invest a little less in Scotland's tarmac and a little more in Scotland's talent, because the budget compromises not only a long list of SNP promises, but the promise of Scotland's future. By all means find a better way of funding the measures, but the Government should not tell us that, in a budget of £30 billion, it cannot find the money to support the proposed changes. If Parliament supported the Labour amendment, 15,000 more Scots would have apprenticeships; 300,000 secondary school students would have extra chances to learn a trade; 10,000 two-year-olds whose life chances are already in jeopardy would have extra, earlier support that might bring them through; and 20,000 women and their children might make the break from their abusers and rebuild their lives in peace. Today could be about whatever backroom dodgy deal the SNP can do with whichever parties to get its budget through, or we could support Labour's amendment and make today about the deal that Parliament should do with Scotland's people and the promise that we will do the best that we can for them. If we do that, how many times over will we all share in the return?

The SNP's budget is for the SNP's own ambitions and interests. We can make it a budget—

Will the minister give way?

The 2006 figure that Mr Mather uses is particularly low because of the outage at Hunterston. What proportion of Scotland's electricity generation is provided by nuclear power today?

To ask the First Minister what steps will be taken to meet the Scottish National Party's target of expanding tourism in Scotland by 50 per cent by 2015, in light of recent comments by Philip Riddle, chief executive of VisitScotland. (S3F-421)

We share the desire to meet the 50 per cent target, which was introduced under the previous Executive. One way of supporting tourism is to promote air links to Scotland. In recent days, the proposed Aberdeen to Houston link has been postponed and the established Inverness to Heathrow route has been lost. Will the Government now revisit its decision not to replace the air route development fund, which has enabled hundreds of thousands of visitors to fly directly to Scotland?

Will the minister give way?

This is not an apology at all. That was simply a gross distortion of my intervention. Mr Brown used a direct quote taken from a speech that was attributed to me, but which was a quote from NCH Scotland. I am concerned about what could happen with ring fencing, but those concerns have been expressed most eloquently by those who deliver the services directly. Mr Swinney made a gross misrepresentation.

I am puzzled by Mr Johnstone's point because Mr Brown, who is sitting next to him, said exactly the opposite in his speech, using Scottish Enterprise budget lines as an example. We do not have the same level of detail as we had previously.

Will the member give way?

I did not say that I was concerned about a postcode lottery. I said that NCH Scotland was concerned about the possibility of a postcode lottery. I am not expressing the fears of the Labour Party but the fears of those who deliver the services.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Mr Neil is correct—I am frustrated. He is claiming an increase in the housing budget, but I demonstrated this morning that it is being reduced in real terms over the next three years. Changing £1.5 billion to £1.6 billion is actually a reduction in real terms over a three-year period.

Mr Brownlee makes a fair point. However, we know that the outcome agreements  will be available to us at the beginning of April at the earliest. My point was that we are being asked to sign off £11 billion of spending against outcome agreements that we will not have until April. Have I missed something? Perhaps the member will correct me.

The cabinet secretary is now hiding behind the Parliament's budget process. That is a disgrace. Two weeks from now, when he brings the budget bill to Parliament, we will lodge amendments on each and every one of those areas according to the proper process, which has been agreed. He should not hide behind the private nature of committee reports. That is a disgrace.

I am pleased to open the debate, which is designed to allow further scrutiny of the Government's spending review. As members know, our opinion was and is that cabinet secretaries should have debated their departmental budgets in Parliament, defended their decisions and clarified how their decisions support their departments' objectives. The Government refused to do that, which raised the question of what it has to hide. That question remains, for although we have had almost two months to examine the Government's spending plans, we still see them "through a glass, darkly." The "glass" to which that phrase refers is a mirror: it has, indeed, been a budget of smoke and mirrors. First, we had the hysterical but synthetic outrage at the level of the settlement, which I have no doubt will be echoed today. All that sound and fury was intended to divert attention from the fact that Scotland obtained from the settlement what the Scottish National Party expected when it made its manifesto commitments. The settlement amounts to almost £90 billion, which renders ridiculous any argument that when the SNP fails to deliver or welches on its promises, it is someone else's fault. Then the budget document appeared, but what did not appear were most of the level 3 budget lines, all the grant-aided expenditure totals for major local government services, comprehensive capital expenditure figures and real-terms  spending trends at level 2. All that detail was introduced into budget information at committees' request after consideration of previous budgets. The previous Executive agreed to provide that information, which the Government has now removed without consultation. The Finance Committee wrote to ask the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth for that detail, as did the three main Opposition parties jointly, but the response was a list of 170 lines of budget information that had been rolled up—it has disappeared—and which could not be tracked or scrutinised. On top of that, 43 specific and previously ring-fenced funds have been dissolved into the single local government line. I will return in a moment to the concordat with local government, but first I will get to the heart of the matter. Parliament is being asked to authorise through three budget lines £11 billion of funding to local government to deliver uncosted service developments, without any direct link to outcomes. The same situation applies to the block allocation of £8 billion to health boards. In total, that is £19 billion in year 1 alone that the Government will ask Parliament to sign up to providing through what will be, in effect, a blank cheque. The minority Government does not have a mandate to govern unsupported. It should provide more information and more transparency in order to build an informed consensus.

That Administration did not provide more detail, but the point is that, in previous consideration of the budget, it was agreed that more detail would be supplied in future years, for exactly the reason that has been given. The Government gives every appearance of deliberately hiding the detail of its budget to avoid proper scrutiny. However, we can see clearly the string of broken promises that the budget contains—on police numbers, home buyer grants and smaller class sizes by 2011. Mr Swinney also prefaced his spending review statement with his confession to Scotland's students that instead of dumping their debt, he was dumping them. Growing anxiety among those who deliver or depend on services is clear. Much of that anxiety relates to previously ring-fenced funds. The Prince's Trust has said: "Potentially thousands of young people won't get the support they need and deserve."  Children 1 st has said: "The current climate is unpredictable". The Scottish Association for Mental Health has said: "funding we rely on ... may come under much more pressure". NCH Scotland has said: "We could ... have a postcode lottery". Shelter Scotland has referred to a significant threat to about £600 million to £700 million of what we usually call the housing budget, and Scottish Women's Aid has said: "This could mean a vast reduction in refuge and support services". The Government has heaped scorn on those fears and described them as "negativity", but they are not just our concerns—they are the concerns of the homeless, the mentally ill, the disabled and their carers, young people who are fighting addiction, and women who are fleeing domestic violence. If those people find it hard to share the mood of optimism that the Government loves to claim exists, that is because they have been let down by life, society and all of us too many times not to fear for the services that they need. If those people find it hard simply to accept the assurances that the money for all those services is available and that there will be no problem, perhaps that is because those assurances come from the same people who promised to provide 1,000 extra police, smaller class sizes and first-time buyer grants, and to pay off student loans. Mr Swinney will surely say, as he always does, that I do not understand the new relationship that he has with local government. [ Interruption. ] I do not doubt that many SNP members—from sedentary positions or otherwise—are sharpening their Pat Watters quotations for the debate. However, they should remember that when it was put to the president of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities that Alex Salmond had promised to Parliament that there would be class sizes of 18 in primaries 1, 2 and 3 by 2011, Pat Watters said: "And which council is he a member of?" When COSLA's chief executive was asked about the concordat indicators, he said that COSLA had "not signed up to them." The Government cannot give the assurances that it has given. I have heard John Swinney being compared to a bank manager. I think that it was meant kindly and was meant to suggest that he is dependable and can handle figures, but he asks us to see him as a bank manager—as someone who handles other people's money with little more than a word of  advice as to how they might spend it. A bit of a threat of bank-managerial sternness is also present. On ring fencing, the minister responsible for housing told The Big Issue : "If we find a local authority who decide to use the money for something else entirely, we can always re-introduce ring fencing." That is called having your cake and eating it. Such services matter so much because they tackle disadvantage and deprivation. Any budget should be measured by its contribution to social justice. I accept that removing ring fencing does not mean that services will certainly be lost, but it creates such fears, which the Government should not dismiss. Other budget lines are also central to social justice and, as the smoke clears a little, we see that they are certain losers. On the day of the spending review announcement, every housing organisation protested that the housing budget would be cut in year 1 of the review period. They were told that they had to consider the whole three years and that the housing budget would really rise by 19 per cent. The budget allocates £1.6 billion to housing over the spending review period, but the previous Executive spent £1.5 billion on housing and regeneration over the previous spending review period. In real terms, that is a cut in the housing budget. We now have detail of the fairer Scotland fund. It rolls up seven existing funds and it is budgeted at £145 million for each of the next three years, but those seven funds already add up to £145 million, so that is another real terms social justice cut. If the budget fails the social justice test, surely it must invest in economic growth, given that the Government's all-embracing priority is sustainable economic growth. However, again the Government remains unconvincing. On infrastructure, we have already lost the rail link to Edinburgh airport and we still await an announcement on the M74, although to be fair we are assured that the funding is in the budget. There is no funding allocated to upgrading Scotland's digital infrastructure and there is no replacement for the route development fund, which has supported more than 40 direct air routes from Scotland. In recent weeks we have seen the cancellation, or at least the postponement, of the new route between Aberdeen and Houston and the cancellation of the Inverness to Heathrow link. Those are straws in the wind, but they are not encouraging. It is when it comes to investing in its people that the Government's budget fails most. We have very good participation rates in higher education, but  they are still lower than in many of the countries with which we will have to compete in the potentially difficult economic times ahead. Our universities are now telling us that they will, as a result of the budget, have to cap participation rates. When it comes to vocational training in schools and modern apprenticeships, we have still to hear of a single guaranteed extra place, while in England the huge increase that was recommended by the Leitch report will be delivered 10 years early. We are in danger of being left behind. The budget could be better—small changes could improve it markedly. We will continue to argue for and promote in the budget process funded amendments that would inject social justice into the budget, better secure Scotland's economic future, and which would invest in our young people and their skills and in those who undertake higher education.

I cannot because, as the member knows, we are pursuing all the amendments and improvements to the budget through the budget process in committee. Those debates currently remain private. We will lodge those amendments two weeks from now and if they are accepted they will make possible the guarantee of, for example, 15,000 additional apprenticeships, vocational opportunities in every school in Scotland and support for connecting Scotland through direct air routes. Those are three examples that I can give straight away. I do not doubt that the Tories will hold the Government's hand throughout today's debate, as they have done at every stage of the budget. I am not surprised, because when we defend the interests of the homeless, the disabled, the disadvantaged, poor pensioners and young people trying to get a start in life, we expect to find the Tories on the other side. I began with an allusion to 1 Corinthians, chapter 13, verse 12, for those who were awake. The next verse refers to the great virtues of faith, hope and charity. The trouble with the budget is that it asks us to accept far too much on faith rather than providing numbers or evidence. In too many areas, including the central one of supporting economic growth, it substitutes hope for solid investment where it is needed. The Government should show a little charity or—even more unlikely—humility. It should respond to concerns about its budget and amend it before it comes before Parliament as a bill. It would be the better for it.  I move, That the Parliament regrets the difficulties faced by subject committees in scrutinising the Spending Review 2007 due to the failure of the Scottish Government to provide figures to the level of detail established in previous budget consideration; notes the widely expressed concerns that provision in some areas is inadequate or rendered vulnerable through immediate removal of ring-fencing, and calls on the Scottish Government to work with the Parliament's committees in their detailed consideration of these areas and, as a starting point, amend its spending review proposals to boost economic growth and protect the most vulnerable in our society.

Mr Adam says that, if we criticise the budget, we are required to produce an amendment that brings in money from somewhere else. I was not a member of the Parliament for the past four years. Perhaps he can remind me how many times the SNP, when in opposition and complaining about something not receiving funding, produced an amendment in that form. Once?

Will the member give way?

Will the member acknowledge the problem that, in arriving at its growth rates, the  Government has gone back more than 25 years? That includes a couple of recessions under the Tories, which rather drags down our economic success in later years.

The previous Executive made economic growth its top priority, so we whole-heartedly support the economic strategy's purpose of increasing sustainable economic growth and opportunities for all. One clear difference from previous approaches is the setting of a target for economic growth. The choice of targets seems curious, given their relativity—they are moving targets, as Mr Purvis showed in his intervention. The target of matching UK growth begs the question: what happens if UK growth drops? Will we have achieved our target even if our economy slows but the UK economy slows more quickly? In any event, we know that Scotland's gross domestic product growth matched or exceeded the UK figure 13 times over the past 26 quarters. The recent picture is perhaps not as bleak as the Government would like it to appear. Nonetheless, the purpose of increasing economic growth is a vital one. What matters is what we do to achieve it: targets will not, in and of themselves, drive economic growth. The reality check is whether the budget invests in the strategic priorities that have been identified to drive growth, as Mr Swinney make clear. The promised small business bonus scheme is part of the strategy and we support it in principle, although in our view it is a missed opportunity. The scheme could have been used to incentivise training or energy efficiency. There was a potential double win. In Scotland, we have a great track record of support for innovation and business growth, through successful, ground-breaking initiatives such as the proof of concept programme and the  Scottish co-investment fund. However, the budget lines for Scottish Enterprise and for innovation and investment grants, which we would expect to include such programmes, are falling in real terms, and "The Government Economic Strategy" does not appear to contain new ideas on support for innovation. That is disappointing. On infrastructure, the picture is worse. Not only are funds for major public transport projects falling, but the rail link to Edinburgh airport, which was the single most important economy-related public transport project in Scotland and had the best cost-benefit ratio of any rail project since devolution, has been cancelled. What is more, the route development fund, which was the single most successful initiative, which connected Scotland with the world and which supported some 46 new direct routes to Scottish airports, has also been cancelled. The fund had to be changed to remain European Union compliant, but it has gone completely. In its former life, the SNP never stopped banging on about the importance of direct air routes to Scotland, and Scottish business agreed. Does the Government think that Scottish business no longer cares about direct routes to Scotland? I think that Scottish business cares about direct routes.

The point is that the route development fund gave us the competitive advantage over the rest of the UK that the Government supposedly seeks. Two iconic projects have been cancelled, and the business world is asking whether the M74 extension is next. The preparatory work has been done, so why cannot construction begin? Immediate progress on the project is a central test of the Government's commitment to Scotland's economic infrastructure. The greatest test of investment in economic growth is investment in our people. In his foreword to "The Government Economic Strategy", the First Minister calls Scotland's people "our greatest asset". He is absolutely right to do so. We cannot afford to waste the potential of a single Scot. Yesterday I met someone who works in the construction industry, who complained to me that we produce only 200 structural design engineers a year. He knows of a single university cluster in India that turns out 4,500 design engineers a year. The jobs that he cannot fill in Scotland are being  outsourced to Vietnam. On the way to that meeting, I heard Polly Purvis, from ScotlandIS, talking on the radio about the skills shortages in information and communications technology. There are 7,000 unfilled vacancies in a skills set that is a core driver for growth. How can a Government that is committed to economic growth produce a budget in which the enterprise lines for skills funding are cut—in cash terms, never mind in real terms? Why are our universities in open rebellion—however Mr Swinney double or triple-counts the figures—threatening to freeze student numbers and predicting that they will fall behind their competitors?

How can the pressing need for wider vocational opportunities in our schools be reduced to one sentence in the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities concordat, with no funding, targets or hope of progress? How could Mr Ingram tell my colleague Rhona Brankin last week that there will be no additional apprenticeships in Scotland? To take such an approach is not to stand still but to go backwards—[ Interruption. ] Ms Hyslop is disagreeing from a sedentary position, but I assure her that that is what Mr Ingram said. On the day when Mr Ingram told us that there would be no new apprenticeships in Scotland, the responsible minister in the UK Government announced 120,000 new apprenticeships in England. In my council area, when an apprenticeship is offered, there are 300 applicants. We need those apprenticeships, but we are falling behind.

I am sorry, but no. The settlement could have delivered skills academies in every part of Scotland, science and maths centres of excellence and 1,500 new apprenticeships. It could have guaranteed that no 16-year-old would be allowed to drift without education, training or a job—they will soon be given such a guarantee elsewhere in the country. Those who criticise compulsion miss the point: the compulsion is on us. We need to find ways in which to harness every talent, no matter the challenge. I was a teacher when the leaving age was raised and I taught so-called ROSLA—raising of school leavers age—classes. It was tough, but we found ways to succeed. The Government is in danger not of compromising an election promise, but of compromising the future promise of a generation of our young people.  In the strategy, the Government has willed the end, but, in its budget, it has failed to will the means. When he was pressed on the matter at the launch of the strategy, the First Minister fell back on what, in his world view, is the means to any end that anyone cares to chose: independence. All over the world, nations are coming together to build single markets, single currencies and single regulatory unions to drive economic growth in global markets. That is happening in America, Asia, Africa and Europe, but our Government wants to go the other way. Frankly, if Scotland was independent, the Government would argue in its economic strategy for closer links with the rest of this island. Our financial services and energy sectors would demand markets that were more closely integrated and greater access to the English market, which is 10 times the size of the Scottish market. According to the Government's own figures, the English market is worth £14 billion.

The fact of the matter is that we are part of a national grid that allows us to sell into England. We do that day in, day out, and yet the member wishes to break that arrangement. The strategy says that Scotland was an economic leader 100 years ago, but it misses the point that that was precisely because of the pooling of markets, resources and risk in the union. It is really hard to understand why a Government that talks so much about economic growth is, in real terms, disinvesting in skills, higher education, and economic infrastructure.

I am sorry, but the cabinet secretary has never, on any occasion, allowed me to intervene on her. [ Interruption. ]

It is also hard to understand why all the crucial drivers are deprioritised in favour of a business rate cut, which is welcome but not enough, and a council tax concordat that jeopardises progress, even on early years policies such as class sizes. It is hard to understand those things unless, of course, The Wall Street Journal of 31 October is right in saying that the next country to adopt  Reaganite policies is Scotland. It went on to gush that "The First Minister sounds a lot like the Gipper". Members might think that Mr Salmond would protest, but no, he could hardly hide his delight—indeed, he purred that he was "a long time advocate of supply side economics." We always thought that Mr Mather's fiscal fairy dust was a joke, but perhaps it is no laughing matter. It may be a darker magic of the sort that even George Bush senior called voodoo economics. We should worry about what spell the SNP wants to work on workers' rights and the minimum wage, if the Government were to get its hands on them, as the strategy suggests it should. We are entitled to ask whether the Government's economic strategy is simply the empty vessel that makes the most noise. The purpose is admirable, but the means are lacking. In every area that the Government has deemed a strategic priority—one that is vital to the delivery of its purpose—investment is static or even falling. There is nothing new in the document. On skills, infrastructure and higher education, the Government's budget has failed its own test of purpose. The rhetorical roar of the Celtic lion is simply a cover for a real-world whimper of actual investment—or is there something worse here? Reaganomics, laissez-faire, trickle-down, the Laffer curve, crackpot economics—call it what we will, we are entitled to ask of the strategy, "What manner of economic beast is hidden here, slouching toward separation?" I move amendment S3M-883.3, to insert at end: "calls on the government to make the necessary investment in skills, schools, colleges, universities and infrastructure, and believes that Scotland can best achieve sustainable economic growth as part of the United Kingdom."

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will John Swinney make it clear to the chamber that, in reaching the figure that he gave for the increase in higher education funding, he is counting cumulatively over three years, and that, were we to apply that method of counting to the additional resources from the spending review, we would find that he has received £7.2 billion over the next three years? Either way of counting is fine, but he must be consistent.

I think you will find that if you had been listening you would have heard me indicate the areas in which we intend to do that, but as we discussed at some length last week, the proper place for that to happen is the committee—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. "I thank the minister for his statement and for providing an advance copy of it. I welcome aspects of it, as do we all, but I do so with the caveat that the devil is in the detail ... Members of all parties could make more considered and useful speeches if the debate were held some days after the statement was made. The arrangement must be changed. It is nonsense to have so little time". That is how Mr Morgan opened the debate for the Scottish National Party on the previous spending review in 2004. Later, a certain Mr Lochhead agreed, saying: "We have had barely a few minutes to digest the statement. I hope that we can come back to the topic in the very near future to have a proper debate on it."— [ Official Report , 29 September 2004; c 10675, 10685.]  It is a great pity that, now that Mr Lochhead is a minister, he and his colleagues are unwilling to produce the budget and defend it in detail as we asked them to do last week. The question remains: what do they have to hide? Moreover, it is a great pity that they appear to have removed from the budget documents the real-terms spending tables that their predecessor Administrations normally included. Perhaps that was to hide what appear to be real-terms cuts in the energy budget, the enterprise budget and the tourism budget, which are hardly the mark of a Government with economic growth at its heart. Perhaps it was to hide the spending cuts that are emerging even as we speak this afternoon: the 6 per cent cut in next year's budget for affordable housing—which has been slammed not by us but by housing organisations and is hardly the sign of a Government that is prioritising housing need—or the real-terms cut in culture spending from a Government that often talks about its commitment to Scottish culture.

My point was that, if we had more time, we could argue about the calculations. However, that is not my calculation but the calculation and considered view of Shelter Scotland, the Chartered Institute of Housing in  Scotland, the Scottish Council for Single Homeless, Scottish Churches Housing Action and the Association of Local Authority Chief Housing Officers. More time would have been good because this budget is of enormous importance. It shapes the investment of almost £90 billion over the next three years. We should dwell on that figure for a moment because, this afternoon, we have heard yet again the broken record of complaint that, somehow, nationalist ministers have been short changed, robbed and mugged in the comprehensive spending review. Let us look at the facts. In March, the SNP said that it expected to get £1.8 billion extra over the three years of the review period. Even by its own arithmetic, which I do not accept, the SNP received more than 99 per cent of that. On top of that, as Mr Swinney boasted today, it has access to £900 million more in end-year flexibility funding. Therefore, the SNP has almost exactly what it expected it would have to spend. In fact, a week before the settlement, the nationalist spin doctors fanned out to tell the media that Scotland would get only a 1 per cent real-terms increase. Even by the SNP's own dubious arithmetic, it got a 1.4 per cent increase, so it seems that in the end the SNP got more than it expected. Therefore, that single transferable excuse for every failing will not do. The Government got almost exactly the budget that it expected when it made its promises to the voters. A senator once said: "A billion here, a billion there, and soon you're talking about real money." Well, £30 billion a year is real money and we have a real increase year on year, so those who voted for the SNP will believe that they have every right to expect it to deliver what it said it would. The budget is one of broken promises. The week began with the tortuous confession from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice that the true number of new police officers was not 1,000 but 500. In fact, the budget will recruit fewer additional police officers than either of the previous two Administrations recruited. Then, more quietly, in the erudite columns of The Times Educational Supplement , the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning admitted that the First Minister's promise to have class sizes of 18 in primaries 1, 2 and 3 by 2011 also meant something different. Today, we hear that the promise might be delivered some time, somewhere, but that was not the pledge that the First Minister gave in the Parliament—to paraphrase Gladstone, a promise delayed is a promise denied.  We hear, too, that the promise to Scotland's students to write off their loans has been ditched. We always knew that that promise could not be afforded and, I suspect, the SNP always knew that, too. This morning, we had the sight of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, hours before he stood up in the Parliament, going to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities as a supplicant, desperate for a signature on a deal and gambling everything on being able to come here today with a piece of paper—the Neville Chamberlain of Scottish politics—claiming a council tax freeze. However, as he admitted, he cannot claim that, because the 32 councils will make up their own minds. The point is that Mr Swinney does not want councils simply to deliver his council tax freeze; he wants them to deliver all his other promises, too. He is trying to pass over to local authorities responsibility for the promises on class sizes, school buildings, free school meals, increased nursery provision, carers and respite care. The First Minister visited my constituency today to open a new primary school. He was welcome and he was right to come, because it is an excellent new school that was funded and built by a Labour council under a Labour-led Executive. The Government promised to match our school building and refurbishment programme brick for brick, but Mr Swinney cannot make that promise today. He has outsourced the promise to local authorities. Our programme was for 250 schools. Will he build 250 schools? He simply cannot say. The Government should be clear: we will hold it accountable for its promises. It will not be able to hide behind local councils when promises are broken, any more than it will be allowed to hide behind the settlement. We will work hard to examine constructively how the budget can provide more skills opportunities for our young people as well as support for respite care and for renewing our town centres. We will work with others in the Parliament to examine constructively how we do that. However, we will hold the Government to account. We once called the SNP manifesto the longest betting slip in history. Those who placed their bet on the promises on police officers, class sizes, student grants or first-time buyer grants have today seen those promises fall at the first hurdle while others disappear into the mist or into the distance. The race has some way to go yet.

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement and for the advance copy of it. On hearing today's statement, there is a real sense of "At last!" On at least 60 occasions in the chamber, ministers have been asked about their policy intentions and have told us that we must wait for the strategic spending review. That is what  we have done. The implication was that, come that day, all would be revealed. It was not. In fairness to Mr Swinney, all budget statements produce more questions than answers. For 18 months, the SNP told Scottish students that they would write off their debt immediately. This afternoon, it took Mr Swinney 18 seconds to ditch that pledge. Does he agree that he has let those students down? On 5 September, the First Minister confirmed that class sizes in all primaries 1 to 3 would be 18 or fewer by 2011. Will Mr Swinney confirm that that pledge has been broken today? Mr Swinney referred to the Government's economic strategy, launched yesterday, which rightly pointed to the importance of skills in building economic growth. How many new apprenticeships, how many more graduates, and how many more schools-based vocational courses will the budget fund to drive forward that economic growth?

This morning's debate is about the nationalist Government living up to its rhetoric. In the first days of this session of Parliament, much was made of the recognition that we are a Parliament of minorities. There was much rhetoric about recognising that no single party had a majority, and what that would mean for our deliberations. The First Minister was clear on that. On his first day in post, he made a solemn pledge: "My pledge to the Parliament today is that any Scottish Government that is led by me will respect and include the Parliament in the governance of Scotland over the next four years. ... We will appeal for support across the chamber policy by policy."— [ Official Report , 16 May 2007; c 36.]  Later in May, he said: "Good ideas—well researched and well argued—will be welcomed and considered."—[ Official Report , 23 May 2007; c 58.] Fair enough. As Mr Purvis and Mr Henry have pointed out, the Parliament then spent several weeks debating the Government's priorities. Ideas were suggested from all sides of the chamber—ideas on skills, justice, energy and the renewal of our towns. However, in those weeks, one idea grew on all sides of the chamber: the idea that it was all a charade and that the Government had not the slightest interest in being prepared to listen and learn. What the Government was interested in  was avoiding the chamber's scrutiny by any tactic to hand. Even the present Government could not avoid forever facing real votes on real debates. It had, eventually, to produce a programme for government—a legislative programme—and submit it for the scrutiny of the chamber. It did that for the grand total of less than one and a half hours. Members will recall that, the following day, the Government found rather more time for a debate in which it congratulated itself on finding additional funding for the Crichton campus. We all know the importance of the spending review that Mr Swinney will present next week. It will set the direction of health, education, housing and transport for the next three years. It will affect every aspect of public policy so much that, for the past six months, the nationalist Government has been unable to tell us anything of what it will do. On no fewer than 60 occasions in the chamber, ministers have refused to answer questions until the comprehensive spending review is announced—questions on care of the elderly, higher education funding, support for carers, mental health provision and student support. The list goes on and on. There is a great deal to hear and a great deal to debate. Our premise is simple: a statement followed by technical questions and a short debate next Wednesday afternoon is not enough time for Parliament to scrutinise the budget properly. Of course, the Parliament's committees will scrutinise departmental budgets in great detail, as Christine Grahame eloquently described. We have no intention of compromising that process. Those who have argued against our motion today on the basis that it seeks to change committee procedures have missed the point entirely. It does not do that. The point is that the SNP is seeking to bring us a budget that is greater than the sum of its parts. To prevent that, the budget process normally features a stage 1 debate on strategic spending priorities. We want to scrutinise Mr Swinney's budget line by line, but we also want to see a budget that, as a whole, drives economic growth, builds social justice and addresses the challenge of climate change. Those are big, strategic challenges that must be met by the shape and thrust of the budget in its entirety. It is good sense and good democratic practice that the Government's budget be judged as a whole against those yardsticks by the entire Parliament. It is simply nonsense to suggest, as Mr McLetchie did, that the chamber can debate any topic that it wants except the budget.

The proposition is to take time to consider how each departmental budget drives the strategic priorities of the Government and what we think those strategic priorities should be. The SNP's position puts me in mind of something that Clement Attlee said: "Democracy means government by discussion, but it is only effective if you can stop people talking." Clement Attlee was being ironic, but the Government is being serious. As for Mr Neil's claim that parliamentary debates undermine democracy, what kind of Orwellian doublespeak is that? The next thing we know, the SNP will be rewriting its manifesto to pretend that it did not make the promises that it made. No—it has done that already.

No. I am sorry, but I need to move on. The SNP Government loves to talk about its strategic vision and aspiration for Scotland. It loves to talk about it on TV and in newspaper interviews, and the First Minister loved going to America to talk about it there. Why will the SNP not talk about its strategic vision in this chamber for more than an hour and a half? Roseanna Cunningham gave the game away when she said that bringing the budget here would make life too difficult for ministers. Christine Grahame said that that would be "sabotage". It is impossible to escape the conclusion that the SNP is afraid that it will be found wanting.

I disagree with the final part of that intervention. We are asking for additional, high-level scrutiny of the strategic priorities of the budget as a whole. Whatever the SNP is afraid of has sent it running off for help, and it has found help where it always does—in the age-old tartan Tory alliance. The Tories' position this morning is St Augustine's position, is it not? "Lord, give me chastity and continence, but not yet." Their amendment says, "Give me proper scrutiny of the budget, but not  this year." It says, "Give me a spine as a proper Opposition, but not yet."

I am sorry, but Mr Brownlee would not take my intervention. He must sit down. Perhaps the Tories, too, do not want to consider the big questions about the budget—how it drives economic growth and social justice, and how it addresses climate change. After all, the last time that the Tories had control of an economic strategy, they delivered two recessions and black Wednesday. The last time that they pursued their version of social justice, we had 3 million people on the dole and society was so divided that there were riots in the streets. Or perhaps the Cameron effect has arrived, not in any rise in poll ratings but in the Tories' craven willingness to be the nationalists' fellow travellers—the useful idiots of separation—for whatever short-term political gain they can find. Whatever the reason, they are letting the Government off the hook this morning, and that is to their shame. Next week, a budget that will shape the spending of almost £90 billion will come before the Parliament. It will determine how our economy grows, how just our society is and how sustainable our future will be. We ask simply that a Government that boasts of its vision and transparency bring that budget to the chamber and defend it. It is not too late. The Government has until 5 o'clock to find its bottle and do that. The Tories have until 5 o'clock to find their spine. What are they afraid of?

rose—

rose—

Perhaps looking back to his ministerial career, the minister can remind members on how many occasions in stage 1 budget debates we undertook exactly the debates that we are seeking to introduce.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

The member makes a perfectly valid point that we could have used our debate this morning to examine the comprehensive spending review. Does he accept that, instead of that, we chose to use the debate this morning to try to ensure that members have five opportunities to discuss exactly that topic and how it affects Scotland? Why can he not support that?

rose—

Mr Harvie's point is entirely reasonable. If the SNP proposes to bring in 1,000 extra police officers, we will support the proposal, so that those officers can be delivered. The point is that the SNP is not making that proposal.

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?]

Will the member take an intervention?

I want to correct Miss Sturgeon's mistake. The first debate that we brought to the Parliament was on education, which we see as an extremely important issue. That is why we think that it is important to scrutinise the SNP's failure to deliver the policies on which it won the election.

Autumn is a reflective and quiet time and, as we head into our short October recess, the nights draw in, the leaves turn and we find ourselves far from the hurly-burly of an election season, it seems opportune to have a quiet moment of reflection, to look back over the 20 weeks that we have spent together and to see how the new SNP Government is doing. We are entitled to ask such questions because, in the run-up to the election, the SNP was very clear about the commitments on which it asked for the Scottish people's votes. It was even kind enough to tell them and us which of its commitments would be delivered by its Government in the very first 100 days. However, when we look, we find a string of broken promises and lame excuses. Let us start with police numbers. Page 21 of "It's time to look forward: The first 100 days of an SNP Government" says that, within the first 100 days, there will be "Publication of plans for 1000 increase in community police". The next page says that the Government will "employ 1000 additional community police officers". That seems admirably clear to me. However, by the time "Principles and Priorities: The Government's Programme for Scotland" was published, that had become: "We will work with police forces to increase policing capacity" by "the equivalent of 1,000 additional police officers". I do not really know what that means. Does it mean extra overtime? Does it mean shorter holidays? Does it mean that traffic cops will have to get out of their cars and walk the beat instead? Does it mean having a late retirement scheme,  which means that police officers who are ready to retire will not be able to do so? I know that it does not mean what the SNP manifesto said. That promise has been broken because the Government cannot make its sums add up. Let us keep the arithmetic simple. There are 16,000 police officers now. If another 1,000 are added, there will be 17,000 officers; if that does not happen, that is a broken promise. They say that if one is going to tell a lie, it might as well be a big one. In exactly the same way, if one is going to break a promise, it might as well be a big promise.

In truth, I could not hear the member's point of order because it was so ridiculous that it was drowned out by the hooting from members behind me.

The SNP's biggest promises have been on council tax. Although I do not agree with it, I quite accept that the Government is clear that it still wants to introduce a local income tax. I also accept that that cannot be done in 100 days—if it can be done at all by a minority Government. Instead, the 100 days document says: "We will first freeze the council tax". There are no ifs, buts or maybes in that statement. By June, however, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth was saying: "I am not making the decision. I am encouraging local authorities to move to a council tax freeze."—[ Official Report, Local Government and Communities Committee , 27 June 2007; c 40.] That is a broken promise because it could not have been a real promise in the first place; after all, the Government does not have the power to freeze council tax. Did it not know that when it made its promise? Did that lack of powers over local government just creep up and surprise it, or did it make the promise in the sure and certain knowledge that it would be broken? There are also promises that must have seemed like good ideas in an election campaign but which, from the perspective of Government, are revealed as simply daft. Help for first-time house buyers is a good idea, but what they need is more houses at more affordable prices. A universal £2,000 grant will not provide one single extra house—and, better still, its principal effect will be to increase house prices by £2,000. That promise is being broken because even this Government realises  that it was an election bribe that was too cynical and counterproductive to implement. It should simply own up and get on with finding ways of addressing housing issues. The list of broken promises goes on and on: smaller class sizes; the paying off of student loans, as pointed out in the Liberal Democrat amendment, which we are happy to accept; a criminal justice bill; a drugs commission; and the pledge to cut red tape for business, as addressed in the Tory amendment, which I am happy to commend to the chamber. However, let us not get bogged down in lists. Instead, we should consider the Government's strategic objectives, such as the greener Scotland objective. There is no bigger issue than climate change and no more urgent matter than cutting carbon emissions. The SNP agrees; its 100 days document says: "We all have a part to play in meeting the challenge of global warming". What part has this Government played? Even in these early days, decisions have already been taken. First, it wants to abolish tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges. However, it must also explain how it intends to avoid the 15 per cent increase in traffic volume and the release of 9,000 extra tonnes of carbon each year that such a move will cause.

From the very moment—

From the very moment the Government introduced its proposal, we have said that we will support the abolition of tolls. However, in order to do that, measures must be put in place to address the issue of congestion. Last week, the Government abolished the biggest public transport project in Scotland, which would have removed 1.7 million car journeys from our roads. It also tried very hard to cancel Edinburgh's trams and was stopped only by the will of Parliament. I believe that this Government is committed to renewable energy. Indeed, last week, the First Minister pointed out to me that the Government has speeded up the processing of wind farm projects. That is true; however, of the four applications that have been processed, the Government has rejected three. Although it has agreed to onshore wind farm developments, they  have to happen quicker. In that regard, we should not forget the example that the First Minister has set in ordering a couple of luxury Lexus limousines, which might be hybrid but actually produce more emissions than the cars that they replace. No wonder the SNP has had to break another promise: we now hear that there will be no mandatory annual targets in its climate change bill. We are reasonable people on this side of the chamber—

I accept perfectly that this Government is following the example of our Government in Westminster. The point is that this Government said that it would go further than that—and it is not. As Patrick Harvie pointed out, we are reasonable people on this side of the chamber. We know that no Government will solve climate change in 20 weeks. However, in only 20 weeks, this Government has done significant damage. That is not an achievement to be proud of. The Government is demonstrably not doing what it said it would do and yet there has been a whirlwind of activity—we know that, because the SNP has told us so. That is a good metaphor, because a whirlwind forms when storms start to spin, and spin is what we have had. We have a new name and new headed notepaper for the Government. It abolished availability status codes in the health service, but they were abolished again by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing in May and then abolished yet again a couple of weeks ago. We had a green energy day when renewables generating capacity surpassed nuclear generating capacity, except that it did not, because one is available almost all the time and the other is always intermittent. We have had a skills strategy that did not promise a single extra apprenticeship, college place or vocational course in schools. A whirlwind dissipates when it hits something real and solid. The SNP whirlwind is hitting up against the realities of government and, sure enough, it is dissipating. The excuses come out as to why the SNP cannot do what it said it would do, but it is doing exactly what we said it would do. We said that the Government would pick fights with  the United Kingdom Government at every opportunity, and it has done so. We said that it would blame the UK Government for all its failures to deliver, and it does. I repeat that, if one is going to make an excuse, it might as well be a big one. The big excuse is the comprehensive spending review. Time after time in the Parliament, we have sought assurances from ministers that services that are vital to the communities that we serve will be protected. Time after time, ministers tell us that they do not know because they are waiting for the results of the CSR. However, the envelope of the spending review has been known since the most recent budget. Are ministers seriously telling us that they have made no working estimate of how much they might have to spend? Either they have made an estimate and they are dissembling, or they have not and they are simply incompetent. However, the ministers know enough about the CSR to start briefing the press that the settlement will be inadequate, unfair and unequal. That is simply preparation for the biggest and lamest excuse of all. The Government harvested votes using promises that it could never afford, that it never had the power to deliver and, worst of all, that it had no intention of seeing through in government. Rather than take responsibility for that, it now seeks to dish out the blame. The truth is that the Government has twice as much to spend on Scotland as the first Scottish Executive had in 1999—it will have more than £30 billion to govern Scotland. However, this very week, thousands of Edinburgh school students are told that there is no money to provide them with the decent school buildings that they need, want and deserve—in 2007, in our capital city, there is no money for that out of £30 billion. Broken promises and lame excuses: let us have a national conversation about that. I move, That the Parliament regrets the SNP Government's failure to implement a range of policies that the SNP pledged to take forward in its election manifesto and its document, It's time to look forward , including reneging on the promise to set out plans to employ 1,000 additional police officers, backtracking on a council tax freeze, failing to implement smaller class sizes in every primary school and not delivering on plans to give £2,000 to first-time house buyers; recognises that the SNP Government is already letting down communities and hardworking families across Scotland, and calls on Scottish ministers to make a statement to the Parliament explaining why they have failed to implement these policy pledges.

The argument at the heart of this matter is the exact opposite of the argument that Patrick Harvie makes. EARL is the better scheme, precisely because the modal shift is greater: more people will use the train than will use their cars. The scheme that Mr Harvie supports will not get people out of their cars, no matter how much he might wish it. He is the one who is promoting car usership.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

On many occasions, my colleagues and I have risen to criticise the Government for reneging on its manifesto promises. I admit that the motion that it has brought to the chamber today fulfils a manifesto promise, albeit an entirely wrong-headed one. It is important to point that out: members should be clear about the promise that the Scottish National Party made. It promised to cancel EARL come what may—not if it was over budget or behind schedule; not if it had management problems; and not if there was a delay in procurement. The project was to be cancelled, full stop. For some reason, ministers felt compelled to dress up that political decision. First, they claimed that costs were out of control. When they were asked to produce the evidence, they could not. They then asked the Auditor General to construct the evidence, but he did not. They then claimed that the project was irretrievably broken, but it was not. Today, they said that they have found a better alternative, but they have not. They then presented other—extremely welcome—improvements to rail lines in central Scotland, as if the funding for those projects depended on EARL's cancellation, but it does not. We would have done those things, as well as deliver EARL. The SNP wants to cancel EARL, but not for any of those reasons; it planned to sacrifice the project to release moneys to fund other promises that it has made. Back in March, during the passage of the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill in the previous session of the Parliament, Fergus Ewing gave the game away by saying "that the money can be better spent on other projects." — [ Official Report , 14 March 2007; c 33136.]  He made clear that he meant projects in his constituency, as did Rob Gibson—in a piece in his local paper of 28 June this year—and Brian Adam, in a members' business debate only last night on the Aberdeen western peripheral route. That is  why ministers have been ducking and diving, seeking ways to defy the will of the Parliament. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth said in the previous debate on the subject that he would abide by the will of the Parliament, only to walk straight into a press briefing in which he conceded the case for Edinburgh trams, but averred that EARL had "had it". Even this week, the cabinet secretary and his ministerial colleagues attempted to avoid the full scrutiny of the debate that they had promised—they hoped to get by with a statement alone. Let us be clear: on 27 June, the Parliament instructed ministers to continue to progress the EARL project by resolving the governance issues that the Auditor General had identified. Instead of that, the cabinet secretary and his ministerial colleagues stopped work there and then on EARL. Today, they have returned to the chamber with a poorer alternative and, in so doing, they have defied and failed the Parliament, failed Scotland and failed our capital city. For the Tories, Mr McLetchie described the SNP position on EARL as "depressing negativity". He went on to say: "the SNP policy on the rail link and trams is hostile to the interests of our capital city and its role as a driver of the Scottish economy. The SNP is an anti-Edinburgh party, and its transport policy speaks volumes about its parochialism and provincialism."— [ Official Report , 14 March 2007; c33141.]  That is still true today, and I am sorry if the Tories have now U-turned into the SNP's siding of negativity, parochialism and provincialism. The project that our amendment supports would provide the best cost benefit ratio of any of the planned rail projects in Scotland—2.16:1 over 60 years—and almost £1 billion of benefit in the first 30 years. It would remove 1.7 million car journeys from our roads and connect 62 stations—serving 64 per cent of Scotland's population—directly to Edinburgh's airport, without a need to change. We accept that the scheme that the Government proposes is better than having no surface link at all and even that it will provide wider connectivity than a simple spur solution would. However, where are the full costings and the Scottish transport appraisal guidance appraisals? What is the cost benefit ratio? How many car journeys will the proposal save? Does the Government know? No. Does it care? No. In the minister's peroration about getting out of cars, he forgot to mention that, as Iain Smith rightly said, public transport works when it goes where people want to get to. The Government promises an airport station that is not at the airport and which will not get airport passengers out of  their cars. We are promised a journey time from Edinburgh to Glasgow of 35 minutes, which is good and welcome, but it will take almost as long as that to get to Edinburgh's own airport from the city centre. The proposal is simply second best and second rate. The SNP Government is fond of symbols. It has negotiated flag-flying protocols, changed its headed notepaper and got new ministerial business cards. The decision on EARL is a symbol of how serious the Government is about investing in the infrastructure and convenient international connections that a modern economy needs. EARL would be the kind of fast, simple and direct connection that international travellers expect and are used to elsewhere. What message will we send them if we cannot provide that? What message will we send the business community and the construction and engineering sector? The message will be that flagship projects such as EARL will be agreed, designed, legislated for, budgeted for and then cancelled on a political whim to pay for pork-barrel projects elsewhere. I have heard EARL described as a Rolls-Royce solution—it is, and why not? The SNP ordered a luxury Lexus limo for its First Minister, so why is it delivering a Reliant Robin rail link for the rest of Scotland? The Government might win the vote on the motion tonight, but if it does it will lose any credibility that it is big enough to take on the sort of projects that Scotland needs in order to compete in the 21 st century and it will lose any right that it might ever have had to claim to have vision and ambition for Scotland. [ Applause. ] I move amendment S3M-546.1, to leave out from "the Scottish Government's plans" to end and insert: "the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link as approved on 14 March 2007 and improvements to other rail services."

Any attempt to reduce the burden of bureaucracy on business is, of course, laudable and welcome. Yesterday, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth spoke about slimming down the enterprise networks. When he was asked what savings would be made and what the impact would be on costs and staffing, he was unable to give any indication at all. Can the First Minister explain, as he moves towards reducing regulation on business, how his success and progress will be measured and indicated to Parliament?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement. I am glad that he began by recognising some significant—indeed, world-class—successes of Scotland's economic development strategy, such as the proof of concept fund. I was intrigued when he said that some of the recent criticism of Scottish Enterprise was justified, while some of it was not. I wondered whose criticism he thought was justified and whose was not. I presume that his own criticism falls into the first category, but I wonder whether Mr Neil's criticisms, for example, fall into the other category. Today Mr Swinney came to the Parliament not to praise Scottish Enterprise but to bury it—or, at least, to dismember it radically—or so we had been led to believe. The Scottish National Party manifesto said clearly: "We will ... consult on proposals to transfer responsibility for local enterprise delivery to existing local authority Economic Development Departments." The Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism confirmed what that meant when he said to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee: "We have a strong aspiration for the LECs to be merged with local government."—[ Official Report , Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee , 27 June 2007; c 16-17.]  What, then, is the cabinet secretary's reasoning for moving away from that commitment and aspiration? Does he really consider a single meeting of 100 stakeholders to be a complete, rounded and comprehensive consultation on such an important issue? What consultation has been undertaken with stakeholders in the tourism industry, given that the cabinet secretary has announced today a change to the operation of VisitScotland, as part of the centralisation of the enterprise network into regions? Finally, what are the Government's plans for inward investment and Scottish Development International, which is a joint venture between the Executive and Scottish Enterprise that is responsible for Scotland leading the United Kingdom in inward investment, especially in research and development projects?

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to increase renewables generating capacity. (S3F-161)

In nearly five months, ministers have managed to process only four wind farm projects—that is the efficiency that the First Minister refers to. The Government has consented to one of those projects and it has rejected three, including one that, as the First Minister knows, is in his own area. On 21 January, Mr Salmond told the Sunday Herald that "There should be a cap on future developments. We should concentrate the development of onshore wind into suitable areas." The industry is puzzled. Is there a cap on wind power developments? Should the industry restrict its proposals to certain areas, and, if so, which ones? If there is no cap, when will the 4GW of renewables projects sitting in the First Minister's in-tray finally emerge?

It is entirely fair for the minister to say that investing in our skills is central to building a prosperous Scotland—almost every speaker has said that. Our complaint is that the strategy contains no guarantee of investment of any kind in the skills agenda.

On the first day of Mr Salmond's tenure as First Minister, in the very first question that Jack McConnell put to him, Mr Salmond was asked why skills had not featured in the statement of Government priorities that he gave that day. Mr McConnell did not receive an answer that day, and it has taken 120 days more to get the answer—of sorts—that we have today in the form of the strategy. The document is gracious enough to acknowledge that the strategy builds on the work of previous Executives. It says: "Scotland is the only nation or region of the United Kingdom where the percentage of people with a Higher Education qualification outnumbers the percentage with a basic school leaving qualification. Scotland's skills profile has also been improving faster than that of the rest of the UK". That is not a bad place for us to be in. However, we know that with, for example, China and India producing 4 million graduates every year, it is not a place in which we can stay unless we constantly and urgently raise our game on skills. We know that in 2020 three quarters of the workforce will be made up of people who have already completed their education and entered the workforce, which means that in-work training is crucial. Therefore, I am pleased that the document commits ministers to supporting the successful Scottish union learning fund and uses the excellent example of the agreement between the Amicus section of Unite and Rolls-Royce to illustrate it. The document is also correct to say that we have to ensure that our skills profile matches the needs of the labour market. That is a key task of the sector skills councils. The strategy's commitment to that approach and its endorsement of the UK commission for employment and skills is another welcome aspect of the document. However, if the Government believes that workforce development is central to economic success, that the skills profile must meet the needs of the economy, that we must improve the utilisation of skills in the workplace and that we must stimulate and increase demand for skills from employers, why has it shifted ministerial responsibility for skills away from responsibility for enterprise and economic growth?  I know that ministers will say that they approach government in a cross-cutting way and that economic growth is central to all ministers' objectives. However, I hardly believe that when the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism meets the enterprise sector or the energy sector—and I think that the voluntary sector is next in line to have its concerns and views mind-mapped before its eyes—skills do not come up. The question is whether the minister with responsibility for skills is at those meetings when that happens. When the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning discusses with the further education and higher education sectors their central contribution to raising the level of skills and qualifications—to say nothing of their role in driving innovation and its commercialisation—is the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism in the room? The importance of that is shown in "Skills for Scotland", which quotes Les Carey of the Rolls-Royce factory at Inchinnan, who said: "our competitors use similar machine tools and methods of manufacture ... our differentiator in the market place is our employees." When she was the chief executive of Hewlett-Packard, Carly Fiorina said something similar: "Keep your tax incentives and highway interchanges, we will go where the highly skilled people are." If we are to be sure that Scotland remains where the highly skilled people are, we need to step up a gear now. The disappointment with the strategy is not in what it contains, with which fault largely cannot be found, but in what it does not contain. The strategy's top line on its launch was a merger of two public bodies, but the merger is a poor fit and is opposed by those who deliver the service. Ten years ago, apprenticeships had all but disappeared from Scotland—there were about 2,000—but now there are 35,000. However, we need more and we need them now. In my constituency of East Lothian, when the council advertises for an apprentice, it receives 300 applications. That means that for 299 people who are ready and willing to take up an apprenticeship, the opportunity is still not available. We need more modern apprenticeships. The strategy document says that what matters is the quality and not the volume of apprenticeships. I disagree. What matters is the quality and the volume of apprenticeships. Of course they should be of the highest quality, but Labour was committed to establishing 50,000 apprenticeships in Scotland. How many will the Government deliver?  If we are to be sure that Scotland remains where the highly skilled people are, we cannot afford to waste the potential of a single young person. In 2007, no person between 16 and 18 years old should be left to drift on benefit. Every 16 to 18-year-old should have the chance of a job, proper training, a quality volunteering experience, a college or university place or a meaningful fifth and sixth year at school. We accept that what we propose might not be the only way to achieve our objective but, elsewhere in the UK, the Government is making that aspiration a reality. Here, no such guarantee has been given.

The cabinet secretary made our position clear. We want no young person to leave school without having one of the options that I described in place. The cabinet secretary disagreed with us and we are willing to listen to other ideas. However, the fact that many young people do not have such options is exactly why it is important to have a guarantee in the skills strategy. If we are to be to sure that Scotland will remain where the highly skilled people are, we need more young people to have greater access more quickly to a wider range of vocational opportunities. We proposed doing that through 100 skills academies throughout the country. Other parties have other ideas about how to progress matters—we are happy to discuss them—but the Government has no ideas in its strategy about how to do so. The same applies to science. "Skills for Scotland" points to the importance of science and technology skills in the knowledge economy, but the paragraph on pages 26 and 27 that is devoted to that matter must be one of the most complacent passages of blandness ever in a Government document, which, I suppose, is an achievement of some sort. Labour wants to establish science and maths centres of excellence. We know that such a model works in the United States. Again, there may be other approaches, but the SNP's document contains none of them. Last week, the First Minister told the CBI the old joke about economists—if you laid all the economists in the world end to end, you would not reach a conclusion. However, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee recently laid three of Scotland's top economists end to end, and those economists did reach a conclusion. They concluded that to raise the level of skills and  qualifications, we must invest in our children's early years provision. I know that the cabinet secretary agrees with that, because I heard her say it before, during and after the election campaign. Indeed, she said it again today.

The point is that if we do not invest in early years provision now, we will be in exactly the same position 15 or 16 years from now, having exactly the same discussion. Of course, investing in such provision is not the only thing that must be done, but it is important and urgent. The SNP promises another strategy in 2008. Perhaps we can hope for a plan by 2009 and action by 2010. The SNP loves to describe its Government as a whirlwind. We must now be at the eye of the storm where nothing much happens. Skills is an area of endemic market failure. The Government must intervene to ensure that the needs of the economy and our people meet and match. Unfortunately, the SNP's strategy threatens to make skills an area of Government failure. We are all searching for the silver bullet that will guarantee economic growth and prosperity. The SNP thinks that it is independence, but it is wrong. If there is a silver bullet, it is skills and education. They will drive our economic growth and allow us to meet the challenges of globalisation, compete with the emerging economies of the 21 st century and prosper. Skills and education give our next generations the opportunity to be all that they can be, to raise their quality of life and that of their families, and to make real their hopes and aspirations. They ensure that we can build the houses that we need and power the prosperity that we want while we protect the planet. They ensure that we can have the future that we dream about. Without constantly improving, modernising and prioritising skills and training, the werewolves of lost opportunities, prosperity that passes by and frustrated potential will stalk our land unhindered, without the slightest interest in our country's sovereign status. If there is a silver bullet, it is skills and education. That is why we cannot accept anything less than total commitment to a step change in the provision of skills and education in this country. We cannot accept organisational change without real purpose, aspirations without resources to back them up, or complacency where urgency is the imperative. That is just not good enough.  I move amendment S3M-443.2, to leave out from "and the call" to end and insert: "believes it to fall short of the step change required in raising skill levels in Scotland, and calls on Scottish ministers to urgently bring forward proposals to increase access for apprenticeships, expand vocational choices in the school system and ensure that all 16 to 18-year-olds have the opportunity for education, volunteering, training or employment and guarantee the funding required to ensure that our universities and colleges remain world class."

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to develop the role of voluntary organisations in supporting vulnerable and older people in their communities. (S3O-484)

In East Lothian in recent weeks, the Scottish National Party-led council has rescinded grants to lunch clubs and day centres throughout the county. It has—I am glad to say—properly reinstated those grants, but the fear is that when ministers try to persuade councils to freeze council tax levels, some will see voluntary sector grants as a soft target for savings. Will the minister give an assurance that, in the fruitful discussions between ministers and councils that we heard much about yesterday, it will be made clear to councils that they must continue to fund the vital work of voluntary organisations in supporting the elderly and vulnerable?

Will the minister give way?

I am pleased that this debate is taking place and to have the chance to contribute to it. Like many other speakers, particularly those from Fife and the  Lothians, I represent one of the constituencies—East Lothian—in which concern about the oil transfer proposal has been greatest. Time does not allow me to compete with John Park's vivid travelogue of Fife. Although I am sure that I could do just as well on the other side of the Forth, that will have to wait for another day. Suffice it to say that in East Lothian there is no support for Forth Ports' proposal. It is opposed by all political parties in East Lothian. The previous East Lothian Council opposed it, and I assume that the new administration opposes it. The proposal is opposed by the Scottish Ornithologists Club, from its base at Aberlady, and by the Scottish Seabird Centre at North Berwick. It has no support in and is believed to be of no benefit to East Lothian. I welcome the cabinet secretary's motion, which will also be welcomed by my constituents. We last discussed the issue in Parliament on 24 May, when the cabinet secretary made a statement on the matter. On that occasion, he endorsed and undertook to continue the search that Sarah Boyack initiated for a route to an amendment to the habitats directive that would give Scottish ministers a locus in the decision. At that point, we urged the minister to update us before the summer recess. I freely acknowledge that Mr Lochhead has responded to that request. A couple of weeks ago he held a useful and welcome briefing for MSPs on progress, and he has clearly worked hard to get the measure that is before us today in place before the summer recess. I give him and his officials all credit for doing so. On 24 May, we stressed the importance of recognising the limits to the powers that the measures will give to ministers. That issue has been aired at length today by many speakers. A helpful aspect of the debate is that the position is clear and honest. We know that the measure will not give ministers absolute power to agree to or to reject proposals such as this on the basis of public opposition or the threat to tourism, for example; it allows solely for the exercise of devolved powers, within the framework of the habitats directive. It is a partial measure, but we agree with the minister that it is what is possible under the Scotland Act 1998 and that it will be a great improvement on the perverse legal position that currently prevails, which leaves Forth Ports as both regulator and beneficiary. Roseanna Cunningham was right to point out just how perverse the position is. Of course, this perverse position was created by a previous Tory Government. If it had got things right the first time round, we would not have been left in this situation.

I advised the secretary of state in the Scotland Office, and the issue certainly was taken seriously and examined at the time. If today's debate is about finger pointing, some fingers must point in the direction of the Tories. However, today's debate is not about pointing fingers. The fact is that the legal position is perverse, and all sides of the chamber want to correct it. As Sarah Boyack made clear, we still believe that the regulation of ship-to-ship oil transfers should in the long run be dealt with in this Parliament by a marine bill that complements the proposed United Kingdom marine bill. There is some truth in Tricia Marwick's reference to legislative spaghetti and Rob Gibson's comment about 85 pieces of legislation. Mr Gibson also referred to a comment that I made at an election hustings; I do not remember seeing him there, but he is always very welcome. That very complexity is exactly the reason why, as Robin Harper made clear, these matters must be resolved fully within a proper marine spatial planning framework. Of course, that will require close work with the UK Government and, almost certainly, complementary legislation here and at Westminster. As a result, we have no problem with supporting the Conservative amendment, although it would have been better if it had cited the need for a marine bill. However, the main business today is to secure the regulations before the Parliament, so I give credit where credit is due to the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment for bringing them to the chamber before the recess. We will certainly support his motion this evening.

The cabinet secretary acknowledged in his statement that the delay in the spending review announcement, which we fully accept is not of his making, will impact on the ability of delivery bodies to plan. However, the streamlining, decluttering and simplifying that Mr Swinney has talked about will do that, too. The cabinet secretary did not entirely address the issue that Tavish Scott raised. When will he produce clear proposals that will show what is meant by decluttering? How will that parallel and dovetail with the spending plans process that he outlined earlier? How will the Parliament, its committees and other stakeholders engage with the decluttering process? What reassurances or, indeed, guarantees can he give that that is not just code for job cuts and service cuts?

I, too, congratulate Mr Hume on securing a debate on an important issue. I acknowledge the contribution that has been made in this area by my predecessor as MSP for East Lothian, John Home Robertson. In the  previous session of Parliament, he successfully argued for the inclusion in the Schools (Health Promotion and Nutrition) (Scotland) Bill of sustainability and fair trading as two of the criteria that local authorities should consider when procuring food or catering services. In that debate, John rightly highlighted the success of East Ayrshire Council and North Lanarkshire Council in sourcing food locally when possible. As Christine Grahame said, procurement is the key. The benefits of local food are increasingly apparent: many members have already spoken of them. Local food is certainly good for the economy. In advance of the debate, I visited the excellent East Lothian food and drink website that East Lothian Council set up and which I recommend. In its directory, I found no fewer than 53 food and drink producers and specialist retailers in my constituency alone. Some of the firms are small, but they sustain employment and contribute significantly to the wealth of the county. Local food is also good for the environment, reduces congestion on our roads and improves road safety. However, the Royal Highland show clearly does not do that, given Mr McArthur's experience earlier today. The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs estimated in 2002 that food miles result in over 17,000 injuries and 290 deaths from road accidents. That is as compelling a case as any for reducing the distance between where food is produced and where it is subsequently consumed. The roots and fruits healthy eating project in East Lothian is funded primarily by East Lothian Council and NHS Lothian. The scheme delivers low-cost fresh fruit and vegetables to hundreds of customers across 19 towns and villages in East Lothian, encourages healthier eating and provides access to good-quality fruit and vegetables—locally produced, where possible—to local communities at affordable prices. The scheme works with schools to increase awareness of how our food is produced, particularly through working in the scheme's own vegetable garden. I was pleased to attend the scheme's 10 th anniversary event recently. Similar schemes are proving to be successful around Scotland. Like other members, I welcome the NFU Scotland campaign—what's on your plate?—which is aimed at encouraging consumers to buy Scottish produce. I was pleased to pledge my support to the campaign earlier in the week. Furthermore, the launch this month of Scotland Food and Drink is a positive development, bringing together food industry interests from trade bodies and companies to secure a stronger and more profitable food industry in the years ahead. I cannot claim the level of engagement with farmers markets that John Scott can claim through  his involvement in the farmers market movement, but I am a regular customer at the Haddington farmers market. It is an excellent event and its strength is that almost all the food on sale is local, being from either East Lothian or Berwickshire, including the legendary ostrich burgers, which come from just up the road from Haddington. I welcome the support that is given to the farmers market sector by bodies such as SAOS. Will the minister say in his summing-up speech what support the Executive might plan to give the sector to sustain and grow farmers markets in Scotland? I am glad to have had the opportunity to take part in the debate. I hope that the minister will consider seriously a framework that favours a more local and sustainable trade in food and which moves that agenda forward as fast as possible, for which, as Mr Scott said, there is a great appetite.

I accept Mr Swinney's point. I believe that he thinks that the accountability of local government is important. Will he therefore admit that the reason for suggesting a nationally imposed 3p rate is the realisation, part way through an election campaign, that the rate would in fact have to be levied at a level somewhere between 6.5p and 7p, and that the Executive's  proposals are simply a matter of expediency, not principle?

To a degree, the debate has been predictable, as it deals with a subject that was comprehensively debated in the course of the recent election campaign. There is nothing wrong with that, as the principles that underlie the debate have not changed. What has changed is that we are now debating the subject in the context of a new Parliament and a new  Administration. The stakes are raised and the urgency is heightened. That is why we have lodged an amendment that brings into sharp focus the responsibility of the Executive to be clear about exactly how it will ensure funding for local councils, in good time to allow the Parliament to subject those plans to full and proper scrutiny and to allow councils properly to make their own plans. Mr Swinney has made some kind of commitment in that regard this morning, but the way for members to hold him to that is to support our amendment. In the absence of any greater clarity, we are entitled to assume that the Executive wishes to pursue the prospectus on which it fought the election—that is, a nationally imposed 3p local income tax rate. Of course, that is inadequate for funding local government services. Furthermore, it is not local. Charlie Gordon, in an excellent speech, made it clear just how fundamental that flaw is. "For good local democracy it is vital that there is a strong and identifiable relationship between the local electorate, local politicians, and their ability to determine the local rate of taxation." That was a quote not from Charlie Gordon, but from the SNP's submission to the Burt review. It was true then, and it is true today. It was convenient for the SNP then, but it is inconvenient for the SNP today. Mr Tavish Scott gave us fair notice that the Liberal Democrats will work with the Executive on this matter. Mr Scott should tell us today if they are prepared to sell the principle of local accountability as part of the negotiations. As well as applied taxation, direct and indirect taxation, taxation on earned and unearned income and taxation on goods and services, a tax based on property should be part of the whole mix. I point out to Robert Brown that it was one of the principles of the founders of socialism that wealth and property, and indeed unearned income, should be subject to taxation. A property tax is easy to collect and hard to avoid. It provides a stable source of revenue for local government.

Those are the very people who would pay nothing under the proposals on which Keith Brown's party fought the election. A property tax is fair if it is properly mitigated through a system of discounts and benefits. Many members have repeated the mantra that a local income tax is based on the ability to pay. It is not as simple as that. It is based on the ability to earn.  It takes no account of age, as council tax does. It takes no account of caring responsibilities, as council tax does. It takes no account of disability, as council tax does. It takes no account of responsibilities for children, as council tax does. What about student nurses? The Executive trumpeted a 2.5 per cent increase in their pay packets, but it wants to take 3 per cent out. Student nurses currently pay no council tax; under the Executive's proposals, they would pay local income tax. About 450,000 Scottish pensioners pay income tax. Under a local income tax, they will be paying more, and it is dishonest to pretend otherwise. We can make council tax fairer, and we should. If we really want to help pensioners, Derek Brownlee, Elaine Murray and even Alex Neil have each suggested a way. We can improve local tax. We can do so without crippling local government, without stripping accountability from councillors and without making Scotland the highest-taxed part of the United Kingdom.

I congratulate Mr Gibson on securing the debate. No one who has examined a map can deny that the geography of Scotland and Norway suggests that there must be great scope for co-operation. Indeed, if there is any weakness in Mr Gibson's motion, it is perhaps that it does not acknowledge the extent of existing co-operation with Norway, although in fairness he referred to that in his contribution. In a previous role, I spent some days last year in Stavanger during the offshore northern seas conference. It is clear that those who work in the North Sea oil and gas industry move seamlessly between that city and Aberdeen. The two cities are twinned, but their relationship is rather more real and profound, even workaday, than most twinning relationships that I have come across. In fact, I am tempted to say that if people moved as readily between Edinburgh and Glasgow, whether for the day or for periods of their careers, as they do between Aberdeen and Stavanger, it would be a good thing for Scotland. That relationship is aided considerably by a relatively new direct air route from Aberdeen to Stavanger. It is one of more than 30 facilitated by the route development fund, which, if I can be forgiven a moment of self-congratulation, I recall launching as Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning back in 2002 to 2003. The relationship is also helped by excellent existing co-operation between the Norwegian and United Kingdom Governments, which was most recently codified in the 2005 framework agreement. The agreement covers transboundary oil and gas projects and cross-boundary developments, many of which previously needed a new treaty each time a project was proposed. The co-operation also led to the groundbreaking agreement on the supply of wet gas to Britain from Norway, specifically benefiting Mossmorran and St Fergus. The agreement's added value to us was certainly recognised in Norway, where it provoked some controversy at the time. The agreement was groundbreaking in another way. Looking back at the press coverage at the time, I see that the MP for Banff and Buchan, whose constituency covers St Fergus, put out a press release praising both former Labour minister  Brian Wilson and Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown. That certainly is an unusual occurrence. The constant contact and collaboration between energy companies based in both countries is a great driver of innovation, and Mr Gibson is right to single out the Scottish Power-Hammerfest project to harness tidal resources. He was right, too, that it is another testament to the test and development facility at EMEC, where the kit will be developed and improved to the 1MW level. In passing, I noticed Mr Gibson's reference to a renewable obligation weighted towards marine, which I support. I am not sure whether the minister was quite as clear on that in his recent statements, but perhaps he will say something about it tonight. We should not forget opportunities for reducing carbon emissions from more conventional energy sources, and I commend to the minister current discussions between the UK and Norwegian Governments on infrastructure and regulation for capturing and storing carbon under the North Sea. The proposal for a North Sea supergrid is interesting, and I hope that the minister will provide more detail of Scottish National Party thinking on it. I understand that the First Minister had already had discussions with Norwegian ministers about it prior to the election. From this side of the chamber, we hope for a fair wind and favourable tide for greater co-operation with Norway, with the gentle caveat that we should not parallel Norway-UK collaboration but build on it for added value, which, like Mr Gibson, I believe that we can bring to the relationship.

To ask the Scottish Executive what consideration it has given to efficiency savings in the justice and communities budget. (S3O-228)

The minister's colleague, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, has made much of the Howat report in discussing the more efficient use of public money. He has refused to rule out the recommendations in that report, with the exception of the one regarding Scottish Water.  One recommendation is that the fire college at Gullane in my constituency should be merged with the police college in Tulliallan, with the Gullane site being sold off. The college at Gullane has trained firefighters for 50 years. I think that the fire service will have concerns about the potential loss of its specialist training facility, and I am sure that my constituents in Gullane will be worried by the prospect of the disposal of a large site in the heart of their community. Will the minister allay those worries by assuring us that he will not pursue that recommendation?

I thank the minister for making a copy of his statement available in advance. This is the first statement to Parliament on energy, although the First Minister had a fair bit to say about it in his statement last week. Mr Mather outlined his vision for the future of energy in Scotland last week in a conference speech that was later categorised in the press as a "gaffe". Much of what has been said has been bluster about rejecting nuclear new-build applications that have not been received, so a slightly more cautious and measured approach today is welcome. I have three questions. First, the minister said that he wants Scotland to plan for export, but  Scotland currently exports 20 per cent of the electricity that is generated here to the wider UK market. Last week, Mr Mather referred to that as surplus and seemed to believe that it was a safety cushion that allowed him to be cavalier about security of supply. In fact, it is an existing export industry, creating wealth, jobs and skills just like any other export industry. Is that existing export industry in the Scottish energy market expendable or not? Secondly, given that onshore wind is the only mature renewable energy generating technology available now and providing commercial electricity to the grid, as Mr Mather admitted in his statement, and given that it has the capacity to expand, which he said that he desired, will he tell us whether the Scottish National Party still supports a cap on onshore wind generation and new projects having to wait on community energy plans before they can move forward? Thirdly, as the SNP intends that Scotland will depend significantly on existing nuclear generation of electricity until at least 2023 and as the management of radioactive waste is a devolved responsibility, will the Administration continue as co-sponsor with the UK Government of the expert-led process through the Committee on Radioactive Waste Management? Alternatively, will it implement SNP policy of above-ground, on-site storage of all radioactive waste, and if so, when?

I add my congratulations to all those members who made maiden speeches today. There were literally too many to mention—there were nine by my count—and their thoughtful but pretty diverse contributions can reassure us that we will not spend all our time on the mushy ground of consensus in the debates that are to come. This was a good choice for a debate in which to make a maiden speech because, of all the subject debates that the Executive has initiated, it goes to the heart of what matters most to Scotland. Its title, "Wealthier and Fairer", is perhaps a bit like motherhood and apple pie—as Tavish Scott said, who would be against it?—but it takes us to the greatest challenge that we face, which is how we can continue to grow our economy in the face of globalisation and increasing competition from the emerging economies of the world while sustaining and increasing prosperity and opportunity for all. We cannot do that by throwing up barriers to trade because, in every part of the world, those barriers are coming down. In every part of the world, developing economies are revealing themselves as opportunity markets for our goods and services, not simply threats to our economic future. We cannot do it by competing on low wages, nor should we even consider doing so. We certainly cannot do it with fiscal fairy dust. We can succeed in the face of the challenge only by supporting, investing in and harnessing the ideas, imagination and skills of Scotland's people and creating the conditions in which those ideas and skills can flourish fully. Throughout the debate, there has been general agreement across the chamber that we need to pursue that strategy, so I will address a couple of the specifics. I reiterate that, as Wendy Alexander made clear, we welcome the reduction in business rates that is proposed for small businesses and business start-ups. Indeed, we were committed to extending the existing small business rate relief scheme to the tune of £30 million. However, although rate reduction was presented as a panacea for town centres on several occasions in  the debate, we believe that additional resources are required to take action in our town centres. We think—and here I disagree with Gavin Brown—that it is a missed opportunity not to use business rate relief to create virtuous cycles by incentivising research and development, increasing training and raising energy efficiency. That would provide a link with the Government's stated objectives on wealth creation, fairness and energy use. It would be a tax cut with several purposes.

Our commitment to an extension of the existing rate relief scheme was clear, but we were also committed to using such a business tax reduction to incentivise the things that I described. There is a policy contradiction at the heart of the SNP's tax plans. Although it trumpets the reduction in tax on business, it plans to raise taxation on the income that is earned by those who work in those businesses and who make them succeed. We know that the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism believes that that is "naive"; to us, it seems simply perverse. A number of members pointed out that the link between today's two topics of wealth and fairness is jobs—higher-quality, higher-skill and higher-return jobs. Education and skills are the engines of Scotland's economic growth. Building the capacity of our people and harnessing their endeavour will secure our future. That approach is demonstrably correct and it is working. Scotland is already the highest-skilled part of the UK. In 1997, 23 per cent of the workforce was educated to degree level; now the figure is 31 per cent. Ten years ago, 69 per cent of the workforce qualified to level 2; now the figure is 77 per cent. In 1997, there were a couple of thousand apprenticeships in Scotland; now there are 34,000. People's skills have been harnessed. There are 250,000 more Scots in work now than there were 10 years ago, with many more graduates staying in Scotland and working and creating wealth here. After generations of decline, Scotland's population is growing again. We have seen the results of that. Output from the financial services sector is up by 90 per cent and income from tourism, which did not really get a mention in the debate, has risen by 20 per cent in five years following a period of stagnation. Life sciences now contribute £1 billion to our economy. There has been a 12 per cent increase in the number of innovation-active Scottish companies.  None of that happened by accident. It happened through investment in skills, education, innovation and initiatives such as the fresh talent initiative and the new deal, which have unleashed the talent and imagination of our people. Like Jeremy Purvis, I trust and hope that the fact that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning is closing the debate means that the Government agrees with that. I hope that she will present to us the Government's proposals for developing the area of skills. It is an area that needs constant attention and where we need constantly to raise our game. We cannot pause now while we strategise or wait to appoint advisers. If we were on the Government benches, we would be debating concrete proposals today to build Scotland's skills base, to increase opportunity and to get more Scots into work. Subject debates such as this one are okay, but it is a full employment agency that would drive economic growth, given the political will to make that aspiration a reality. That would mean 15,000 more apprenticeships, or skills academies in every part of Scotland. That could widen opportunities, particularly for those who do not have them now, and it could raise—in quality and esteem—the skills that both small and large Scottish businesses need now. Even Liz Smith agreed with that in some way. We ask ministers to give us a vote on those commitments, and we will support them. We can win that vote, and we can get behind the potential of our people. We can let Scotland's people make Scotland wealthier and fairer. It's time—decision time.

I do not know whether it is technically possible to lose your maidenhood twice, but as this is my first speech in this chamber and my first as the member representing East Lothian, I hope that members will indulge me and allow me a moment to mark it. From the birth of kings and the battles of many centuries to agricultural and the industrial  revolution, the history of Scotland was not just written but made in East Lothian. Unlike Mr McArthur, whom I congratulate on his maiden speech, I find the approach to government a good maiden speech topic, because it was in East Lothian that John P Mackintosh had the vision and clear sight to develop, in the face of opposition from all sides—including his own—the idea of a Scottish Parliament. Tragically, he did not live to see it. His successor—and my predecessor—John Home Robertson was one of those who carried the idea through to the Parliament. I pay tribute to John, who served my constituents as MP and MSP for 28 years. Re-reading Mackintosh on how Scotland should be governed, I find it astonishing how prescient his vision of a Scottish Parliament was. He even foresaw the SNP holding power, or a share in power, in the Scottish Parliament. He did not fear that, because he thought that "the practical task of governing the country" might convince them that "the days when small countries can maintain the fiction of national sovereignty are over." We can only hope that that will be the case. Mackintosh's other great concern was the nature of cabinet government and the centralisation of power within the executive branch. He believed in efficiency and that a Scottish Parliament would improve the governance of Scotland, but he might have baulked at the creation of ministerial briefs as all embracing as the one that is held by the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. Over the past couple of days there has been some banter about the crocodile tears that were shed by Mr Swinney when Wendy Alexander held the brief for enterprise, transport and lifelong learning. I, too, held that brief, although I do not recall receiving much sympathy from Mr Swinney at the time. That portfolio existed in the context of a clearly articulated strategy that explained how economic growth would be driven by improving the commercialisation of research and innovation in our universities. That link was never simply a convenient description of a ministerial brief; it represented a pipeline of support and funding, including the small firms merit award for research and technology—or SMART—funding, the support for products under research programme, the proof of concept fund and the Scottish co-investment fund. That support—unique to Scotland—has been internationally admired and has created and sustained spin-out companies in many sectors. Indeed, in the case of life sciences it has nurtured an industry that now contributes £1 billion to the Scottish economy.  The portfolio also responded to a business community that said that investment in the transport infrastructure was the key to success. The result was a transport delivery plan that had at its heart the route development fund, which has delivered more than 30 new direct air routes from Scotland, including vital links to the United States and the far east, and a plan for our capital city that seeks to place its international airport at the heart of our rail network and to link businesses from every part of Scotland to the rest of the world. The Administration's early decisions have broken the link at the heart of government between ideas and enterprise, and have threatened the link between Scotland and the world that the Edinburgh airport rail hub can be—all for an efficiency saving that, by the cabinet secretary's own admission on television last week, amounts to around £500,000 over four years. Efficiency in government is a good thing, and this side of the chamber will support it as long as it also underpins effectiveness. The efficiency that matters most to Scotland's economic future is to maximise the contribution that our people make to their own future and ours by ensuring that there is high-quality employment for all and by giving everyone access to the skills and training that they need. We must, above all, avoid wasting our people's potential. In the spirit of these subject debates, and given the minister's willingness to listen and his desire to focus on the important issues, I commend to him Labour's plan for a full employment agency that would pull together all the necessary supports to put 100,000 more Scots into employment. If the Government really wants to put economic growth at the centre of its priorities—which is what the First Minister said yesterday he wished to do—it must put skills and full employment at its heart. I do not know whether this is what is meant by the new politics—after all, it has always been the politics on this side of the chamber—but I can tell the minister that he will have our support if he commits himself today to the goal of creating full employment to drive economic growth.

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement. My constituents will welcome the seriousness with which he has taken up the issue and will be pleased that he is pursuing the search for legislative solutions that was begun by Sarah Boyack. However, I am in no doubt that they will be concerned that he has not provided a timetable for action. Will he at least commit to indicating to the Parliament prior to the summer recess which of the shorter-term measures that are within his power—rather than the longer-term measures that require negotiation with Westminster—he intends to pursue and how quickly?

As this is a reserved matter, the Executive liaises closely with the UK Government about supporting this case.

The Executive has been involved in the preparation of materials to support the bid. We have also mobilised the Executive office in Brussels—an arm of the Scottish Executive—and I believe that officials there have been in contact  with MEPs to promote the bid. We would certainly be happy to consider further materials or ways to support it. Glasgow would provide an excellent base for EMSA. I understand that Genoa, Lisbon, Nantes, and Piraeus have made other bids. However, even an Edinburgh boy such as I knows that Glasgow can readily see off that opposition.

I am happy to accept Mr Gallie's welcome for my first answer and to agree with the further points that he makes. I will take steps to ensure that cognisance is taken both of those points and of the point that was made about websites.

A wide range of policies promotes economic well-being. Scottish Enterprise Borders is taking action in line with the direction and priorities that are set out in the Executive's "A Smart, Successful Scotland". The Borders local economic forum allows for the co-ordinated delivery of local economic development activities.

As Christine Grahame knows well from previous exchanges, we are keen to see progress on the matter. However, the business case is not staring me in the face because it is not yet with the Executive. I was pleased to see from this week's press that the Waverley rail partnership is making progress—it is about to submit an interim case, which I believe will be with the Executive in the next few days. Next Monday, we enter the period during which it will not be possible to progress that case, but I assure Christine Grahame that the matter will be in my diary for 2 May.

I can only agree. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to Mr Jenkins's far more constructive approach both to representing his  constituents and the interests of the Borders and to the proceedings of the Parliament. He will be sorely missed.

The connection between Margo MacDonald's question and the original question is the 200 civil service jobs at the Scottish Public Pensions Agency that were relocated from Edinburgh to Galashiels. I understand that the decision to which she refers is extremely difficult for those who work in SNH to accept. We must work hard to ensure that there is alternative employment for those who cannot move to Inverness. I understand from her question that Margo MacDonald is meeting my colleague Ross Finnie tomorrow, so I do not think that it would be proper for me to comment further.

rose—

In a similar vein, Tavish Scott might  wish to note that when we examine proof-of-concept funding, the Scottish agricultural and biological research institutes, which bring the innovation to the sector that he is talking about, do extremely well as recipients of those funds. "A Smart, Successful Scotland" is supporting exactly the kind of innovation that he is talking about, and that is important.

I know that we have discussed this point before, but this is my last chance in this  session to try to get a rational answer to the question. It is true that the rate poundage in Scotland is higher than it is in England, but it is also true that, at the last revaluation, rateable value went up by only 15 per cent in Scotland compared with an increase of 25 per cent in England. Is it not the case that the most important thing for business is the take in rates? Does that not depend on both rateable value and rate poundage? Will Miss Goldie at least admit that mathematical fact?

Will the member give way?

rose—

I have this to say about it: one chooses who to ask to pass judgment on one's success. I choose not a single Labour activist who expressed a view with which I clearly disagreed, nor the 17, I think it was, out of 100 in the figures that Andrew Wilson rather spun; I choose to ask the 138,000 Scots who are in jobs now who were not in jobs in 1997. I choose their judgment on Labour's handling of the economy.

rose—

Mr Wilson must give way.

It is right that one of the last debates in this session of the Parliament allows us to focus on the Scottish economy, which is the issue that underpins all others. We have made it clear that devising, implementing and sticking to a strategy for improved economic growth is at the centre of the Executive's priorities. Without a prosperous economy that creates wealth, we cannot do the other things that we want, which are to create first-class public services, and a more socially just Scotland. The context of the debate is the devolution settlement, which allows the Parliament and the Executive to focus on policies that will enable the Scottish economy to maximise its potential and achieve sustainable growth in the medium to long term. In the debate we must, therefore, acknowledge the stable macroeconomic environment from which the Scottish economy benefits and which is a consequence of the United Kingdom Government's sound handling of the UK economy. That approach has delivered the longest-ever period of sustained low inflation and historically low levels of interest rates—they are less than half the levels of the 1980s and early 1990s. Best of all—I make no apology for saying this—the UK measures to tackle unemployment, along with our training and enterprise policies, have delivered a 25 per cent reduction in claimant-count unemployment since May 1999.

When we want to look forward, we must look back and judge the handling of the economy on the record of the current UK Government. We all know about the record of the Tories in Government, when unemployment stood at 3 million. Not only is the rate of unemployment historically low, but the employment rate is as high or higher  than the rate anywhere else in Europe. Youth unemployment has fallen by 54 per cent since May 1999, while the number of unemployed older people has fallen by 32 per cent in the same period. From a global perspective, Scotland has a small and open economy. In 2001, the growth in gross domestic product slowed simultaneously in the United States, Europe and Asia—the first time such a slow-down has happened in the three major global economies for almost 30 years. That situation has inevitably impacted on businesses in Scotland and, as a result—as we have made clear repeatedly—our GDP growth figures are not good enough. Of course, current events continue to cast a shadow of uncertainty across the global economy. That is why it remains absolutely essential that we continue to lay the foundations for our future prosperity. Stability in interest rates, inflation and the labour market and sound public finance through adherence to clearly defined fiscal rules give us the opportunity to invest in physical, human and knowledge capital. "A Smart, Successful Scotland: Ambitions for the Enterprise Networks" sets out the Executive's vision of a more productive, competitive and prosperous Scotland. That vision, which is being implemented by Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise, is exactly about investing in physical, human and knowledge capital. Proof-of-concept funding, which is unique in the UK, small firms merit awards for research and technology—the SMART scheme—support for products under research, or SPUR, and SPUR plus are all investments in the commercialisation of Scotland's excellent academic research. The Scottish co-investment fund and the business growth fund form a £40 million package that is intended to help Scottish companies grow. Regional selective assistance has been refocused to provide better support for Scottish companies and smaller companies and to provide investment in knowledge capital as well as physical capital. There is a new research and development support grant scheme. We have also made the most far-sighted investment of all: £450 million over a 10-year period in three intermediary technology institutes to commission and commercialise market-driven research. That investment is a bold long-term initiative to address the unacceptably low level of research and development in Scotland's private sector. It is the investment in our people and their skills, however, which must be the greatest driver for economic growth in the years ahead. Carly Fiorina, the chief executive officer of Hewlett Packard, once said:  "Keep your tax incentives and highway interchanges; we will go where the highly skilled people are." Our obligation is to ensure that the highly skilled people are right here in Scotland. That is why we have delivered 50 per cent participation rates in higher education; the highest graduation rates in Europe; over 20,000 new apprenticeships; 500,000 students in our further education colleges; and a network of trade union learning representatives throughout our industries. It is also why we will further increase the apprenticeship programme to 30,000; reintroduce individual learning accounts; and roll out educational maintenance allowances throughout Scotland so that no young Scot has to leave school or college in order to boost the family income. When we issued "A Smart, Successful Scotland" in 2001, we also established a new joint performance team to measure progress. The joint performance team's second report is published this morning. We continue to do very well in relation to exports, e-business and the core reading and mathematical skills of our schoolchildren. We do not do so well in relation to GDP, productivity, business investment in research and development, entrepreneurial activity and new business formation. We will address the areas in which we do less well and seriously address the last two. We need a cultural shift in Scotland—a shift towards entrepreneurism. If someone wants to change the culture, they start with the young.

Of course the change in culture has to extend to politics. That is why, as I am about to say in a moment, we have made a political decision to invest unprecedented sums in a shift towards entrepreneurism. I agree that we have to streamline the support that is provided for growing businesses. I have spoken about how we have reduced the regional selective assistance bureaucracy in respect of grants of less than £50,000 to allow businesses to get a quick answer on their application. If Miss Goldie is referring to what I think she is referring, I will address her question later in my remarks. Over the next three years, we will invest over £40 million to provide every young person in Scotland in every school in Scotland with education for work and enterprise at every stage from primary 1 to secondary 6. That is an effort  that is simply unparalleled in the creation of a more aspirational, enterprising nation. We are not aware of any country in the world that can beat that investment. It is a sign of a cultural shift in politics—one that is required. In addition to enhancing our smart, successful Scotland strategy with further investment in people, last year's Scottish budget allocated unprecedented sums to transport over the next three years. In the years to 2006, spending will rise by more than 50 per cent with almost £1 billion per year being spent on transport at the end of that period. We have also put in place financial planning procedures that will allow us to commit to a transformation of Scotland's infrastructure. Our investment in transport will see the completion of the M74, the M8 and the M80, the extension of the M77; rail links between Airdrie and Bathgate, Larkhall and Milngavie, Stirling and Alloa; £375 million for Edinburgh's transport system to bring trams back to the city; rail links to both Glasgow and Edinburgh airports; a new crossing over the Forth to open up central Scotland; and a route development fund that has already supported four new direct air routes to Scotland. However, infrastructure is not just about transport. We are also investing more than £200 million in improving access to broadband, which has been added to, in recent months, by £24 million to bring ADSL-standard access to 70 per cent of Scotland's people by this time next year.

As Mr Neil probably knows, the first stage of project ATLAS came online early, and the second stage is still on time. Nevertheless, Scottish Enterprise has publicly made it clear that it has sought from the European Commission a ruling on any state aid implications. I remain confident that those issues will be resolved and that project ATLAS will allow better broadband access for businesses throughout Scotland. So all this is a smart, successful Scotland, with the addition of investment in company growth, in research and commercialisation and, above all, in skills; investment in transport and communications infrastructure and investment in a culture of enterprise and aspiration as well as macroeconomic stability. This is a strategy based on which we are building new industries in biotechnology, photonics, software design and renewable energy.  There is no doubt that that strategy is a necessity across the economy. What is a successful, home-grown financial services company such as Intelligent Finance, if it is not built on innovation, the skills of its work force and investment support for its back-office functions in Rosyth and Livingston? Last November, I met senior executives of the JP Morgan bank to discuss with them their experience of setting up their European technology centre in Glasgow. They explained that they had chosen the site from 18 possibilities on the basis of infrastructural support in the financial services district and the available skills. Earlier this week, the bank announced an expansion of the centre and the creation of 150 highly skilled jobs. When I met State Street Bank, in the United States, to discuss its plans for the Edinburgh-based fund management operation of Deutsche Bank, it was assurances about investment in Edinburgh's public transport system that the bank sought. It has now taken out a long lease on its Edinburgh office and has thereby committed to Scotland. Dundee has world-renowned biotech companies such as Cyclacel. It also has Michelin Tyres—traditional manufacturing, surely—which is driving up productivity by innovating in the production process, investing heavily in the skills and training of its work force and benefiting from the new, shorter and cheaper link to its markets that is provided by the Rosyth to Zeebrugge ferry. We are investing in innovation, in infrastructure and in people, whether in manufacturing, in the financial services sector or in retail. We are investing in every sector of our economy, old and new. We will pursue this strategy with determination. It is for the long term, but we will continue to refine it. The Executive's response to the Scottish manufacturing steering group's report was published this morning. When I reconvened the Scottish manufacturing steering group, I set a tight timetable for it to report under Dr Masters' leadership. I undertook to respond to the group before the end of March, and today I did so in a letter to Dr Masters and the other members of the group. We have accepted 21 of the 23 recommendations that were directed at the Scottish Executive. Seven more will be discussed with UK ministers before August. One initiative that flows from the report will target small businesses by establishing a pilot scheme of at least 300 business learning accounts over the next two years. A number of those will be targeted specifically at the manufacturing sector. Employers who are engaged in the pilot scheme will be reimbursed for 50 per cent of all business growth training. All the effort and investment in economic growth is driven by the recognition that our growth rate is  not good enough and that there is no quick fix. Our annual growth rate to the third quarter last year was 0.1 per cent, compared with 1.3 per cent for the UK. However, it is instructive to compare the rates when the electronics sector is removed from both figures. Growth for the remaining 94 per cent of Scotland's economy was 2.4 per cent, which outperformed the UK's figure of 2 per cent. Those figures are not offered as spin, but simply as an indication of the importance of electronics to our economy. It would be foolish to deny that factor and we must address it. The electronics sector is performing poorly worldwide. However, there is evidence in the electronics industry in Scotland of what we need to do. For example, Wolfson Microelectronics was born from world-class research in the University of Edinburgh and now designs and sells from Scotland—production is done overseas—components contained in cutting-edge, must-have products such as the X-Box games console and the iPod MPEG player. That is a clear example of Scottish ideas coming out of the lab, on to the test bench and into global products.

The question posed is extremely interesting, because we know that for 25 to 30 years Scotland's GDP growth has lagged behind the UK's. One aspect of considering the figures for 2002 to the third quarter, excluding the electronics sector, is that that consideration identifies a trend: 94 per cent of the Scottish economy turned round in that year. I would have expected a party that says that it stands up for Scotland to welcome that, but I am not surprised that it does not.

Nonetheless, the fact is that for 25 or 30 years—for a generation—Scotland's growth rate has lagged behind the UK's. However, we also know and understand—I want to come to this immediately—that growth in the 1980s and 1990s was largely fuelled by a kind of foreign direct investment that brought important jobs to Scotland. To a certain extent, however, the jobs were brought to Scotland on the basis of our having a low-wage economy. We are no longer prepared to compete with the rest of the world on that basis. In addition, that kind of foreign investment is simply no longer available to us in the 21 st century. Therefore, the methodology of the 1980s and 1990s is not available to us now.  An example of that in our electronics industry is Motorola. That company's assembly plant at Easter Inch has gone and the Scottish Parliament rightly paid much attention to that change. However, the work force has found new jobs and training and started new businesses. Unemployment in West Lothian has gone down rather than up. Moreover, Motorola's huge wafer fab operation in East Kilbride is not only still there, but is thriving and expanding. Why? Because it operates further up the production chain and it stays where the highly skilled people are—and they are here in Scotland. For the same reason, Sun Microsystems has just opened a new extension and a new line in Linlithgow. When I visited Motorola recently, I met a young woman who had completed a modern apprenticeship there, after which she had undertaken a company-sponsored degree in electronic engineering. Now, she works on cutting-edge design and the manufacture of new silicon, which is found in almost every make of car that is produced in Europe today. A growing company using research and innovation with Scottish knowledge, upskilling staff and moving production up the chain in providing global markets with Scottish products—that is the paradigm that we pursue in the quest for economic growth. At its heart is investment in what will drive that growth sustainably. The nationalist and Tory amendments should be resisted, because they contain the seeds of that strategy's destruction. The nationalists would cut £120 million to £150 million from the budgets for investing in skills and business growth.

An SNP document says that as a first step, the SNP "will use savings from the reform of the local enterprise network to reduce business rates to a level lower than the rest of the UK." That would involve £120 million to £150 million coming out of the budgets for skills that support the Executive's strategy. The nationalists would destabilise our economic stability with an independence referendum and, if they succeeded, they would have to fund a fiscal deficit and the costs of a separate Administration from further cuts and higher taxes. Stability would be gone and investment in our future would be gone, and then the jobs would go, too. The Tories would go one better. They would cut £250 million from skills and business support. Their amendment says that they would increase spending on transport by £100 million, but our transport budget is set to rise to £1 billion a year,  so the Tories would pay for a 1 per cent increase in the transport budget with a 100 per cent cut in skillseekers, modern apprenticeships and other programmes.

I am finishing. As we look forward to a new parliamentary session, it is time for the Scottish Parliament to choose investment in Scotland's future, in Scotland's skills, in Scottish ideas, in Scotland's infrastructure and, above all, in Scotland's aspiration. I move, That the Parliament endorses the Scottish Executive's policy to increase the sustainable growth of Scotland's economy over the long term as set out in A Smart, Successful Scotland and believes that this, along with the investment in Scottish transport infrastructure outlined in Building Better Transport and the introduction of education for work and enterprise for every pupil at every stage of school to create a culture of aspiration and entrepreneurship, will deliver increased prosperity, thus providing resources for first-class public services and a more socially just and sustainable Scotland.

Ministers and officials meet regularly with representatives of higher education institutions to discuss matters of interest. Subject to the outcome of the election, the next scheduled ministerial meeting with key stakeholders is due to take place in June this year.

HE institutions in Scotland are clear that widening access is a key priority. The approach here is different from that in England. There is 50 per cent participation in higher education in Scotland. Widening access is our key priority. Although admissions policy is a matter for the individual institution and should be transparent and should not compromise academic standards, the universities understand that we believe that there is merit in considering wider issues than simply exam results and considering factors that have a good correlation with the potential for achieving success and excellence at university.

Mr Wilson is never one to let the facts get in the way of a good story. In Scotland, we fund higher education at a level that is 20 per cent higher per head of population than in England. Wales aspires to our level of funding of higher education. Our set-up serves higher education and Scotland's young people well.

I have had discussions with NUS Scotland in the past couple of hours. I gave it an absolute assurance that when we come to the third phase of our higher education review, which will consider the implications of the changes in funding in England and how we will respond to them in Scotland, it will be included.

For capital infrastructure projects over 10 years, we have £3 billion of investment moneys, within which we have the necessary resources to implement a Borders railway project, subject to the business case being proven.

Christine Grahame is quite wrong, in that those other projects are further down the appraisal process. On the proposed Borders railway, the Waverley railway partnership must produce, as I have said many times, a detailed plan, costings and a suggested funding package. However, that has not happened yet and it is clear that, until it does, it is not possible to commit to the project and to consider it properly. In my statement last week, I made the point that the investment plan has taken account, within reason, of the possibility of the Borders plan being introduced and seeking development. That is the current position. As I said previously, we provided the £2 million not to hold up the process but to accelerate it.

I said that Edinburgh's plan for improvement in public transport would have to go ahead and be progressed. Edinburgh is not only our capital city, but our most successful city and it manifestly needs investment in its public transport infrastructure. I made a commitment to that. However, I also made the point that the parallel projects that make up that improvement plan will have to prove their business cases. However, they are further down the appraisal line than the proposed Borders rail link is. All that I aim for in this matter is absolute clarity. There is space in our investment plans to progress and deliver on the proposed Borders rail link. The position is that the Waverley railway partnership is working up a detailed plan, with costings and a suggested funding package, and must also promote a private bill. That is what must happen next. There has been no ducking or diving on the issue. The situation is as I have said.

I certainly acknowledge the desire throughout the Parliament, to which Ian Jenkins referred and which has been demonstrated on several occasions, for the project to go ahead. However, it remains the case that we have an appraisal process to judge the effectiveness and desirability of individual transport projects and to ensure that we get value for money when investing public funds. The proposed Borders project must go through that process. The core issue is that a detailed plan has not been submitted to me because it is being developed by the Waverley railway partnership. I cannot commit to a project if a detailed plan is not available. However, there is scope in the investment plan for supporting a detailed plan for a Borders rail project if or when such a plan becomes available.

We have already signalled in our recent strategy for lifelong learning our wish to effect a step change in the delivery of enterprise in education for our young people. To that end, we have set aside £40 million over the next three years.

Soon we have to respond to the report "Determined to Succeed—A Review of Enterprise in Education", which examines how we deliver education for work and enterprise in our schools. The purpose of that is to open our young people's minds to different opportunities and possibilities. Helen Eadie makes a good point, which I will reflect on and feed back into our response to the report.

The recommendations of the report say that every one of our young people should experience education for work and enterprise at every stage in their school career. We have to respond to that report and we will be doing so soon. Therefore the answer to Alex Neil's question is that all our young people will benefit.

I am not sure whether Annabel Goldie has read "Determined to Succeed", but it was produced by a group chaired by my colleague Nicol Stephen and made up substantially of people in business. The members of that group were clear that direct contact between businesspeople and our young people should be at the core of what we do. When we respond to the report, we will be clear about how we ensure that that happens. The report acknowledged the PSYBT's work in spreading the word about the enterprise culture and supporting young people in starting businesses.

I assume that Dorothy-Grace Elder is referring to the training and employment grants scheme. I am aware of the changes. In very recent days, a number of MSPs have written to me to raise that issue. I have asked for a report on the situation. When I receive that report, I will respond directly to those who have raised the matter. Dorothy-Grace Elder also has a question on the issue next week.

The Executive has regular contact with Scottish Enterprise and with its local enterprise companies on matters relating to enterprise and innovation.

I am not sure to which investment decisions Mr McAllion refers. Perhaps the best thing would be for him to write to me and copy his correspondence with Scottish Enterprise Tayside. For 2002-03, Scottish Enterprise Tayside has a budget of £8.7 million. That is a public figure, but it  does not include some of the funds that are available through national mechanisms such as the modern apprenticeship scheme, which Scottish Enterprise Tayside has a part in delivering. If Mr McAllion was unable to obtain specific figures, I will pursue the matter if he writes to me again.

Absolutely not. Sticking with Dundee for the moment, we know that Dundee has a number of the most cutting-edge life science companies in the world, such as CXR Biosciences, Cypex and Cyclacel. All those companies have benefited from the Scottish Enterprise biotechnology cluster approach and from support through, for example, the proof-of-concept fund, the small firms merit award for research and technology, and the support for products under research scheme. Those things are driving research and innovation in Dundee and they are entirely worth while. Cutting the support for business is, frankly, the last thing that Dundee needs just now.

I am sure that Margo MacDonald will join me in welcoming the £375 million that was announced last week for the City of Edinburgh Council—the biggest-ever commitment to Edinburgh's public transport system.

I think that I made this point in answer to questions on the funding for the  Transport Initiatives Edinburgh plans: it would be a mistake to think that the recent announcement was the only investment in public transport in Edinburgh. Edinburgh and the Lothians also did well out of the fifth and final round of the public transport fund, which will allow the city council to go ahead with other projects. For example, it will enable the doubling of the size of the park and ride on the north of the Forth bridge and the provision of new park and rides around Edinburgh. If Margo MacDonald's point is that Edinburgh cannot wait until 2006 but must make public transport improvements right away, I agree with her, but that is what we are doing.

Again, I can only agree. I remind colleagues that a new rail station will be opened later this year in Edinburgh Park, which is a business park in which tens of thousands of people are employed. Those are the kinds of developments that we need to see even in advance of trams.

The dates are 2008 for Glasgow and 2010 for Edinburgh.

The Scottish Executive is addressing road safety through a combination of engineering, enforcement and education.

We want the number of child casualties to be reduced by 50 per cent by 2010, and we regularly monitor the figures and the progress that has been made. One of the most interesting of the trials that are under way in West Lothian, which includes Bristow Muldoon's constituency of Livingston, is the trial of part-time speed limits around schools, whereby 20mph speed limits are in place when they can have the most effect in protecting our children as they go to and from school.

I am keen, for several different reasons, for the improvements to progress quickly. I think that Mr Gallie has written to me asking the questions that he just asked. I have sought detailed answers and I will make them available to Mr Gallie when I have them.

All the improvements that we make in road safety, including making roads in residential areas safer, are part of efforts that we audit regularly, both directly and through local authorities. We will continue to do that.

Working with the United Kingdom Government, we have developed a range of initiatives, including investment incentives, to support businesses and other enterprises operating in disadvantaged communities. We are also investing £2 million a year over the next three years to stimulate the social economy, which provides valuable public services, particularly in the most deprived communities.

The modern apprenticeships are crucial in that regard. Although I cannot give a direct answer in numbers, I note that local enterprise companies have responsibility for modern apprenticeships and that enterprise networks have a strategic objective of closing the gap in unemployment between the worst 10 per cent of areas and the Scottish average. Modern apprenticeships are important in that regard as well. As Wendy Alexander said, 20,000 modern apprenticeships have already been created and 5,000 additional ones are to come. I made it clear this week that I would like there to be 30,000 modern apprenticeships, as they are central to the maintenance of the historic low levels of unemployment in the country.

I understand that Renfrewshire Council is compiling a report on the operation of the company. That report will be submitted to Communities Scotland, which will take any necessary action.

The point, of course, is that around 50 per cent of Scottish Enterprise's budget is for investing in skills through modern apprenticeships, skillseekers and other training schemes. Investing in our people is the best way to give them the kind of future that we want. I understand that the Tories disagree with that. I think that that is unfortunate.

Last year, the transport delivery report focused our effort in transport on three main themes: tackling congestion; improving integration and accessibility, including lifeline links; and providing vital missing links in the transport infrastructure. We promised to report on progress and "Building Better Transport", which was published today, is that report. "Building Better Transport" describes progress and the way forward in five key areas: economic growth, accessibility, integration, new ways of working and developments for the future. Transport is vital to us all and underpins every aspect of our lives, but I begin by talking about its importance to economic development. Economic growth is firmly at the top of the Executive's agenda and I am determined that we will stimulate growth in the economy to generate wealth, to create jobs, to reduce unemployment and to give ourselves a competitive edge in the global marketplace. We have listened to business, which says that it needs a first-class transport infrastructure to support economic growth. We are now investing in exactly that alongside our investment in research innovation and the skills of our people. The announcement of the Scottish budget in September was a defining moment. The decision to allocate record funding to transport has been the biggest single factor in enabling us to move forward. The budget placed transport at the heart of our strategy for economic growth. It was a budget to stimulate growth in our transport systems, to invest in our public transport and to give businesses better opportunities to access their markets.  The transport budget will rise by more than 50 per cent in the next three years and reach almost £1 billion a year by 2006—an unprecedented increase by any standards. That huge uplift in transport spending has given us the assurance that money is available to fund the major infrastructure projects that business and Scotland need. Securing those resources has given us the confidence to plan and budget for the long term. With a stable macroeconomic environment, low inflation, low interest rates and increased public spending, we have an unprecedented opportunity to invest in our transport infrastructure, to provide the freer movement of people that our economic development strategy demands and to link the work force to the labour market and Scottish business to the world. With the security of the new levels of funding, we can now plan properly for the longer term. We are developing a strategic investment plan that will enable the Executive to make commitments to major capital projects that extend beyond the standard three-year budgeting cycle, adding up to some £3 billion of transport improvements over the next 10 years. Combined with that longer-term commitment will be a new approach to active management of financial flows over the longer term, with some additional end-year flexibility for the major capital projects. That means that, over the next 10 years, we will be able to use that £3 billion to invest in the biggest package of transport infrastructure investments that we have ever seen. Although resources are not limitless, I am certain that the transformation of Scotland's transport infrastructure will be well under way by the end of the decade. For example, yesterday I was able to announce that the Executive would guarantee £375 million for Edinburgh's transport infrastructure. That substantial investment will ensure that funding is available for at least the first new tramline in the city. The investment is also irrespective of any decision that might be taken on congestion charging. Edinburgh's tram proposal will be one of the first public transport schemes to benefit from the new, longer-term approach to planning. The same long-term planning horizon was applied when we committed ourselves to funding the strategic elements of the Aberdeen western peripheral route. Building on significant investments that were made prior to the spending review—such as the completion of the M74, the M77 and the Glasgow southern orbital route—we have given firm commitments to upgrade the A8 and A80 to motorway status, to build the Aberdeen western peripheral route and to reinstate the Airdrie to Bathgate railway line. We are also pressing ahead with rail links to both Glasgow and Edinburgh  airports. We have received the report from the consultants and in the next few weeks I should be in a position to make decisions about both airport rail links. We have invested £1 million in the redevelopment of Waverley station and supported the Waverley railway partnership with more than £2 million to develop the case for the Borders railway line and to secure parliamentary powers. All those projects should benefit from our longer-term approach to budgeting and financial planning. One of my key priorities is to deliver the new Scottish passenger rail franchise. Good progress is being made in partnership with the Strategic Rail Authority to deliver the next franchise. Later this month, I expect to be able to announce the shortlist of those who will be invited to bid for the franchise. However, we are not prepared to hang around and we are investing in immediate improvements to our rail services. We announced in December our single biggest railway investment to date, which will deliver 22 new trains, more drivers and more reliable journeys on the network. That investment will make a real difference to the transport system and the economy of Scotland. The delivery of Edinburgh Park station, which is at the heart of Edinburgh's financial services sector, threw up the problem of performance penalties, because creating a new station extends journey times, which carries a financial penalty. Working with the rail regulator and the SRA, I broke that impasse and secured agreements that prevented the financial penalties from being levied. In addition, we agreed to fund fully two additional trains to enable new Edinburgh Park trains to operate without creating delays to other services. We will ensure that those and other lessons are learned so that we can improve the speed of delivery of other rail projects. Sustainable development is fundamental to our transport vision and thinking and is vital to reducing our use of resources, making better use of our energy and tackling congestion. We have committed to freight facilities grants totalling £47 million and have provided £12 million for the new rail-freight hub at Grangemouth. We have invested £11 million in the Rosyth to Zeebrugge ferry connection, which has helped to stimulate tourism from and trade with Europe. Those grants and investments are a huge boost to the economy and the tourism industry and will get a greater number of heavy lorries off our roads. Buses, too, play a key role in our economy. They carry more passengers than any other form of public transport does and the number of bus passengers has increased in each of the past three years. Through the bus service operators grant, the Executive pays grants of £50 million a year to the bus industry. In addition, to increase accessibility to transport and to lessen social  exclusion, we introduced free concessionary bus fares, which have enabled more than 1 million older people and people with a disability to enjoy local off-peak bus travel and have easy and free access to amenities. Safe and reliable transport services are vital, but people also need excellent travel information to make the best use of them. Traveline Scotland was created to meet that need and it now deals with more than 16,000 telephone and online inquiries a week and provides timetable and journey-planning information for all modes of public transport throughout Scotland. We are investing to make transport more accessible and inclusive. We live in a diverse country where our island and remote rural areas require different transport solutions. We continue to invest heavily in Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd, to support the air network across the country and to use public service obligations for the maintenance of key links to remote areas. The new interim route development fund will help to stimulate new routes from the Highlands and Islands to other parts of the country and between various airports and the continent. Having direct links to Scotland from the continent and further afield is crucial for business and for attracting more visitors here from overseas. Our support for lifeline ferry links is at record levels, which means new ferries for Orkney and Shetland, investment in new piers and harbours and the tendering of the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services. That support will protect fares and lead to important service enhancements. Those key economic and social lifelines remain high on our agenda. We are making real and significant progress in delivering the key transport projects that Scotland needs. We are doing all that we can to increase the speed of delivery, but it has to be recognised that a detailed and intricate process is involved in taking the initial idea of a new road to the eventual opening of that road. In the case of railways, the number of players involved is greater, the legislative process is more complex and the experience of building new lines is almost non-existent in Scotland. We must consider new ways of working that will bring about real change and move more quickly from inception to completion. That is likely to involve considering the legislative process for rail enhancements and financial planning processes. However, I am determined that we will do whatever is needed to improve transport in Scotland. The "Building Better Transport" report is about taking a long-term, strategic view. It is about a £3 billion improvement in transport infrastructure. Above all, it is about delivering better transport for the benefit of everyone in Scotland.

I am proud to say that the Executive has opened the first new rail line in Scotland for 10 years—the Edinburgh crossrail project. Mr MacAskill has to understand that the Executive inherited a position in which there was no strategic vision of what was required to improve Scotland's transport infrastructure. We have worked through multimodal studies, such as the central Scotland corridor studies, to identify exactly what is required. We have made plain in our transport delivery report what is required and we have identified the resources to deliver it. We have created the financial planning procedures that will allow us to move forward, the net result of which is a commitment to £3 billion of improvements in our strategic transport infrastructure. Mr MacAskill should not make the mistake of thinking that that is all that is being done in relation to transport. If he examined the public transport fund, he would see what I suspect he already knows but does not want to mention—that £235 million of public transport improvements have already been funded and that, through our rural transport initiative, more than 400 rural transport initiatives have been put in place. We have made real progress. The report is about strategic infrastructure improvements, which is our most important priority as we look forward to the end of this decade and beyond.

I remind members that those comments on Edinburgh's transport come from the party whose main contribution to the debate so far has consisted of dressing up Lord James Douglas-Hamilton as a lollipop man. I simply do not know how much clearer I can be about Edinburgh's trams. The investment of £375 million does not depend on any decision that is taken on congestion charging. If Edinburgh goes ahead with congestion charging, £375 million will be invested; if Edinburgh does not go ahead with congestion charging, £375 million will be invested. I hope that that is clear enough for David Mundell. Yesterday, the Tories accused me of speaking with a forked tongue. However, their approach has been to take two different business cases and to swap them interchangeably to suit their rather crass argument. It is absolutely the case that the investment will provide the resources for at least the first tramline in Edinburgh and other public transport improvements. Indeed, the council believes that it is enough for a second tramline. I hope that that is the case, as that would be very good. The business case for the tramlines will, of course, have to be made, but that it is not the same as the business case for the whole Transport Initiatives Edinburgh Ltd project. Every public transport project that we fund, whatever it is part of, has to prove its business case. The TIE plan is part of parallel projects. The funding secures at least the first tramline and other public transport initiatives, potentially including the second tramline. I say yet again that that is irrespective of road user charging in Edinburgh. I sincerely hope that that is clear enough for the Conservatives. Mr Mundell asked where the funding is for the Waverley line. The Waverley railway partnership is working up its plans and a funding package, which will include an indication of how much public funding will be required for the line. Like every other project, the business case must be made as part of the plans. However, if the question is whether there is a resource to support the Waverley rail link in the transport investment plan, the answer is yes. I hope that that, too, is plain enough.  On buses, of course the powers in the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 to which Mr Mundell refers are available to local authorities. They choose when and whether to use those powers. The power of quality bus contracts has never been used. I would like to see it used, but that is a matter for the local authorities.

As I have made clear on numerous occasions, it is for the Waverley railway partnership to produce the business case and to introduce the private bill that will be required for the new rail link. However, my statement and the investment plan are all about allowing people to move more readily, particularly from where they live to where they work and make their living. I appreciate the argument on Midlothian and the Borders and the links to Edinburgh in particular. Those links are as important for Edinburgh as they are for the economic situation in Midlothian and the Borders. I am pleased to hear that progress has been made. The next stage in the process is for the private bill to be introduced, which I hope and expect the partnership to do very soon. One thing that we have done to support the Waverley railway partnership in recent times is to increase its resources to just over £2 million to speed the process up. I look forward to the introduction of the bill to Parliament.

There is no doubt that integration is key to our planning. Perhaps one of the great mistakes that was made in transport infrastructure improvement in Scotland in past times is that such integration was an afterthought rather than part of the planning process. Transport Initiatives Edinburgh is focused on the integration of its trams with heavy rail and other public transport  interchanges. It recognises the importance of Waverley and Haymarket stations in that. I would expect the detailed planning on that to take into account the points that Rhona Brankin raises.

I appreciate the points that Mrs Ewing makes. In the journey of a new road from its inception to its construction, 90 per cent is taken up with preparation. By that I do not mean feasibility studies; I am talking about the necessary engineering work. We are already considering how to streamline the process, as I undertook to do. Building roads involves disruption and the compulsory purchase of property and we have an obligation to ensure that any objections that are made by the public are properly considered. I understand that the public inquiry on the case that Mrs Ewing raises will take place later this year. The objectors have to be given the opportunity to make their objections and to have them considered.

Sarah Boyack makes a powerful point about the balance of the investment plan. On the increase that we propose over the three years of the next spending review period, transport expenditure overall is to rise by 50 per cent, while expenditure on public transport is to rise by 70 per  cent. That will produce a shift in expenditure so that, by 2006, 70 per cent of the transport budget will be spent on public transport. I know that the order in which we have been able to make announcements in recent days has sometimes made it look as though there has been more investment in roads than elsewhere, but I point out that yesterday's announcement on transport in Edinburgh and the pending announcements on airport rail links relate, of course, to public transport. As for the process in Edinburgh, Sarah Boyack knows that private legislation must be introduced for light rail schemes. The City of Edinburgh Council's plans are for the first tramline to be completed by 2009. That will be important for integration with other modes of transport, not just with rail. As I said to David Mundell, the funding allocation will allow at least the first tramline to be put in place, as well as other public transport improvements. Those will include park-and-ride schemes around Edinburgh. The fifth and final round of the public transport fund is already funding park-and-ride improvements in Edinburgh. Those are exactly the up-front public transport improvements that Edinburgh wants and needs.

For a number of good reasons, I will not make an explicit funding announcement with an amount of money attached. One reason for that is that the Waverley rail partnership is still to present to us what it believes to be the funding requirement for the line. I repeat in part the assurance that I gave to Ian Jenkins: there is funding available to develop the Waverley rail line to the Borders. Why is there a difference in treatment? Anyone who, like me, was born and brought up in Edinburgh and has lived in Edinburgh all their life  knows well that the way in which mass transit and public transport issues have been addressed is the one area in which Edinburgh has not been a success story. It is important that we give guarantees that Edinburgh can move forward on that. Today's announcement is very much about supporting Scotland's economic success. The cities review recognised that our cities must be the drivers for economic success. We need to support Edinburgh's economic success particularly in the area of public transport, where there has previously been some difficulty. I am sorry if I misinterpreted part of Mr Mundell's question. Waverley station was one of the priorities in the transport delivery report. The situation is that we are supporting the technical studies that are currently being carried out to allow us to develop a proper plan for the redevelopment of Waverley station. The SRA, which chairs the steering group that is taking the matter forward, recently made it clear that it will support the redevelopment of the station. We expect that the SRA will be very much involved. Nonetheless, we have taken cognisance of the key necessity of the redevelopment of Waverley within the envelope of the investment plans that I have outlined today.

Since announcing our commitment to the strategic sections of the peripheral route, we have reached agreement with the local authorities in that part of Scotland that they will work to provide the local elements of the road. Intensive discussions have taken place between my officials and council officials. Within a matter of what must be two or three weeks, I expect that we will be able to make announcements on what can be done to accelerate the construction of the road and on the division of the funding responsibilities and the split between local and strategic elements.

I simply cannot begin to comprehend why anyone should think that providing funding for transport improvements to which we are committed in Edinburgh should be connected in any way to funding or otherwise transport improvements to which we are committed in Glasgow. There is no such connection. Time and again we have made it clear that we are committed to rail links to Glasgow airport and to Edinburgh airport. Why have I not made an announcement? I explained in my statement why I have not made an announcement. It was only last Tuesday that Lewis Macdonald and myself were presented with the consultants' final detailed recommendations. Since then, we have been working hard to use those recommendations to reach a decision about the routes on which the consultants have provided us with significant information. I have said that I will be able to make an announcement about how we go forward in a matter of days rather than weeks. Will it be a positive announcement? It will be an announcement when I make the announcement. We are committed, and I have repeated that more times than I care to remember.

The improvements contained in the investment plan will link powerfully our Scottish people and their skills with the labour markets where those skills can best be used. That is why, when I became minister, I spent so much time resolving the impasse surrounding Edinburgh Park railway station, for example. Edinburgh Park is the centre of Edinburgh's financial services sector and is the most successful business park anywhere in Scotland. The impasse prevented us from putting  in a railway station that everyone agreed was required and we have worked to solve that problem. Of course, that is about making the job and career opportunities in that part of Scotland available to those who might wish to travel there from the west, Fife or indeed other parts of Edinburgh. In all the discussions that I have with businessmen, they talk about transport infrastructure improvements and how the key priority is moving the people they need to the places where they are needed so that they can do the work. We are making powerful improvements that will help Scotland's economic development.

It is true that our ability to look forward to capital and infrastructure improvements depends on a reasonable assumption of economic stability. If there is one thing that would destroy that stability, it is the long period of constitutional wrangling that separating Scotland from the rest of the United Kingdom would create. I am in no doubt that the Executive's commitments would be jeopardised by such a move. I have a couple of more detailed points to answer Mr Gallie's question. I did not say that there was a commitment to £3 billion plus Waverley. I said that for capital infrastructure projects over 10 years, we have £3 billion of improvements. Within that envelope, we have the necessary resources to implement the Waverley rail project if and when the business case is proven. I also said in my statement that, by 2006, the transport budget—excluding capital charges for the trunk road network, which are unavailable for spending—will be £1 billion a year. Therefore, a considerable resource is available for other projects. If Mr Gallie is asking whether those projects would be jeopardised if there is an economic downturn and resources are reduced, the honest answer is yes, if there is enough of a downturn. However, a considerable safety margin is included. That is underpinned by the kind of economic stability from which we benefit at the moment, which would be jeopardised by any move towards independence.

Having made those commitments, I am concerned to proceed with them as quickly as possible. If the member considers the M80 completion for example, he will find that we have already progressed on the work that must be done on the Auchenkilns roundabout. I assure Mr Canavan that we will do whatever we believe we must do to proceed with all the commitments as quickly as possible. The only caveat that I put on that is to repeat the point that I made to Mrs Ewing: there is a process whereby those who object must have their objections heard. We must give those people due consideration. That is a matter of common justice. That aside, we will proceed as quickly as possible.

Margaret Smith makes an important point—that the purpose of congestion charging as planned by the City of Edinburgh Council is to cut congestion. Whatever happens with congestion charging, there needs to be investment in Edinburgh's public transport system. That is why we have made the decision to which the member refers. All the research shows that although improvements in public transport will lead to far greater use of public transport, they will not produce a commensurate reduction in congestion. That is not a reason for not investing in public transport. However, the research suggests that if the citizens of Edinburgh want congestion to be cut to the levels that the City of Edinburgh Council plans, it will be necessary to introduce congestion charging. We have made it clear to the council that, before it takes such a step, it must  demonstrate to the Executive that there is public support. The council has decided that it will do so by means of a referendum. At that point, the citizens of Edinburgh will have a choice. That is an entirely fair and appropriate way of going about things.

I will try not to forget anyone. We are aware that work on the western peripheral route is only one part of addressing Aberdeen's  congestion. We expect to discuss soon further plans for the modern transport system. We have borne that in mind in developing the investment plan. We are in negotiations—which I will not go into, for reasons that I hope members understand—with several airlines on routes that the route development fund could support. I assure Mr Adam that Aberdeen airport is considered as part of the work on the route development scheme. I take Robin Harper's point about cycling and walking. It is fair to say that they tend to be overlooked in infrastructure improvements. However, only two or three months ago, we made the largest-ever grant—£1.4 million—to Sustrans to complete the national cycling network, so it has not been forgotten, even if it was not mentioned in the statement, for which I apologise. I agree that it is important to improve rail services, in addition to providing links to airports. That is why we are investing in new rolling stock for the Glasgow route. That will not make a significant difference to the travelling time between Edinburgh and Glasgow, but it will increase reliability and cut overcrowding on trains. We continue to work with my colleague in the Department for Transport on cross-border links with England. Robert Brown asked about light rail in Glasgow and whether Strathclyde Passenger Transport has made any transport improvement proposals to us. We discuss constantly with SPT improvements and enhancements to the public transport networks for which it is responsible. No proposals on light rail are on the table. A couple of possibilities are being discussed, but they are at an early stage. We are interested in the development of light rail anywhere. In Edinburgh, plans are at an advanced stage. Mr Scott asked an interesting question about Prestwick. Perhaps I will return to it in the next couple of weeks.

We have recently received the consultants' final report on the provision of rail links to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports. That report is being considered and we will in due course make an announcement on the way forward.

I have made it clear on a number of occasions that the Executive is committed to rail links to both Glasgow and Edinburgh airports. As Mr Brown will know, the final stage of the consultants' work was to consider the short-listed options. It was only on Tuesday that my deputy, Lewis Macdonald, and I were presented with the consultants' full findings on that. Although it will take slightly more than 48 hours to decide the way forward, it will be only a matter of days or weeks before we make that decision.

There is a real synergy between the potential for providing rail links and the potential for expansion at Glasgow and Edinburgh airports. The development of that work involves a wide group of stakeholders and a steering group. As the BAA is very much part of that, it is aware of the work on the rail links. The answer to the member's question must be; "Yes."

It would be hard to convince me that a light rail system provided solely as a link to the airport, or any of the other options that have been mooted, would work as stand-alone developments. I know that there has been talk about potential light rail options in Glasgow and, indeed, in Edinburgh and the potential of extending such developments out to the airports has been discussed. The consultants examined light rail options, but their shortlist of four consists of heavy rail options for both airports. On previous occasions, other members have indicated that there is an appetite to proceed on the issue as quickly as possible. Along with value for money, that is probably the overriding consideration.

Of the sum of about £300 million that has been committed from the public transport fund and the integrated transport fund, about £274 million will be spent directly on public transport infrastructure, about £3 million will be spent on a range of public transport feasibility studies and nearly £23 million will be spent on preparatory work on various public transport projects.

There has been some speculation in this week's press about what an engineering study is. An engineering study for a rail link that we are committed to opening is not a feasibility study—it represents stage 1 in the construction of the Airdrie to Bathgate rail link. Anyone who thinks that a railway can be built without first doing an engineering study has little idea of how a rail network operates.

Mr Mundell will be aware that the Scottish Executive does not have responsibility for cross-border links. We have said before that it is disappointing to see a reduction in services, although more reliability would be welcome. I am happy to accept Mr Mundell's endorsement for the Executive's investment in Lockerbie station.

The extension to the platform at Bathgate means that when the new rolling stock begins to arrive later in the year, rail users from Bathgate will have the advantage of far less  overcrowding in the trains that they use; indeed, overcrowding should be eliminated. Yet again, we made a good-news announcement of £100 million for new rolling stock and an attempt was made to undermine it by suggesting that it had not occurred to us that we had to extend the platforms—of course, it had. Later in the year, the benefits will be seen by passengers in Bathgate and elsewhere.

Growing businesses is a key priority of our strategy for the enterprise networks. Local economic forums provide a mechanism for driving forward an agreed economic development agenda in each local area. We have refocused our regional selective assistance scheme to help locally based companies access support.

The small business gateway has been key to streamlining and increasing the effectiveness of the kind of support to which Mr Gorrie refers. It ensures that services and support can be provided by accredited business advisers or by lawyers and accountants—whichever are required for the various aspects of people's plans—and can be accessed through one website or one telephone number. We have worked hard with those involved to ensure that it is much easier now compared with how it used to be for people who have a good idea for starting up a business to access not just grants and money but expertise.

As Mr Neil will understand, the RSA scheme operates day by day, and discussions on potential grants, applications and so on take place every day, so I do not have a figure to hand. Mr Neil will also know that one of the changes that I have made on RSA has been to publish quarterly reports, so that details about the grants that have been offered and accepted are clear and transparent. The amount of money that we allocate in the budget to RSA is less than it was. That is the case simply because it operates in an inward investment market that is much smaller. I assure Mr Neil that no project has ever been turned down because of a lack of money in the RSA budget. As long as I have anything to do with it, that will not happen.

Miss Goldie knows the answer to that question. There is a difference between both the rates poundage and rateable values in Scotland and England. For that reason, the burden imposed on businesses is the same in Scotland and England. We have said that we will freeze business rates. That measure will come into force in the next financial year and will help businesses. However, all the other measures that we are taking to improve the skills of the work force are also important. If we took money from those programmes simply to reduce business rates, we would be cutting off our nose to spite our face.

Karen Whitefield is absolutely right. She has already been involved in discussions with the company, local agencies such as Scottish Enterprise Lanarkshire and North Lanarkshire Council about how to do what she suggests. There is no point in going over old ground, but we all wish that we could have started those discussions at a much earlier stage in the process. Boots has made a commitment to support regeneration in the Airdrie area. It is important that it works with the efforts that have produced such good results in Lanarkshire in recent years, to give the area the boost that it requires.

Around 100,000 people are entitled to rises as a result of the October 2002 increase in the national minimum wage. The new lifelong learning strategy, which I launched on 11 February, shows our determination to create a Scotland in which people have the knowledge, creativity and skills to participate fully in economic, social and civic life and enhance their earning capacity.

In the past, Mr Sheridan has shown that he is happy to move between relative and absolute measures of poverty as and when it suits his argument. The first step towards the eradication of poverty in Scotland is the eradication of mass unemployment. We have taken that step. That must be built on by eradicating the lowest pay. We have done that by introducing the national minimum wage. The next step is to provide support for families in particular  circumstances through measures such as the child tax credit. Next we must give Scottish workers the opportunity to increase their skills, so that we can aspire not only to full employment in Scotland, but to the most fulfilling employment that it is possible to provide for our people. That is our strategy.

Mr Wilson will no doubt also be aware of the labour market figures that came out earlier this week, which show further falls in unemployment and the claimant count to levels that have not been seen for almost 40 years. That gives us the opportunity to focus support on those who are furthest from the labour market and have the greatest barriers to overcome to access the opportunities that we have created. We will continue to work with Whitehall colleagues. I met the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions earlier this week. We discussed the pathways to work project, which will move willing people from relying on inactive benefits into the labour market and will provide them with the necessary support that they need to do that, which they could not even have dreamed of 15 years ago.

We are fully engaged in the "Close the Gap" initiative, which is a UK-wide initiative. My colleague Margaret Curran and I have been involved in that. When we talk about improving skills and providing more opportunities for the work force, it is important that we pay particular  attention to creating such opportunities for women. We can use a range of means to do that. For example, we have provided additional support for child care for those who study in further or higher education. As I have said, the enterprise networks have particular targets for helping women to start new businesses. It is pleasing that there has been significant success in that area.

The Low Pay Commission is in no doubt that although the national minimum wage has not been the only contributor to the reduction in poverty that has taken place, it has been one of the most significant contributors. The national minimum wage is a powerful tool. We have to ensure that employers are aware of and are complying with the requirements of national minimum wage legislation because we had to wait a very long time for a minimum wage in this country. It is right and proper that we are always vigilant that it is being complied with.

The Executive is committed to an accessible public transport system that allows people with disabilities to enjoy the same opportunities to travel in Scotland as other members of society. To achieve that, we will work with public transport providers and others to improve access to services and facilities across Scotland.

I agree that we expect the providers to sort out whatever differences they have to sort out, and to make the facilities accessible. On coercion, there is the ultimate coercion of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. We expect providers to understand their obligations under that. On occasion, we have received applications to fund such improvements, through the public transport fund for example, and we have looked positively on many of them.

The DDA covers all forms of disability, not just wheelchair use. Three sets of regulations have added further detail to that, including the Rail Vehicle Accessibility Regulations 1998, and other regulations that cover buses and so on. I believe that there is still some discussion around the final form of the regulations covering taxis, but in all cases those disabilities should be addressed. One support in aid that we have is the Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland. We look forward to its first annual report towards the end of this month, and we will take up its suggestions.

The new rolling stock will have to meet the new Rail Vehicle Accessibility Regulations 1998. If anyone is aware of a continuing difficulty, I am happy to be made aware of it. The fact is that the new rolling stock should be as accessible as is rolling stock anywhere else in the world.

We have received several letters that report alleged cases of incorrect recording of the length of concessionary fare journeys. Any abuse of the travel scheme is a matter of concern and I urge anyone who experiences such behaviour to report the matter to the bus operator and local transport authority concerned.

I am not sure whether I can give an explanation, although explanations occur to me. The matter is certainly a matter of concern. The concessionary fares scheme is an important initiative that we have introduced and I want it to work. We have set mechanisms in place to improve it—we will equalise the age of qualification for men and women, for example—and are working closely with our partners. However, at bottom, the contractual relationship for delivering the scheme lies with the local authorities and the bus companies, which should be the first port of call for any member who has evidence of such behaviour.

The initiative is built on existing services, but it is built to improve. We started with the local scheme and have created a consistent minimum service throughout the country of free off-peak local bus travel. Just after the recess, we passed the Local Government in Scotland Bill, which will introduce age equalisation in April. Over the weekend, I made it clear that any Administration that I have anything to do with after the election will extend the initiative, which will become a national scheme for our older people.

If that is the excuse given, it seems to me to be a fairly unfortunate one. If Mr Canavan provides me with some details, I will certainly draw the matter to the attention of the concessionary fares working group. Sylvia Jackson's point that we aspire to a move towards a national scheme is perhaps the important one, as that would resolve some of the problems that have been mentioned.

The Scottish Executive holds regular discussions with the Sector Skills Development Agency to ensure that the new UK-wide network of sector skills councils is successfully established in Scotland.

Some progress has been made. Although he knows this well, Mr Neil does not acknowledge the fact that five trail-blazing SSCs, have been provisionally licensed. One of them—Cogent—is based in Aberdeen, although it is a UK body. We are in constant contact with the SSDA to progress the range of issues and, earlier this month, the Scottish Executive and the SSDA signed a formal protocol. Therefore, he should not worry, as we are working closely to ensure that the transition from NTOs to SSCs will progress and that the momentum will be maintained and accelerated.

There are two important aspects to the SSCs, and we must ensure that, in every case, they are their main characteristics. Mr Raffan is right to say that, first, they must work with all the  other providers and stakeholders in their industry to ensure that training is delivered effectively and efficiently. Secondly, the SSCs must be employer led. That is important in establishing the connection between skills training and the labour market.

The most important thing about today's announcement is the fact that it shows a clear recognition that the traditional skills that Scotland has provided for so long are still here and have a future, not just this year or next year, but into the decades ahead. The news is very welcome.

The Scottish Executive is in regular contact with the Strategic Rail Authority on a wide range of issues.

It is important to recognise that the SRA's strategic plan is very much about getting a grip on the costs of rail projects and injecting some realism into plans for the railway throughout Britain. It is very disappointing that some Virgin CrossCountry services will now stop at Edinburgh instead of going further north. The vast majority of passenger journeys in Scotland are undertaken on the ScotRail network and, starting later this year, there will be new rolling stock and improvements on overcrowding and in passenger safety and comfort. We continue to work with the SRA towards a general improvement for passengers in Scotland.

Of course. The comments on what the SRA's strategic plan says about Waverley are extremely unfortunate. The plan states: "The SRA will continue to work with the Scottish Executive to progress without needless delay a preferred way forward at Waverley, subject to affordability constraints." The point that I have always made during exchanges with Margo MacDonald, Sarah Boyack and others is that there is no current plan for Waverley—the development of a plan for Waverley must be achieved first. When that has been done, then we can move forward. With a fair wind, there is still no reason why a completion date of around 2008 should not be possible. We should judge the capacity of the Executive and the SRA to deliver on our track record. In  recent months we have moved forward with the new station at Edinburgh Park, new lines such as the Airdrie to Bathgate line and new rolling stock, which will benefit each and every part of the Scottish network. That is the Scottish Executive and the SRA delivering on commitments together. I see no reason why we will not be able to do that at Waverley station.

Mr MacAskill gets to the nub of the issue but completely fails to understand the importance of it. The SRA's strategic plan recognises that the redevelopment of Waverley station is a strategic priority for the UK rail network. Therefore, the SRA will work with us in delivering it. That is why the SRA is in the lead in the redevelopment of Waverley and why I expect it to work with us to deliver that. The alternative would be for us to deliver the station's redevelopment from Scottish resources, which would not recognise the fact that the rest of the UK should contribute to the development of Waverley, just as we contribute to the strategic rail network.

Improving access to further and higher education is a key priority. We have drawn the funding councils' attention to the importance of ensuring that the institutions comply with the new duties under the Special Educational Needs and Disability Act 2001 to ensure that disabled people are not disadvantaged in accessing further and higher education. We have provided the funding councils with additional funding to assist further education colleges and higher education institutions towards compliance.

The most significant staff training that has been put in place in further education is the  Beattie resources for inclusiveness in technology and education centre, which is located at Stevenson College in my constituency but provides a service to every college in the FE sector. Every college is now signed up to the BRITE scheme and has sent staff to the BRITE centre. When they return to their institutions, those members of staff cascade out the training that they have received in the methods and technology that are available for working with students with disabilities.

The provision of car parks at stations is a matter for the rail industry, in conjunction with local authorities. However, the Scottish Executive is always willing to discuss with rail operators and/or transport authorities any proposals to extend car park provision for commuters at rail stations, where suppressed rail demand can clearly be shown.

I may choose my words differently, but I agree that it is desirable that modes of transport should work together. That is why only yesterday we announced several hundred million pounds of investment in the transport infrastructure of central Scotland, covering not just road but rail and other public transport. In general, I would expect station operators to work with  others to consider the wider implications of decisions that they take about car parking. In this case, that is a decision for GNER.

When asked about Laurencekirk station—as happens regularly now—I have always made it clear that Aberdeenshire Council, in partnership with ScotRail and Network Rail, is responsible for developing the proposal. However, I repeat that we are very much in favour of different modes of transport working together. We are willing to work with anyone who is trying to pursue that line.

I expect the reopening of the Airdrie to Bathgate line to provide a new, powerful public transport alternative and to reduce congestion in the transport infrastructure of central Scotland. The strength of the central Scotland corridor study was that it was not just a study of roads or rail but a multimodal study that considered how the different transport options interact with one another. A great deal of work is still to be done on the detail and I am sure that issues such as car parking facilities will be part of that. The general principle and thrust is of different modes of transport working together, which is better for people and better for business in central Scotland.

None. However, we are in regular contact with the Waverley Railway Partnership, which leads on the Scottish Borders railway project.

The Borders railway line remains one of the developments that we would like, as we made clear in our transport delivery report. We also made clear what the process should be. The Waverley Railway Partnership leads the project and will bring to us the proposal for a link to the Borders. In December, I met Councillor John Scott from Scottish Borders Council, which takes the lead in the partnership. He was still working on the project and I expect the partnership to produce proposals.

That is absolutely right and it is why the link is mentioned in the TDR, as well as links further south into the Borders, which also have potential benefits. As I said, the partnership is taking that forward. The next key stage is to introduce the private bill in Parliament, which I expect to happen within the next month or two. In recent months, I have provided an extra £250,000 to accelerate that process. It has been my purpose to move things on as quickly as possible.

I do not accept that that is the position that we have outlined. My predecessor Sarah Boyack challenged the partnership to maximise investment in the project from private sources. A key aspect of the proposals that the partnership is working up to bring to us is the shortfall or the gap that would require to be filled by public funding. I have tried to accelerate the process and I continue to work to do that.

Yes. The Scottish transport appraisal guidance, which we are working hard to develop, takes account of those factors as well as the more obvious value-for-money factors. Only yesterday in the debate on the Transport and the Environment Committee's report, a number of colleagues expressed the view that the STAG process is excellent and is developing well. That appraisal process would be applied to potential new railway lines in Scotland, including the Borders line.

The Executive is taking action on a number of fronts, including an investment of £15 million between 2001 and 2004 in inclusiveness projects that will help hardest-to-reach 16 to 24-year-olds. Those projects—13 in total—are managed by Careers Scotland, whose target is a 25 per cent reduction in the number of young people who are not in training, employment or full-time education by the end of March 2004.

I am well aware of the social justice target that was referred to. One of the great strengths of the Executive is that social justice cuts across all our responsibilities. The target referred to has been discussed among colleagues and, indeed, between Cathy Jamieson and myself in the past days. To address that important issue, we must look to the newest initiatives in our lifelong learning strategy, which is in preparation and is soon to be published. I continue to work closely with the Minister for Education and Young People to ensure that there are new initiatives to do that.

The provision of a wider choice of opportunities in school for young people around the age of 13 or 14, to ensure that we reduce the number of those who are lost to the system and become disaffected with school, is one of the matters that Cathy Jamieson has spoken about in recent weeks. I warn anyone who considers that  group of young people to be a single cohort, and who thinks that there is a single solution, to take the issue much more seriously. There is a wide range of reasons, some of which are less difficult to resolve than others. Included in that group is the cohort of young people who take time out after school or who take a gap year. However, the total also includes a ridiculously disproportionate number of looked-after children, who might be served well in their younger years but who, in the transition to adulthood, are not served well. We will be focusing on those transitions, and there will be a range of them, because there is a range of reasons behind the statistics.

Further to my response to Annabel Goldie, I agree that we need more and better information. The group is made up of individuals, some of whom have complex reasons for not accessing the opportunities that exist. We must ensure that there is support to help them over those barriers. We must also recognise that, although we have increased and improved participation rates in further and higher education, there is still much to do on the widening access agenda to ensure that those opportunities are available to all our young people, if that is the appropriate path for them to follow.

The A8000 is a local road and the responsibility of the City of Edinburgh Council. On the A1, dualling of the Howburn to Houndwood section is due to be completed in July of this year and the completion of the Haddington to Dunbar expressway will follow in December. Thereafter, we plan to dual between Thistly Cross and Bowerhouse. Work is estimated to start in 2004.

The excellent settlement for transport in the recent Scottish budget demonstrated that we accept that transport infrastructure is key to the competitiveness of particular parts of Scotland and to the country generally. As I pointed out, there is a timetable for the improvements to the A1. The City of Edinburgh Council's progress on the A8000 remains on track. We have received the objections to the compulsory purchase orders and they are under consideration. If a local public inquiry is required, it will take place very soon. We expect that it will still be possible for the council to achieve its target date of 2006.

We are extremely pleased at the progress that has been made on the A1. The words of Lord James Douglas-Hamilton are always touched by the wisdom of ministerial office—or rather, they were at one time. The progress on the A1 will make a real difference in East Lothian and in the east of Scotland.

The member is right. This week, I spent some time in Kirkcaldy at the invitation of Marilyn Livingstone MSP. We talked about transport links between Fife and the booming economy of Edinburgh. It is clear that the improvement to the A8000 is on track and will make a genuine difference to those transport links.

Not at all. The importance of the A8000 to the east of Scotland, to the Scottish economy and to economic regeneration more generally means that we expect everyone, including the relevant councils and the bridge authority, to pull their weight and work together in partnership to deliver the desired improvement. That is what is happening. It would be nice if the SNP could welcome that.

The Scottish Executive is in regular contact with Network Rail on a wide range of issues.

The pressures on rail industry funding, for different reasons, are widely acknowledged. Announcements were made recently about that. As for Network Rail and the additional cost of dealing with landslips and other incidents over the winter, Network Rail has shown at Falkirk and through the completion of the works at Dolphinstone in the past couple of days that it is equipped to and can deal with such incidents. Network Rail is responsible for the network's maintenance and renewal. The responsibility for improvements lies with the Strategic Rail Authority, so that funding question is slightly different.

Those kinds of improvements often lie within the responsibility of local authorities. I think that I am right in saying that we have had a similar discussion at question time over recent weeks on the subject of Laurencekirk. As proposals are developed and submitted, we always look to work with our partners to see what can be done to improve our rail network. That is our intention and desire.

We await what I hope will be the imminent submission to the Scottish Parliament of the bill that is required for the promotion of the reopening of the line. The progress of the bill will depend on the Parliament rather than the Executive. The current plan remains to start construction in 2004, which would mean that the route could reopen in the winter of 2005-06.

The Scottish Executive supports the United Kingdom Government's commitment to the single sky proposals. The potential for reduced delays and airport congestion should lead to a positive economic impact.

There are certainly no negative implications for the proposed centre at Prestwick. The growth and development of air services imply that there will be a need for more air traffic control staff than at present. Of course, it is well known that there has been a delay in the construction of the new Scottish centre at Prestwick and that has followed on from the downturn in air traffic after 11 September 2001. The position is kept under review.

Intermediate technology institutes will operate in key market areas—energy, life sciences and communication technology and digital media—in which Scotland has potential competitive advantage. The institutes will support an increase in business research and development, develop Scotland as a world-renowned centre of expertise and substantially increase the number of high-growth technology companies in Scotland.

The purpose of the ITIs is to commission at the pre-competitive stage research that would not otherwise be undertaken. The ITIs will own the intellectual property that is generated  and will aim to commercialise that. Depending on the innovation, I guess that some of that research will be best commercialised in the small and medium-sized enterprise sector and some will be best in the bigger sector. It is expected that small spin-out businesses will be created. I look forward to that happening in Aberdeen.

When the ITIs were developed, institutes in places such as Sweden, Singapore, Taiwan and Canada were examined. The ITIs are based on a model that has proven successful elsewhere. The budget for the three ITIs is £450 million over 10 years. It is always nice to do more and for budgets to be bigger, but the key point to recognise is that that is a massive catalytic intervention to transform Scotland's economy. We will continue to benchmark that and watch how it performs over the years.

The facts are completely the reverse. The funding under discussion is a further source of funding for research within the university sector. The ITIs will commission research in the university sector that would not take place otherwise. That research will be over and above our expectation for our universities to continue to punch well above their weight in attracting the competitive research funds that are available on a UK basis. As always, there is a catch. In order to bid for research contracts from the ITIs, our academic institutions will need to have the infrastructure in place to support the research. An additional £10 million of recurrent funding has been included in the comprehensive spending review from the 2005-06 period to support universities to do exactly that.

The relationship between business failures and economic performance is far from clear cut.

When considering statistics on the economy, it is possible to take a simplistic approach or a serious approach. It is not surprising that, as usual, the Tories go for the former. A variety of statistics exist on business failure and it is not always clear what lies behind them all. I could argue that Scotland showed an increase in VAT registered businesses last year that was far greater than the increase anywhere else in the United Kingdom apart from Northern Ireland. It is central to a smart, successful Scotland that businesses—small businesses in particular—are able to thrive and grow. Some would argue that, in the spirit of entrepreneurship, it is also important that some will thrive and grow and some will fail. As a society we should recognise that. What is important is what we do to support the businesses that are succeeding. I am thinking of important measures such as introducing the small business gateway, restructuring regional selective assistance, streamlining small grants through RSA, and the Scottish co-investment fund, which assists businesses that are having difficulty finding venture capital investment.  Another important measure is the freezing of the business rate, which was done for exactly the reasons that Annabel Goldie outlined, in dialogue with business. That measure will help businesses to thrive in Scotland this year and in future years.

The comments about my predecessor, who was responsible for developing the smart, successful Scotland strategy, do not warrant a response—indeed, they are beneath Mr Wilson. We have made it absolutely clear and continue to make it clear that economic growth is our priority. Indeed, I made it clear to the Glasgow Chamber of Commerce this morning that economic growth is our priority and that the economic growth rate that we have seen in Scotland, not only over the past few years but over the past 30 years, does not meet our aspirations for Scotland. We have to pursue a medium to long-term strategy that will allow us to realise our economic potential. Mr Wilson asks for one difference. I could give him a raft of differences, but I will posit one—the network of three intermediary technology institutes, which the First Minister announced earlier this week. The institutes will allow Scotland to maximise its potential in the three areas of energy, the life sciences and biotechnology, and in information and communications technology and digital media. They will take an approach to building research and development and commercialising it that does not exist anywhere else in the UK. That is an example of the kind of policy that we can pursue that will allow us to maximise our competitive advantage.

Mr Canavan has stayed close to this matter, as I would expect, and I have had some  correspondence with him on the issue. I have made it clear to my officials that I wish to be kept up to date with the discussions about either avoiding the closure or, in the case of closure, what can be done to support the work force. In all fairness, I think that it would be best for me to give the most up-to-date report possible. We could perhaps undertake to get that up-to-date report and provide it to Mr Canavan as soon as that is practicable.

Our recently published document "Scotland's Canals: an asset for the future" lays out our vision and aspirations for the Scottish canal network. In that document, we stress the importance of maintaining and improving canals. However, the strategy for improving their infrastructure is primarily an operational matter for British Waterways.

I have no problem repeating Mr Matheson's welcome for the work that has been done around Falkirk. The Falkirk wheel is one of the most popular attractions—if not the most popular attraction—in Scotland. It has been a catalyst for understanding the canals' potential to promote economic regeneration. Michael Matheson is right to say that we must raise awareness of that potential in Scotland more generally. That was one of the main reasons for the publication of the document "Scotland's Canals: an asset for the future". In the budget, we have increased the resources that British Waterways receives from the Executive by some 23 per cent. We expect British Waterways to build on those resources and to work with partners such as local authorities to maximise the canals' potential. Our canals were ignored and neglected for far too long. Now that they have been refurbished, we have a real opportunity to move forward. We must never again allow them to be neglected.

The great thing about question time is that one always learns something. I had always thought that Cathie Craigie had a constituency interest in canals, of which I was well aware. I now realise that her interest in canals is much more profound and goes back much further. That interest is much to the member's credit. I know that she has been very involved both in the regeneration of our canals and in looking forward to what is now possible. We have seen the beginning of much greater use of our refurbished canals—that development is to be welcomed. However, Cathie Craigie is right to say that we will benefit from it only if everyone involved—local authorities, the enterprise network, VisitScotland, voluntary organisations and the communities through which the Forth and Clyde canal passes—works together. One of the primary purposes of the document "Scotland's Canals: an asset for the future" was to ensure that those lengths are strengthened where they exist and formed where they do not. We will do everything possible to encourage that process.

My answers are: yes; yes; yes; and I could not commit to that just now.

Last week I published an update to our broadband strategy, which details the actions that we are taking to increase availability of broadband in Scotland, including in the Highlands and Islands. At the same time, I announced a new initiative, worth up to £24 million, which is aimed at accelerating and widening the reach of broadband throughout Scotland.

Yes. The purpose of the pathfinder project is to aggregate public demand for broadband in order to stimulate the roll-out of broadband accessibility in the Highlands and Islands and in the south of Scotland. Procurement started formally last month.

Assistance is available. The truth is that achieving broadband availability throughout Scotland was always going to require a mixture of different technologies. We continue to try out power-line carrier technology, and there will be a major trial of wireless technology in the Western Isles by the enterprise network. Highlands and Islands Enterprise is already working with businesses in the Highlands and Islands to pursue the possibility of using satellite technology for broadband access.

In answer to the first supplementary question that I was asked I said that the pathfinder project is exactly as Mr Hamilton described; it has gone out to procurement. We expect to see strong expressions of interest that will deliver the benefits that we all want to see in the Highlands and Islands and in the south of Scotland. The truth is that predicting how the broadband telco market will operate has been an inexact science in the last year or so. We have always made it clear that where the market fails to deliver what we want, we will intervene. That is exactly why we introduced our new intervention of £24 million, which is aimed at enabling more digital subscriber line exchanges. We have great confidence in the pathfinder project, but we will monitor it and see what comes back in terms of expressions of interest.

Scottish Executive investments are improving roads, railways and buses in Ayrshire.

I am happy to agree that the three towns bypass will be an important element of the improvement of the transport infrastructure in Ayrshire. Invitations to tender for that project went out last month. Irene Oldfather will know that improvements are also taking place on the A737 at the Roadhead roundabout and the Head Street junction. I am aware of proposals and suggestions that further improvements could take place at Dalry, for example. However, such decisions will be made as part of future major investment programmes.

I am happy to agree that the link to Stranraer is important for Scotland and for Galloway in particular. We continue to work closely with the partnership there. Lewis Macdonald has been involved in recent weeks with that partnership, looking at the A75 and A77 links to Stranraer. On the detail of the legal position on a potential route for a Maybole bypass, I am loth to make anything of legal positions when I reply to a question in the chamber, but I am willing to find out the detailed answer to Mr Gallie's question and reply to him in writing.

The most significant improvement to the A77 is, of course, the M74 extension. We made announcements on that issue only in the past few days, when the preferred bidder was announced. I appreciate that the question was about further south on the A77 but, as a regular user of the road, I must say that both parts of it are important in relation to how long it takes to reach Stranraer. As the member knows, the north channel partnership discussions are looking at several proposed schemes for the A77 and A75, which are geared particularly towards making the transit from ferries easier. I would expect to be able to make announcements in the relatively near future about the outcome of those negotiations.

Colleges are accountable to the Scottish Further Education Funding Council for the provision of adequate and efficient further education in the communities that they serve. I am satisfied that both SFEFC and the board of management of Borders College will continue to use their judgment and experience to ensure the continued provision of high-quality further education in the Borders.

I am aware of the issues surrounding the Hawick campus of Borders College. Euan Robson, the constituency MSP for Hawick, has not  only raised the matter with me in the past, he has also raised it directly and properly with the Scottish Further Education Funding Council, which has the responsibility for working with the college to ensure the most efficient provision. Borders College has exceptionally high property costs per student compared with other colleges, and that matter has to be addressed. My expectation is that all options will be considered. The suggestion that the Hawick campus will definitely close is premature. I understand that the petition is in the hands of the Public Petitions Committee. It is for that committee to decide how it intends to deal with the petition.

Account is taken of the specific issues of rurality and remoteness in the funding methodology that the funding council uses. Rural colleges receive a funding uplift to take account of the increased costs that they have to bear. Nevertheless, Borders College has exceptionally high property costs per student compared to other colleges, and the board of management of the college must address that. They should do that with due consideration of the impact on the local community, for example, and in discussion with the funding council. I expect all options to be considered in those discussions, which are properly a matter for the college and the funding council.

That seems to be a reasonable aspiration for Scottish Enterprise. I cannot resist the opportunity to ask Mr Mundell whether what he says is a sea change from the previously expressed view of the Scottish Conservatives, which was that Scottish Enterprise should be abolished and the money used to cut business rates.

I thank the convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee for giving me this opportunity to speak. I congratulate the committee on its report, which is a thorough and wide-ranging analysis of a complex policy area. The committee has certainly given the Executive food for thought. It is particularly impressive that the committee took evidence from such a wide range of interests, as its convener indicated. It is even more impressive that that vast body of evidence has been distilled into the final report and that the convener distilled the report into his 20 minutes almost exactly. As the committee is well aware, the Executive plans to produce a new lifelong learning strategy early next year. I confirm that we intend to take full account of the committee's findings in developing that strategy. Today, however, I want to listen and not to give the Executive's definitive position on the committee's recommendations. The report was published only four weeks ago and I will give the committee a considered response when we publish the strategy document early in the new year. In the meantime, the debate gives me the opportunity to listen to the Parliament's views on the committee's proposals. I am grateful for that opportunity. I have produced an interim response to the report, which has been placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre. It should be clear from that that the Executive has much common ground with the committee. At the most fundamental level, we agree that lifelong learning is crucial. Like the committee, I believe that a learning culture can lead to more confident citizens, more cohesive communities and a more prosperous economy. All of us—whether we are employed or not and regardless of where we work or what we do—can benefit from learning new skills and developing new interests. As the convener made clear, that is a requirement for us all in this day and age. The people of Scotland and Scottish businesses in the private and public sectors have a huge appetite for learning. By working with providers, employers, trade unions, the work force and all learners, we can harness that appetite so that everyone can realise their potential through learning. The convener said that in no way did the committee's recommendations suggest that an enormous amount of good practice in lifelong learning did not exist. I echo that. In recent years, the Executive has made several significant structural and funding changes to stimulate demand, expand provider capacity and widen access to learning and training. We are also improving the information, guidance and support that are available to individuals and businesses  about the benefits of learning to them. I listed the initiatives that are under way on those matters in my interim response to the report. Today is about looking towards the future, so I will not dwell on the past. However, the evidence is that the current lifelong learning system in Scotland is producing some positive results. For example, 50 per cent of Scottish young people participate in higher education by the time that they are 21. More than 65,000 new further education places have been created in Scotland since 1998-99. Three in four people in the Scottish work force are qualified to Scottish credit and qualifications framework level 5 or above, and that figure continues to rise. More than 20,000 Scots are in training for a modern apprenticeship, which is at SCQF level 6. However, the committee is right to say that the future holds significant challenges for us. I am not complacent about our need to face up to those challenges. Like the committee, I take seriously the forecast changes in Scotland's population. Fewer young people will enter the labour market, so it will be important for us to help those who are in work to reskill and retrain. We must keep up with the demands of our economy and enable young people to enter the world of work with confidence.

We are proud of our participation rates in higher education. Not all the 50 per cent of young people who are in higher education are in universities—25 per cent are in higher education in the FE sector. A key concept in the committee's report is parity of esteem. It is important that we ensure that young people are not funnelled into particular channels, but are given the opportunity to choose the channel that is right for them and right for us and our economic growth. That does not mean university or higher education for everyone. The committee made that point powerfully in its report. Like the committee, I believe that inequality and disadvantage should have no place in a modern, 21 st century Scotland. I am convinced that closing the opportunity gap will improve the lives of people in our most excluded communities. That, in turn, will help to make learning of all kinds more attractive to everyone and help to establish the  learning culture that we all need for success in the future. The issues are of interest not only to the Executive and the committee, nor do we alone bear the responsibility for delivering change to meet the challenges. I am thinking not only of the delivery agents such as the funding councils, enterprise networks and the institutions, but of the employers, the work force, trade unions, learning providers, community groups and individual citizens, all of whom have responsibilities and roles to play, which is why there was such broad engagement in the development of the report. I have said that there is much common ground between the Executive and the committee. I will quickly give some examples of that. We share the committee's aspirations for widespread stakeholder engagement in lifelong learning policy. We will address that in the strategy. We agree with the committee that learners need and deserve better and more co-ordinated information and advice about learning. All the various players on the lifelong learning field need to work closely together to ensure that learners have easy access to digestible information about the learning that is relevant to them. Like the committee, I believe that it is essential that the learning opportunities that are available in Scotland are not just of high quality but, as the convener said, of the highest quality. That will be an important strand in the new strategy. The committee recommended the medium-term merger of the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council and the Scottish Further Education Funding Council. We understand the case that the committee has made for further integration between the councils and we will provide specific proposals on the funding councils in the new strategy. The committee has made a number of recommendations about work-based learning for young people. We are already working with the enterprise networks to re-engineer the skillseekers programme entirely. We will take serious account of the committee's findings in doing that.

A number of different reviews and processes are going on. As Mr Monteith knows, the Scottish Executive is engaged in a separate review of higher education. I expect that that report will be published a little later than the lifelong learning strategy. I will endeavour to  ensure that there is consistency between the two. I understand that the conclusions of the Whitehall HE review will be available in January. The bulk of the conclusions of that review will apply only in England. Obviously, we will look at what is said in the review and consider whether there are consequences for Scotland.

I think that my reply to Mr Monteith made it clear that we will have to look at whatever changes are proposed for the rest of the UK and consider what consequences those changes might have for Scotland. It would be remiss of us to do anything before we know what the proposals are. However, during the recent discussion about top-up fees, Universities Scotland said: "We don't think deregulated fees are even worth considering. It is politically off the agenda." Perhaps one of the most significant proposals in the committee's report is its call for the introduction of an entitlement to learning for all. I think that that is a powerful concept. As I understand it, it is about equity of opportunity and access. However, I believe that the committee recognised the difficulties that are inherent in putting that proposal into practice, particularly in relation to resources. In fact, the committee stated that it is important that entitlement is taken forward "within the envelope of available resources."

Indeed, not only funding but other aspects are important for taking forward the idea of entitlement. For example, the committee links entitlement to the SCQF, which is clearly important for the development of lifelong learning. However, the SCQF is in its infancy and there is a great deal of work to do to complete, implement and propagate it. That framework is another aspect that we must ensure is right and robust before we move forward. Our strategy will address that. Potential learners do not always take up existing learning opportunities, so we must be certain that people are aware of available opportunities and ensure that barriers to access are steadily dismantled. The committee's convener saw that as one of the most important aspects of the report. None of that is easy. Barriers to access, both real and perceived, are as many, varied and complicated as individual learners are. The provision of co-ordinated services to learners and of help for people to help themselves through the learning pathways are important factors. One of the practical steps that we will take to extend access to learning is to set up a successor scheme to individual learning accounts. We are making good progress on that and I will provide further details in the new strategy. The committee also recommended that we establish a single funding system for the whole of lifelong learning, albeit one that recognises the differences between the sectors. I understand that the committee is particularly concerned about the differences in funding between the HE and FE sectors. Care needs to be taken with the way in which figures are analysed. Comparisons of simple averages do not always recognise the complexities within and across sectors. For example, a medical course will always be more expensive than a business studies course. We must not lose sight of the fact that what is really important is that resources are in place in each part of the system to enable the delivery of our objectives at every level. Our strategy must address that. On a connected point, the committee further suggested that the current lifelong learning system is not cohesive and does not serve learners or business well. The committee made several suggestions for structural change to bring the various elements of the current system closer together. There are some relatively new elements in the system—for example, Careers Scotland and learndirect Scotland—which need time to prove their effectiveness. However, I agree with the overall aim of getting the system to work smoothly and coherently and I will address that in our new strategy.  The committee rightly devoted much space in its report to workplace and vocational training. As the report says, the enterprise networks have an important role to play in supporting work force development and in helping business and the economy to grow. That is why we placed learning and skills at the heart of our strategy for the networks. The convener is right in his view that it is important to society and the individual that we match skills to the needs and opportunities of the economy. We must provide the framework and opportunities to support an efficient labour market and maximise opportunities for those who enter that market. A key step is to have a better understanding of how the system works in relation to the skills that employers are looking for and the links between the supply of skills and economic results. The establishment of Futureskills Scotland is a significant step in that direction. The results of its first skills survey are surprising and fascinating. For example, the survey shows that a lack of suitable skills in the work force—skills shortages—is a relatively minor issue, accounting for only one in five vacancies. Probably a more important issue is the skills gap. One in six employers feels that some of their employees have skills deficiencies that limit their performance. The Executive is not the only player in this arena. We recognise, for instance, the important role that employers have to play. Indeed, we estimate that employers invest some £2 billion in training in Scotland. However, it is clear from the Futureskills Scotland survey and from elsewhere that more could be done to maximise the benefits of that investment. I want employers to do more to develop their work force across the piece. I believe that maximum benefits will result all round if that is done in partnership with employees and their trade unions. There are excellent examples of how that can be done and I am sure that the committee is aware of them. I want to talk about resources. As with all policy decisions, affordability is an issue and I would be failing in my duties if I did not take it into account. The committee has given us a thorough analysis of the lifelong learning landscape. It has highlighted where it feels that problems arise and has suggested some solutions. The Executive is investing some £2.1 billion in lifelong learning this year. We have increased those resources by 14 per cent over the next three years in our current spending plans, which means that investment will rise to some £2.4 billion by 2005-06. We will then build on the process of deciding where the priorities lie for the future in the new strategy. It should be clear from what I have said that I broadly agree with the aims and objectives that the committee has set out for lifelong learning in  the 21 st century. Learning is a lifetime opportunity and a lifetime commitment. As the convener eloquently explained, it is also a lifetime requirement. It can help people to develop in different ways that can enrich their lives, their careers, our communities and our country. The committee's report is a powerful contribution to the debate about the future of lifelong learning in Scotland. Some difficult challenges lie ahead, but the new strategy is an opportunity to set a clear direction so that all our efforts are focused on meeting those challenges. The committee's report is already influencing the shape of the strategy and this debate is an opportunity for other members to do the same. I urge all members to get involved.

Scottish Enterprise follows the strategic direction that was set by the Executive in "A Smart, Successful Scotland". It met an impressive 18 out of 21 output targets for 2001-02, as set out in its annual report. Impact on the economy is assessed using performance measures that were set out in March in the Executive's document "Measuring Scotland's Progress Towards a Smart Successful Scotland". We will report on progress next year.

We are ensuring that there is good co-operation between the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council and Scottish Enterprise through common board members and the exchange of board papers between the two boards. The boards are clear about the importance of science. At the science and the Parliament event, I said that we are good at recognising the importance of Scottish scientists of the past and that it is about time that we got better at recognising the importance of Scottish scientists of the present. Scotland's past was built on science and our future will be. Scottish Enterprise understands that. Tomorrow, in my constituency, I will break ground on the new phase of the Heriot-Watt University research park, which holds the potential for 5,000 jobs through the commercialisation of science. That project is supported by Scottish Enterprise Edinburgh and Lothian. It is one example; there are many others around Scotland.

It is impossible for me to comment on the particulars of a case that is not known to me. If Christine Grahame writes to me with those particulars, I shall investigate them, as I always do. Last year Scottish Enterprise helped more than 7,000 new businesses to get off the ground and 220 Scottish companies to become exporters for the first time. I do not doubt that there were  difficulties in some of those negotiations, but we have moved to improve that situation. Similarly, we moved this week to improve regional selective assistance support for Scottish companies; we are making information more easily available, so that it will be easier for companies to benefit from that assistance. That is important work and, where there are failures, we will look at them and make improvements.

One of the reasons is that about 50 per cent of Scottish Enterprise's budget is spent on the skills and learning agenda, which is probably not the case for the agencies to which Miss Goldie referred. If Scottish Enterprise has a voracious appetite, that is because the Scottish people have a voracious appetite for improving their skills in order to improve their future.

I am aware of the extremely unfortunate situation to which Mr Canavan referred. However, we have a powerful framework, with a track record of success, for providing the maximum possible support to those who lose their jobs, to help them to find alternative opportunities. For example, some 95 per cent of those who lost their jobs in Motorola at Easter Inch in Bathgate are now in work or full-time training, as are 90 per cent of those who lost their jobs at Longannet. I pay close attention to that framework and I believe that we have improved it over recent months. I can certainly give Mr Canavan an undertaking that I will ensure that that framework swings fully into action to the benefit of the workers whose case he raised.

The Scottish Executive has on-going discussions with its agencies—the enterprise networks and VisitScotland—about the promotion of air links serving all parts of Scotland. We are committed to ensuring that the rising demand for air travel brings maximum economic benefits, at minimal environmental cost, to all Scottish airports and the communities that they serve.

It is clear that a combination of the two modes of travel is necessary. The greatest symbol of such a combination is our commitment to improve the rail links to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports. New routes are also important, because direct air routes make it less necessary for many passengers to travel from Scotland to London, which offers an environmental advantage.

As Margaret Smith is probably aware, we are considering a shortlist of four possible routes for the Glasgow and Edinburgh airport links. We still hope that preferred routes for those  links will emerge from that process before the end of the year.

The member has asked two questions in one. To some extent, I answered the first question in my initial answer. I am well aware of the interest that has been stimulated in a direct link to Sweden. As Mr Neil probably knows, there is a direct link between Scotland and Sweden, but it does not operate all year round. That is one of the routes that we continue to discuss with the enterprise networks and VisitScotland. Scotland in Sweden was an enormous success and many people felt that, if progress could be made, an air link between Scotland and Sweden would be a good outcome. There has been much discussion about Inverness airport. The fact is that the £21 million that we give to Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd ensures that there is an Inverness airport. It is HIAL's responsibility to negotiate a commercial deal with Ryanair or with any other operator. Without that £21 million, which is a tripling of the subsidy that we provide to Scotland's airports, neither the low-cost flights that already operate from Inverness nor the more important lifeline services around Scotland would exist at all.

Decisions have not yet been made on the use of the new funding announced for veterinary teaching and research in the UK Government's comprehensive spending review. The Scottish Higher Education Funding Council and the Scottish Executive are members of the Great Britain-wide group that is considering the optimum use of those funds.

Miss Goldie's supplementary question demonstrated that she had not listened to my answer to her previous question. I fully expect that our two vet schools will receive their fair share of funds. Indeed, I suspect that they will receive a disproportionate share, because they contribute disproportionately to veterinary teaching and research in the UK. Their funding must be seen in the context of a budget settlement under which funding for higher education generally will rise to more than £800 million a year by 2005-06. Those funds will be available to SHEFC for higher education, including the vet schools. SHEFC has clearly demonstrated that it recognises the importance of veterinary science by increasing by 29 per cent in 2002-03 the veterinary science part of the block grant for research. I do not recognise the situation that Miss Goldie describes.

The Scottish Executive is currently studying the report and will be writing to the convener of the Transport and the Environment Committee with its response and comments shortly.

It is clear that relations with the SRA are important and I have discussed that in the past with the Transport and the Environment Committee. I think it would be quite wrong for me to respond to the specific point that is made in the report until I respond to the report as a whole. However, Nora Radcliffe makes an important point about the relationship between transport, and the potential for improving transport infrastructure, and land use planning. Only yesterday, I met Margaret Curran and other colleagues to discuss that. We believe that there are things that we can do to bring together land use planning and transport issues. We can expect to see some ideas emerging over the next weeks and months.

That Network Rail is a private company that cannot be directed by ministers is a simple statement of fact and we have to accept that. On responding to the report and the support or otherwise that I give to the recommendations of the report, I have made it clear that I have to take time to respond in the appropriate fashion to the convener of the Transport and the Environment Committee. While Mr MacAskill and others have spent some time poring over pronouncements about the structure of the railways, in recent days we have been concentrating on developing potential improvements in Scotland. The past week has seen money being given to fund the engineering studies necessary for the potential Airdrie-Bathgate link. Approximately £1.5 million—the detail is still to be determined—is to be given to the Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive to take forward Parliamentary powers to build the Glasgow airport rail link, which is another popular improvement.  In the past week the SRA has asked for expressions of interest on the ScotRail franchise. It would therefore appear that, in recent days, the SRA has been pursuing the interests of maintaining and improving rail services in Scotland. That is what is important as far as we are concerned.

It is important to say that the way in which train operators operate those rail services that begin and end in Scotland is bound up in the franchise that is currently held by ScotRail. If Mr McAllion looks at the directions and guidance that we have provided to determine the re-let of that franchise, he will see that better and safer railways are central. If a train operator tenders for that franchise on the basis that Mr McAllion has just described, rather than on the basis of providing better, safer and more reliable train services for the people of Scotland, they will be wasting their time.

No member has said that they are against widening the range of available direct flights or increasing the number of no-frills, low-cost carrier services that are available from  Scotland. The point is that HIAL already has such routes operating out of Inverness in a business deal that it negotiates with the airlines.

Mr Mundell is extremely unfair to Mr MacAskill in accusing him of having no ideas in his 10-minute speech. The single idea that he presented in 10 minutes was that we should support the marketing of Ryanair flights. We should acknowledge that.

To paraphrase Mr MacAskill's last few words, he said yesterday that Inverness had the highest landing charges in Europe. That statement was described as an ill-informed media stunt aimed at grabbing headlines with no regard to the facts. I take it that he now says that it is correct that Inverness does not have the highest landing charges in Europe, but that that is of no interest in the argument that he is seeking to develop.

It is clear to any mature parliamentarian that the "notes" motion is part of the consultation process and allows members to contribute to the debate on how we should develop our aviation strategy. Mr MacAskill is now seven minutes into his speech, but he has contributed no ideas whatever. Given the experience of the prison estates review, perhaps we should look to the previous leadership of the Scottish National Party for a contribution to this important consultation. Does the SNP intend to contribute any ideas?

I am pleased to introduce this debate. The debate itself is an introduction, because its essential purpose is to allow members to contribute to the consultation process on air transport, which was launched by Alistair Darling, the Secretary of State for Transport, in July, and which will close at the end of November. The process is taking place across the United Kingdom. A suite of consultation documents and technical studies provide a variety of detailed growth scenarios and outline the likely infrastructure requirements. In Scotland, the consultation process is being conducted jointly by the Department for Transport and the Scottish Executive. Compared with the situation prior to devolution, Scotland is in a strong position because many of the key areas are devolved. Land-use planning, surface access and the management of publicly owned airports are our responsibilities. Licensing, safety, security and environmental policy are reserved matters, along with international agreements, economic regulation and slot policy. The aviation industry is critical to Scotland's future, not only because it is worth £0.6 billion a year to the Scottish economy and provides directly 15,000 jobs—and at least as many again through multiplier effects—but because it links our nation to the rest of the world. Air links bind nations together. Airports and air services promote economic growth by increasing access to markets and suppliers, and by encouraging inward investment and tourism. Airports themselves act as focuses for clusters of businesses. The aviation sector is growing. The success story in Scotland is one of dramatic growth with passenger numbers doubling in the last decade. The Scottish consultation document indicates that the current 18 million passengers a year who pass through Scottish airports may well increase to somewhere between 26 million and 50 million by 2030. The document also outlines the potential for air freight and the role it can play. The freight sector is subdivided into different categories, with dedicated cargo flights by freight aircraft—either scheduled or chartered—as well as belly-hold  facilities on passenger aircraft, and dedicated mail operations.

Predictions for a period as long as that to 2030 are not an exact science. That is why the prediction for the number of passengers passing through Scotland by 2030 is between 26 and 50 million, which I freely acknowledge is a wide range. Perhaps HIAL's estimate shows its ambitiousness to develop its business in Scotland. Dynamic growth is predicted for all three categories of freight. Scotland could have dramatic growth in freight tonnage from 119,000 tonnes in 2000 to more than 570,000 tonnes by 2030. Mail and belly-hold tonnage will increase, but much of that increase will be delivered by dedicated freight aircraft.

As the consultation process makes clear, we are in constant discussion with the Department for Transport on all aviation issues and other transport matters. Of course air traffic control is part of that. I agree with Mr Gallie that safety is key. One challenge of the consultation, as we consider dramatic growth, is to allow and facilitate our industry to grow in a way that in no way compromises air travel safety, which is to the forefront of everyone's minds these days. Glasgow Prestwick airport has established itself as a major freight hub for Scotland and the UK. Glasgow airport has a healthy belly-hold freight operation. Edinburgh airport is the dominant airmail centre for Scotland and its position in the central belt, its road links and its proximity to express freight users give it great advantages for express parcels and airmail in the future. Aberdeen airport plays the same role for north-east Scotland and the northern isles and Inverness airport plays a role in the distribution of mail and newspapers throughout the Highlands and Islands.  The possibilities are huge and the capacity of the air freight sector to deliver is vital to the development of many of our important businesses, such as information technology and biotechnology, and to meeting the needs of the large-gauge cargo market in the oil and gas, aerospace and engineering industries. As with the growth in passenger traffic, many considerations must be taken into account, not least environmental factors. The consultation document, rightly, assesses the impacts at Scottish airports of the growth scenarios, and environmental factors include noise and air quality changes as well as the potential impact on ecology and heritage. Like safety, those factors are key elements of the circle that must be squared to allow us to develop the aviation strategy in the best way. Anyone can participate in the consultation process. All the documents are available on a Department for Transport website or through a call centre. Background technical reports can be viewed in inspection centres. A questionnaire can be completed online and stakeholders have been sent copies of the questionnaire. The Executive hosted a successful stakeholders conference on 9 September in Glasgow, which Alistair Darling, Jim Wallace, Helen Liddell and I attended. That was a strong indication of the importance that we place on the process. We are part of the way through a series of topic workshops, which are being held in Aberdeen, Inverness, Glasgow and Edinburgh. As I speak, Department for Transport, Scotland Office and Scottish Executive officials are engaging with those who use, and live around, Edinburgh airport at an exhibition in an airport hotel. That exhibition was at Braehead shopping centre in Glasgow yesterday. A closing conference will be held in November to draw together the consultation strands. We are doing everything to encourage an informed debate about the many key issues that face us—maintaining and developing services to remote areas; providing extra airport capacity; the provision of adequate surface access to airports; the development of new routes; and maintaining access to the hub airports in south-east England. We are committed to ensuring that the rising demand for air transport brings maximum economic benefits at minimal environmental cost to all Scottish airports and the communities that they serve.

I want to say something about rail links to both Glasgow and Edinburgh airports and something about the timetable that we face. If Mr Butler will bear with me, I will do so later in my speech. We have no preconceived view on the best way of providing extra airport capacity; there is no hidden agenda. The consultation document sets out a range of options including a number of scenarios for Glasgow and Edinburgh. The document also considers the case for an entirely new central Scotland airport by examining an example site at Airth. Although a new central Scotland airport would have distinct advantages in terms of route development, we have to recognise that it would be extremely expensive and time-consuming to develop, even if a site could be found that met all the environmental, safety and engineering requirements. Such a development presupposes that Glasgow and Edinburgh airports would close. However, that would result in the majority of passengers having to travel further to reach the airport, which would lead to increases in cost, congestion, and pollution. Given suitable investment, our other major airports at Aberdeen and Glasgow Prestwick have the capacity to handle higher volumes, as is the case at Edinburgh and Glasgow. All those options must be discussed fully.

Key to the aviation industry is the fact that it is an industry. As such, it is led by the marketplace. The landing charges at Glasgow and Edinburgh airports are a matter for the operator of the airports who has to negotiate with the airlines in order to create the possibility of new route development. I would expect that to happen. I turn to Mr Butler's point. Glasgow and Edinburgh airports are the two largest airports in the United Kingdom without direct rail access. That is why the Executive has said that providing rail links to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports is one of its top priorities. That commitment pre-dates the air transport consultation. The study to determine the value-for-money case for the links is progressing well. The  consultants are considering in more depth four options for each airport and I expect their recommendations on the preferred option at each airport in the next few weeks. With the assistance of the Strategic Rail Authority, BAA, which owns both airports, and the relevant authorities, we will be able to move the projects forward to delivery. However, necessary and unavoidable groundwork has to be done, including ensuring that the private bill that comes before the Parliament is robust enough to enable members to make informed decisions. All that groundwork suggests that the earliest starting date for design and construction of any link is likely to be 2005. I recognise that that is an ambitious timetable but, with the will and a fair wind, I believe that it is achievable. Like many members, I am keen to see an improved network of direct routes to Europe and beyond. In the past we have considered new routes on a case-by-case basis. Together with the enterprise agencies, we are now working towards a coherent route development strategy. However, any financial assistance to air operators must comply with European Union regulations on state aid. A framework is required for identifying the routes that provide the maximum benefit. In that context, I am pleased that Scotland has been selected to host the ninth world route development forum next September. The forum is the largest gathering of airline network planners in the world. Well over 1,000 route development specialists are expected to attend one of the most important events in the aviation calendar. By bringing that highly prestigious forum to Scotland, we are sending out a global message that we want to develop air travel in Scotland to our full potential and ensure that we achieve maximum advantage from the benefits of strong air links. Securing more direct international air services for Scotland will be top of the agenda when the leading players in the aviation industry visit Scotland. Access to the London airports is also important for Scotland. Such access gives us entry to markets and services in south-east England and to many interlining opportunities. We will work closely with the other devolved Administrations on how best to protect access to the south-east and on the view that we should take on extra capacity at the south-east airports. We are keenly aware of the particular requirements of remote communities and their need to access central Scotland, south-east England and interlining opportunities at the big hub airports. The financial support that we have made available to HIAL has risen from £7 million in 1997 to £21.5 million in the current financial year, which represents a 207 per cent increase in Government support over a five-year period. In the  period from 2003-04 to 2005-06, HIAL's expenditure will further increase to £22.1 million. That is a substantial commitment to HIAL and to lifeline transport links in the Highlands and Islands. The support that we provide will allow HIAL to continue to operate 10 airports and will keep airport charges at a level that can encourage the continuing development of air services. I understand that on Friday there will be an announcement about a new route from Inverness. I am sure that more details about that will follow. Air services are shaped by businesses making commercial decisions. Our role in Government is to identify failings in the market and to be persuasive about, promote and legislate for the provision of public goods. In order to do that, we require a broad consensus about our aims for the industry that takes account of economic, social and environmental factors and considers the needs of all our communities. That is where the current consultation process comes in. We will do our best to ensure that everyone has a chance to contribute—that is the purpose of this afternoon's debate. I move, That the Parliament notes the consultation process currently being undertaken jointly by the Department for Transport and the Scottish Executive on the future development of air transport in the United Kingdom.

A steering group that is chaired by the Strategic Rail Authority and includes the Scottish Executive is overseeing the necessary preliminary work required to inform the final design of the station. Output from that work is expected in spring 2003.

Because of the station's strategic importance to the rail network, the lead agency on its redevelopment is the SRA, but the Executive has shown leadership recently by providing £1 million for the technical work that is necessary to develop the plans. In the real world, there must be a plan before we can progress. That work and 35 other pieces of technical investigation are now under way. I see no reason why, if we progress properly, Waverley cannot be redeveloped by 2008. There is no reason why we should not progress properly.

Sarah Boyack has a well-known interest in Waverley station, which is in her constituency. Her Westminster counterpart for Edinburgh Central has some interest in the matter,  too. The subject has been important in my discussions with him recently. One problem in the redevelopment of our rail network is that we continue to deal with the botched privatisation that took place under the Tories. Today's announcement that Network Rail takes over from Railtrack is a significant step forward. I expect that to have positive consequences for developments at Waverley station.

I welcome a certain note of realism in the debate on business rates, because the cost of the measure that the Tory amendment calls for would be somewhere between £150 million and £200 million, which would mean less resources for spending. Mr Ingram implies that the SNP solution to that would be to raise other taxation. I am interested to know which other taxes would be raised to reduce the business rate or which public services would be cut to pay for that change.

The SNP's motion seeks to give the impression that the economy and growth are not a priority for the Executive, but nothing could be further from the truth. Not only do the economy and jobs form one of the Executive's key priorities—along with health, education, crime and transport—but earlier this week, the First Minister could not have made it clearer that a prosperous growing economy is crucial to the delivery of the first-class public services and socially just Scotland that we want. That is a given. It is also a given that growth is our problem; no one argues about that. The latest gross domestic product figures for Scotland were unwelcome, to say the least. However, in many ways they were not a surprise, given what has happened in the global economy and given the fact that, since 1973, the average growth rate of Scotland's economy, at 1.6 per cent, has lagged behind the 2.1 per cent rate for the UK in the same period. That is a given. Lower growth is not a recent feature of our economy, although it is true that our growth tends to be less volatile than that of the United Kingdom as a whole. It is not all bad news, however. For example, the financial services sector has grown substantially in recent years and makes a vital contribution to enhancing the performance of the Scottish economy. Growth in that sector in the first quarter of 2002 was 1.8 per cent compared to a fall of 0.9 per cent in the UK as a whole. Therefore, although the service sector continued to grow in Scotland faster than in the UK as a whole in the first quarter of 2002, we know that the fall in manufacturing output—significant causes of which were the  global slow-down and the re-structuring of key sectors such as electronics—meant that overall output fell. It is wrong to say that this is a return to the days of the Tories because, despite such difficulties, the labour market in Scotland remains relatively strong. That is important. Employment is high compared to all European countries and unemployment is low in historical terms.

The inheritance was that when the economy faced such difficulties in the years to which Miss Annabel Goldie referred, two or three million people were out of work. Today we have historically high levels of employment in Scotland. They are among the highest of any European Union country. Indeed, only yesterday we saw labour market statistics that show that that position is being maintained and slightly improved. We are not alone in suffering growth problems. For example, data from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development shows that GDP in the year to the first quarter of 2002 showed a fall of 0.7 per cent in Finland and a rise of just 0.2 per cent in Germany and 0.3 per cent in the United States. That compares to a rise of 0.7 per cent for Scotland over the same period. We are not alone in suffering a slow-down in economic activity. However, no one is arguing that such a low figure for growth is acceptable. It does not meet our aspiration for an enterprising and prosperous Scotland in which our people can fulfil their potential. I think that we can agree on that.

No, I simply do not accept that. If Mr Ewing is willing to wait, I will come to that issue when I refer to the Tory amendment later in my speech. The challenge will not be met through short-term tactics but through determined implementation of a medium-term strategy. We have three key economic development objectives. First, we must accelerate our rate of economic growth. We also need to close the gap to help areas of lower economic activity in finding new opportunities. There are not only differences between Scotland's economy and that of the rest of the UK; there are  significant differences within Scotland, which we must address. Secondly, we want to provide opportunities for all those who wish to work. That is not just about providing jobs for all, but about closing the gap between those who enjoy high-quality jobs with high incomes and those who seek work or work only in poor quality and poorly remunerated employment. That is part of the productivity increase and the shift towards higher added value in our economy that we need. Thirdly, our economic development must be sustainable, not just by  improving the environment and by better recycling and waste management—important as those are—but by making productive use of our human resources. We must also avoid, as far as possible, those valuable human resources being out of work and requiring further resources to support them. The requirement for a sharp improvement in our productivity is central to that.

I need to make some progress, given the time. The data and methodology vary, but productivity in Scotland is around, or slightly below, the UK average. However, the UK figure is about 35 to 40 per cent lower than that of the United States and about 20 per cent lower than that of France. We must therefore devote our energies and resources towards the critical determinants of our productivity. That is the heart of our economic strategy and in that—now more than ever—we need to hold our nerve. We have the right strategy and the right policies. We must not be diverted from our path by short-term issues, by debates about powers we do not have rather than about those we do, or by arguments over which arbitrary target to set or pursue. We should pursue three priorities, the first of which is growing businesses. We must encourage entrepreneurship, support new companies and innovation and translate science directly into commercial activity, while creating a climate of innovation that allows new products and processes to be introduced not only in high-technology industries, but in the manufacturing and financial services sectors, where the companies that are succeeding are fuelling their growth by developing innovative products. The second priority is to ensure that our companies are connected to global markets and that they can communicate with them either electronically or physically by train and plane. The third priority is to improve our skills base in relation to the young, those in employment and  those out of work, whom we need to reskill. I stand firmly by "A Smart Successful Scotland: Ambitions for the Enterprise Networks" and I am glad to hear Andrew Wilson support it this morning. I also stand firmly by Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise because they are important to our future.

I said that I stand firmly by those organisations because they operate on the structural failures in the markets. Such work does not deal with the symptoms but with the fundamental problems. We have world-class research in our universities, and there are global markets that want it; however, too often that research does not get out there. We have new businesses looking to expand and capital looking for investment, but too often they cannot seem to get together. Above all, we have skills shortages from construction to financial services and we have people who have the potential to do anything if they are given the chance. We need quickly to match the people with the skills shortages. Accelerating that process has to be our key task and, in recent months, we have worked towards that. We have invested £10 million in further education capital for kit to maximise the relevance of skills training, £10 million on infrastructure improvements and £7.5 million on higher education research. We have also set in motion the Scottish co-investment fund to plug the equity gap growth barrier and we have matched that with a £15 million expansion of the business growth scheme. That represents a real investment in growth from within our own strengths and it will bring benefits. The past few months have also seen the launch of a comprehensive campaign to build a culture of enterprise and entrepreneurism in our future generations. The primary schools enterprise education programme is already under way and will be mainstreamed into secondary schools next. That is investment in the long term and it holds out the prospect of a cultural shift to the kind of modern aspirational country on which future economic success can be based. There has to be a structural shift to address growth. I acknowledge that Scotland's population is, at best, stagnant and at worst decreasing. Not only must we ensure that our people aim high and act  with enterprise and confidence, but that they stay in Scotland to do so. We can have an open debate in relation to that because more has to be done in that regard. I confess that I had thought that the Scottish National Party would have something new to offer today. Mr Wilson has tried to have Parliament recalled and, on the first day after recess, he made a point of order demanding this debate. Now he has it, however, we hear nothing new. We have read in the press that the SNP has said that full fiscal freedom is now going to be economic independence. However, that is not news because we always knew that full fiscal freedom was about only two things: the SNP's love of alliteration—

I think that I must wind up.

And, indeed, the SNP's love of alliteration— [Laughter.] Well, I am speaking to two people at once while I try to make a speech. The call for full fiscal freedom was always about independence because it is a political rather than an economic strategy. Mr Wilson says that he wants to talk Scotland up, but his speech was, in the main, a catalogue of despair. I will close by addressing the Tories. It is true that investment in infrastructure is important and, who knows, perhaps we will hear more of that later today. However, is that to be accomplished by Murdo Fraser's suggestion that we pay for it by the abolition of all business support and work-based training, or by Brian Monteith's fiscal-autonomy magic fix? Do they not acknowledge that business rate comparisons depend on rateable value as well as rate poundage, and that the United Kingdom has one of the lowest rates of business taxation in Europe? Whatever the answer, David McLetchie said clearly on television a couple of weeks ago that the Tories do not have an economic policy. He was right—the amendment does not add up to an economic policy. Meanwhile, the Executive will continue to focus on what it can do, is doing and—above all—must do, because we are determined to create a growing, aspirational, highly skilled and prosperous Scotland. I move amendment S1M-3376.2, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "endorses the Scottish Executive's aim to increase the sustainable growth of the Scottish economy over the long term, using the powers available to the Parliament, thus providing resources for first-class public services and a more socially just and sustainable Scotland; supports the work undertaken to improve the long-term performance of the Scottish economy as set out in the Framework for Economic Development and Smart, Successful Scotland,  and notes the progress in implementing measures to help businesses grow, build Scotland's global connections and improve Scotland's skills base."

In closing today's debate, I speak to the motion. Its clear purpose is to mark the anniversary of the attack on New York and Washington that took place one year ago today, and to do so by noting our positive links with the USA. Some speakers have used the occasion to debate the issue of military action against Saddam Hussein, and the SNP's amendment sought to turn this afternoon's debate to that matter. It is their prerogative to do so, but I think that it is misplaced. I ask members to believe me when I say that I have seen war and its effects close up; I  have seen the aftermath of ill-judged intervention; and I have seen the appalling consequences of a failure to intervene against a regime that held life in contempt. Those matters are of the greatest import—we all hold strong views about them. However, this afternoon we should address the subject matter of the motion. Scotland was getting to grips with the impact of globalisation on a small, open economy such as ours when the 11 September attacks happened. Our approach to the economy was born from a recognition that we had to focus on growing our own businesses, developing our own skills and fostering global connections. Overnight, all that work became even more relevant, as, like all other countries across the world, we realised the profundity of the global economic links that exist today. There is no doubt that Scotland has suffered from the economic after-effects of 11 September. Perhaps tourism has been most obviously affected, but other industries, such as the technology sectors, have also had to cope with post-11 September uncertainty and the consequent serious global slow-down. As we address that situation, one of the factors in our favour is the depth of our historical, cultural, philosophical, business and economic links with the United States. As Rhoda Grant and Annabel Goldie—among other speakers—said, we must work to expand those connections. Scottish Development International offices in the USA build on those links and have an extensive reach from north to south and from coast to coast. Our California office is the hub of our activities on the west coast in the high-tech electronics and venture capital sectors. On the east coast, our Virginia and Stamford offices have helped to forge links with many leading academics and entrepreneurs, particularly in the biotechnology and financial services fields. Of course, John Swinney was right when he said that we should not forget that inward investment has been a major feature of Scotland's economic links with the USA in the past 20 years. Despite the fact that the proportion of inward investment jobs created by US-based firms has dropped from 48 per cent to 33 per cent over the past 10 years—that drop may not be as big as we sometimes imagine it to be—I am in no doubt that it will continue to be important to engage with major inward investors, not least because they have much to teach us about best practice in research, innovation and productivity. We also have productive links in the main US centres of California and New England, whose investors are interested in backing specialist fields that sometimes find it difficult to get support from within Scotland. Several leading Scottish  companies, such as Compound Semiconductor Technologies, Photonic Materials, Kamelian, Kymata and Cyclacel have already benefited from recent US investment. By developing such links further, we will allow Scottish academics and business people to benefit from a vast body of expertise in the process of funding and commercialising innovation. Many Scots have crossed the Atlantic and built successful lives and careers in the USA. There are far too many to mention, although the debate has featured some examples, from Alexander Hamilton, in banking, to Andrew Carnegie. Those connections are as alive today as they ever were. Scottish Enterprise's globalScot network recognises the need to unlock the potential of today's equivalents of Carnegie and Hamilton in order to help Scotland survive and thrive in the global economy. The globalScot network already has 400 founding members, more than half of which are based in the USA. Those senior individuals are willing to help us to open doors abroad for Scottish business and, by sharing their experience, they are willing to help us to develop home-grown expertise, for example by offering positive role models to Scottish schoolchildren. Several members have commented on the fact that Scots have traditionally demonstrated what they can do after going to America. We must bring back that enterprising entrepreneurial approach. We must repatriate it and apply it here in Scotland. Many members have mentioned that some of the strongest links between Scotland and the US are in education, particularly in higher education. It is well known that the American higher education system was modelled on Scotland's—it shares a pattern of initial breadth followed by later specialisation. The link is not merely historical. Students from the USA form the largest group of overseas students in Scotland. Rhona Brankin provided examples from Midlothian. They study at all levels, from undergraduate to postgraduate, and often stay on, as teachers and researchers, to enrich our university faculties. The growing number of American students who come to study in Scotland—the figure now stands at more than 1,500 per year—represent a transatlantic link that we should cherish. Among those students, we welcome a small number of Marshall scholars. The Marshall scholarship scheme, which will celebrate its 50 th anniversary next year, commemorates the humane ideals of the European recovery programme in the aftermath of the second world war—the Marshall plan. The scheme provides the finances for a small number of high-ability young Americans to study for a degree in the United Kingdom. What is true of the classroom is true of the  common room and the laboratory. The academic community is truly international. Benjamin Franklin, no less, was a founder member of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. That transatlantic link remains strong—next month, the RSE will host a lecture on Hugh Miller's influence on transatlantic environmental awareness. There are countless examples of connections in teaching and research between Scottish universities and their US counterparts. The link between the University of Edinburgh and Stanford University has been mentioned. The Edinburgh-Stanford link is a five-year collaborative programme, which is worth £6 million. It aims to establish Scotland as a global leader in the commercial development of language technology and to boost our reputation as a centre for research and design. There are many other ways, from the long-standing to the very new, in which our academic community reaches across the Atlantic. I want to focus on just one of them, the Colin McArthur postgraduate scholarship at the University of Glasgow. The award, which has been provided as a lasting tribute to a Glasgow graduate, Colin McArthur, who died in the events of September 11, has been supported by his widow, his friends and his colleagues, as well as by alumni and friends of the university. It will enable a student who lost a parent or guardian in the tragic events to attend the university to study any chosen discipline. The university hopes that, in time, enough will be raised to endow the scholarship in perpetuity and it seeks, eventually, to extend the terms to cover any US student. Of course the tragic events of last September dented the confidence of the US. That was reflected in transport links—people stopped travelling for a while. Those links are important to us and a strong recovery is taking place. We want to encourage the development of our air links with the US. The re-establishment of the link between New York and Glasgow in 1998 has proved an undoubted success. Direct access to the US and to the Newark hub of Continental Airlines provides a wealth of opportunities to travel throughout the Americas. American Airlines also provides scheduled links to the US and there are charter links to Florida. Such links are important, because people mediate our connections, whether they are business, family, academic, cultural or sporting connections. I was at the World Trade Center, as part of a holiday, a few weeks before 11 September last year. It is odd what one remembers when one thinks back. I remember a covered walkway that was mirrored all round in the New York style. People who passed underneath would see their reflection from a strange angle when they looked  up. Our links with the US are like that—we see ourselves reflected back because there is so much of Scotland across the Atlantic. Like all reflections, the image is not always identical. Sometimes we may like what we see and at other times we may not be so fond of what we see, but we cannot escape the reflection of ourselves. Similarly, we cannot escape the impact of moments in time such as 9/11. All kinds of previous history, actions, decisions and politics converge from all directions on such a moment. All kinds of potential consequences flow from it. However, in the moment itself, and when we talk about where we were, the world stops. Our heart stops too at the tragedy and suffering and heroism, which were above and beyond all normal days. 9/11 was like that. We can analyse the roots of the moment; we can, and should, debate what should happen next or now; but we should also pause in all sincerity to mark apart the moment itself. That is what today is for. At a different time and for a different tragedy, a great American writer wrote: "The world breaks every one and afterward many are strong at the broken places." We all need that to be true now for the United States. That is why our links matter so much now. Support the motion.

The Scottish Executive is in regular contact with Railtrack on a wide range of issues, including railway infrastructure projects.

I agree with everything that Nora Donaldson said—[ Interruption. ] I agree with what Nora Radcliffe said, even if I cannot remember her name. [ Laughter. ] I apologise to the member. The Strategic Rail Authority, which is responsible for the project, has made it clear that the upgrade covers the whole line, will increase capacity and will lead to shorter journey times along the entire route, including the Scottish part of it.

As my previous answer made clear, the Strategic Rail Authority is responsible for the matter. Along with its partners, the authority is reviewing its plans to upgrade the west coast main  line. It will complete its review very soon and will issue a long-term strategy for this key route. We will then know the answers to some of Mr MacAskill's questions.

The Scottish Further Education Funding Council is responsible for funding Scotland's further education colleges. The council works closely with all our colleges to promote their efficiency and financial stability. Ministers have provided additional funding for the creation of a new FE development directorate in the Scottish Further Education Funding Council to improve governance and management across a wide range of issues, by drawing on existing expertise within the sector.

I recognise the unique circumstances of West Lothian College. That is why to some extent it has been treated in a unique fashion in its funding regime. The college has received funding growth to 43,000 units of student activity four years earlier than planned. It has received special funding of around £3 million per annum and £120,000 as its share of the capital allocation that other colleges receive but that it does not need because it is a PFI project. In recent years, the college has received significant increases in funding. Last year, the increase was 30 per cent—more than for any other college in Scotland. I look to the Scottish Further Education Funding Council to work with West Lothian College to ensure its long-term future. I am happy to agree that the college has enormous potential and is doing extremely good work.

I met the chair of the Scottish Further Education Funding Council only a week or so ago and that was one of the topics that was discussed. I have certainly made it clear to her that we expect the funding council to work with the college to see what possibilities there are for improving its financial position. I know that Mr Muldoon has also been in touch with and met representatives of the college. There are possibilities that are worth exploring and I expect them to be explored quickly. I think that a meeting is taking place on Monday, at which I hope progress can be made.

Scottish Enterprise is working up details on the proposed ITIs—including the ITI for energy—for consideration by its board. An announcement will be made in the light of the board's decision.

I expect that it will be possible for announcements to be made soon, and that an announcement on the energy ITI will be the first of those announcements. Responsibility for making that announcement lies with Scottish Enterprise which, as we learned last week, achieved 18 out of its 21 targets for last year. The ITIs are central to Scottish Enterprise's programme every year, so we should have a fair degree of confidence that it will make an announcement soon.

Before a decision about the location is made, a set of criteria will be drawn up and locations will be judged against them. Given Aberdeen's position as the oil and gas capital of the United Kingdom and Europe, I think that it has a pretty strong case. I should acknowledge that Elaine Thomson has made that case to me more times than I care to remember. I am sure that she will continue to do so.

The ITIs are expected to create a link between industry and academic research. That link will work in both directions by commercialising the results of academic research and by commissioning research for which there is a clear market. The central purpose of the energy ITI is to make it clear to people that the sector has a great future in Scotland and that it needs the brightest and best people to work in it.

It is nice to be home. However, the transition is gradual, as in the bill we are still dealing with one of Scotland's ancient universities—not Aberdeen, but St Andrews. As Mr Smith explained, the bill would allow the University of St Andrews to award research degrees in medicine to candidates who are already qualified medical practitioners. As the member made clear, the bill would not give St Andrews the power to offer qualifying exams. Regulation of the health professions, including those regulated by the Medical Act 1983, is a reserved power under the Scotland Act 1998, so any proposal for the introduction of a qualifying examination would have to be considered by the Westminster Parliament. The University of St Andrews is not seeking the power to reinstate qualifications for admission to a career as a medical practitioner. The university offers degrees in medical sciences, which are valued and important stand-alone qualifications from a distinguished university with a track record of excellence that dates back 600 years. Those degrees double as qualifications for entry to the clinical part of a Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery—or MB ChB—programme at other universities. It is clear that for many students the experience of three or four years at St Andrews, followed by three years at an urban university to complete a degree in medicine, is an attractive option. The university already offers postgraduate qualifications in medical science, but it believes that the opportunity to study for a postgraduate medical degree at St Andrews would be an attractive option for qualified doctors.  We submitted an Executive memorandum to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee to assist it with its consideration of the evidence. The memorandum set out the supportive view that the Executive takes of the proposal contained in the bill. That proposal is fully consistent with the principle of making available opportunities for lifelong learning and does not have public expenditure implications. I am happy to reiterate the Executive's support and welcome for the bill.

Careers Scotland was established on 1 April this year.

I am happy to give Marilyn Livingstone that assurance. The purpose of establishing Careers Scotland was to produce a nationally consistent careers service for all ages, but some 220 members serve on local advisory boards. In many instances, the service will be delivered through locally negotiated service agreements. That should ensure appropriate and effective local delivery of the service within the national framework.

This year, it will be £33 million, compared with £23 million at the time of the establishment of the Parliament, which represents an increase of some 40 per cent over three years.

Co-operation between the careers service and schools is key and I will discuss that issue with my colleague, but the locally negotiated service agreements are more important. They will ensure that careers advice is delivered in schools and give head teachers in particular a named contact at Careers Scotland and a say in how the service is delivered most appropriately for their pupils.

Perhaps Mr Harper will acknowledge that, following the renewables obligation, the private sector has invested something like £1.5 billion into renewables. Does he acknowledge that the measures that have been taken are leading to exactly the sort of levels of investment that he and we want to see in the new developments in energy?

Alex Neil raised the same point as I was coming back into the chamber. Scottish Enterprise will announce its operating plan tomorrow. The operating plan will outline the process whereby Scottish Enterprise will develop plans for the three intermediate technology institutes, of which the energy institute will be one. In other words, Scottish Enterprise will be announcing its work plan, a significant core of which relates to work towards the plans for intermediate technology institutes.

I am glad, but not surprised, that Mr Davidson raised that issue. The Tories are responsible for one of the most ludicrous press releases that I have seen in my life. That release calls for the setting up in Aberdeen of a task force similar to the Motorola task force that was set up for West Lothian, on the basis of concern about jobs. The difference, of course, is that the workers at Motorola lost their jobs. Here, we are talking about hypothetical and potential job losses. I make it clear that I do not accept that premise. Mr Davidson's remarks constitute scaremongering that is so comprehensively spun that it has passed through the space-time continuum and time-travelled to some hypothetical point in the future. It is ridiculous, and does the industry no good at all.

I have made it clear that I do not accept that the change in the fiscal regime will have the impact on employment that has been described. Labour members are clear that a growing Scottish economy is necessary to fund public services and to deliver social justice. I want to clarify whether Mr Davidson thinks that the Conservatives would have slashed in half the record additional increases for health, which were announced recently by the Minister for Health and Community Care. Would they have invested those sums elsewhere in the economy? I thought that that was what the member was saying.

Will the member give way?

The reaction from the industry has been well publicised in the press. Does Mr Wilson accept that, since 1998, it has been well known that the fiscal regime required restructuring and that, of the two possible ways of doing that—the petroleum revenue tax and the supplementary tax—the supplementary tax that has been introduced was regarded as preferable by far? Does he also accept that the industry's reaction has been couched in terms of the need for fiscal stability in the industry over the longer term? Can he explain how the Scottish National Party's plans to tear Scotland out of the United Kingdom would provide fiscal stability over the longer term for the oil and gas industry?

rose—

The location of the debating chamber makes no difference to our ability to govern the length and breadth of Scotland, but I wanted this debate to be held here in Aberdeen, the energy capital of Europe, because it provides an opportunity to debate the oil and gas industry's considerable contribution, not just to the economy of the north-east but to the whole of Scotland. More than that, it gives us a chance to debate the potential for Aberdeen and the energy industry to prove themselves exemplars of how Scotland can make itself both  smart and successful. We can achieve that by driving innovation through science and skills; creating growth through the combination of research and commercialisation; and building an industry on ideas and entrepreneurialism. The industry and this city are at the cutting edge of Scotland's 21 st century economy. Oil and gas has a future in Scotland for many years to come. There remains as much oil and gas in the North sea as has already been extracted. However, we will fail future generations if we do not prepare and plan for the time when fossil fuels run out. We can open enormous opportunities for Scotland's economy, and we have within our grasp the chance to be a world leader in the development and generation of renewable energy. Scotland's future economic development must be sustainable if we are to leave a smaller imprint to future generations. We know that a much greater proportion of our future energy needs must be met from renewable sources. The very nature of our country means that we are almost uniquely placed to diversify our oil industry's knowledge and expertise into the emerging renewables generation industry. It is 640 years since the Parliament met in Aberdeen. That might be only the blink of an eye in the geological time that the oil and gas industry sometimes works in. It is, however, a long time in this city's proud history, which stretches from its early beginnings as a fishing settlement, through its status as a university city, to being a player in the industrial revolution and its present position as oil capital of Europe. Furthermore, a strong and diverse north-eastern culture, from the great universal themes of Lewis Grassic Gibbon's literature to—and it hurts me to say this—the great European exploits of Aberdeen Football Club has gone out to build an international reputation. The ideas and skills in the north-east have reached out into the world. However, the discovery of North sea oil and gas in the 1960s has made Aberdeen what it is today. The first North sea oil arrived onshore in 1975 and, for 30 years, the economy of Aberdeen and the north-east has thrived on the development of the offshore oil and gas industry. Now there are 900 oil-related firms in the north-east of Scotland, serving all stages of oilfield development: exploration, development, production and maintenance, and more recently, decommissioning. In the north-east of Scotland, 23,000 people work in onshore oil and gas-related jobs, with another 18,000 offshore jobs.

The oil and gas industry looks out from Aberdeen into the world. We must grasp the great opportunity to build those companies that are based here in Scotland so that they can provide equipment and services for the oil industry, not just in the North sea, but all around the world. There are good examples of how we can do that. The industry has brought prosperity to Aberdeen and the surrounding towns and villages. Low unemployment, high employment, high consumer spending, a construction boom and opportunities for investment make Aberdeen a great place to live, work and study. However, the industry also brings problems and challenges. There is pressure on infrastructure, social differences are exacerbated and house prices are high. We must face those problems by working with the oil and gas industry.

This Parliament and Executive do not have power over the fiscal regime, although we have something like a 40 per cent tax take, which continues to compare favourably with countries that the SNP often uses as exemplars. In Norway, for example, the tax take is 88 per cent. The contribution to the wider Scottish economy of the wealth and prosperity generated by the oil industry cannot be underestimated, with 110,000 jobs—6 per cent of our workforce—in employment related to oil and gas production. The benefits of the industry will continue, as only half of the oil and gas reserves have been extracted. The only way to support that process and maximise production is in co-operation with the industry: Government and business must work in partnership to secure the continued success of Scotland's oil and gas industry. The forum for that partnership is Pilot, which has Lewis Macdonald as its vice chair. Lewis will say more about that later. The most pressing concern for the industry is the potential for a serious skills gap in the labour market. The existing workforce is highly skilled, but we know that 50 per cent of current offshore workers were approaching the age of 50 two years ago and that the situation is predicted to get worse. We must take action to recruit more young workers into the industry and to equip them with the skills and knowledge that will retain our global competitive edge. It is a hugely important industry  and we must make it an attractive one for young people to work in.

The work of delivering improvements in skills and attracting young people to the oil industry is being led by Cogent, an important and powerful sector skills council. Marilyn Livingstone makes an extremely important point. If we are to develop the potential of our oil and gas industry, based here in Aberdeen, we must develop the potential of all those who have skills to offer. In the past, we have been bad at attracting women into the industry. That is our loss and the industry's loss, and attracting more women to such jobs must be a priority. Cogent brings together the disparate threads of the upstream and downstream parts of the industry, and was one of only six emerging sector skills councils to be awarded trail-blazer status. The whole industry now benefits from a dedicated sector skills council, which is based in Portlethan and which will set the future direction of skills and training within the industry. Cogent, with Government and industry support, will help to bridge the skills gap and influence the effective delivery of relevant learning and training. That partnership approach can show a lead to other sectors of the Scottish economy facing similar skill shortages. That is exactly what must be done to prepare Scots for tomorrow's jobs. However, if the north-east is to obtain maximum benefit from the opportunities that are available, we need to take account of the fact that supply opportunities are changing. In the long run, we must rely on more sustainable renewable energy sources. In April, Ross Finnie introduced the Renewables Obligation (Scotland) Order 2002 (SSI 2002/163), which is already creating a massive demand for new and clean sources of energy. He has worked extremely hard to put the obligation in place and his passion for and commitment to renewables is shared by all of us in the Executive. We now want to consider the potential to expand our output of renewable energy to at least 30 per cent, and even beyond that. The target is ambitious.

Our support for renewables is demonstrated by the renewables obligation order, and even more by the fact that we want to consider pushing the output target beyond 30 per cent. Such targets drive the effort that we must put in. That is the agenda that has been set. The target is ambitious, but some key elements are already in place. The market is ready, the legislative framework is right, the resource is plentiful and the economy is ready to welcome the concept of sustainable businesses. Scotland's oil and engineering businesses have already proved their ability to meet new challenges and exploit available opportunities in the difficult and marginal fields of the North sea. They are well placed to take advantage of the tremendous synergies between the oil and gas and renewables sectors. Renewable energy equipment manufacture provides a key opportunity for diversification in the UK offshore oil and gas industry. Scotland's potential for generating renewable energy is renowned. We have the capacity to meet our own energy needs twice over from wind power alone. We are home to the world's leading innovators and developers of marine energy technology and our academic research base in the field is second to none. The boom in renewable energy provides Scotland with an economic opportunity that mirrors the arrival of North sea oil 30 years ago. We must exploit that opportunity. Major players such as Shell and BP have already voiced their commitment to renewables development. They believe that the manufacturing requirements of the renewables industry for onshore and offshore wind turbines and marine energy devices can be met in large part by the skills that have been built up in the North sea oil and gas industry. We know of one oil company that has plans to develop a major offshore renewable energy project in the Moray firth. That demonstrates the industry's belief that diversification is a real and viable option. Members know that we have been working closely with partners to establish a marine energy test centre in Orkney. Ross Finnie will make a further announcement on that shortly. The links to our vision of a smart, successful Scotland achieved by growing businesses and global connections are crystal clear. Research, innovation and knowledge are the key to our success. The strength of our academic research base is a clear advantage over many of our international competitors. Aberdeen itself has two renowned seats of learning and Heriot-Watt University in my constituency in Edinburgh carries out research in the oil and gas sector. We must not allow the lack of a critical mass of sophisticated technology-based companies to  mean that resultant technology transfer opportunities are missed. Scotland's academic science base has improved its commercialisation activities, but more needs to be done. Companies create wealth. If we are to capitalise on the opportunities that are offered by the strengths of our science base, it is imperative that there is a significant and sustained increase in the number of companies in Scotland that exploit our competitive advantage. We must capitalise on our strengths in Scotland and maximise the impact of science and technology on the Scottish economy.

The time between research being produced and commercialisation happening is key. The most important thing is to get that pipeline right. It is not true to say that there have been no initiatives in this area. The proof of concept fund, for example, is part of that process. As I will say in a moment, this is about long-term thinking. Our proposals must be robust and we must ensure that they deliver exactly what we need. That takes time, but progress is under way. I will comment on that later in my speech. The motion highlights an exciting and important development—to which Brian Adam referred in his intervention—in the way in which Government can act as a catalyst in creating business opportunities in the energy industry. Scottish Enterprise has drawn up innovative proposals to create a technology institute for energy. The institute will be a new, powerful link between research and commercialisation. It will spot market opportunities by linking with energy companies and identifying their future commercial needs. The institute will link with the pure research that is going on in universities and, potentially, commission new work. The new intellectual property that is created will be in the ownership of the institute, but it will be there for commercial exploitation by business. This groundbreaking initiative is exactly what good government should get itself involved in: creating a body that can intervene and plug the gap between pure and applied research, that is well versed in the most effective exploitation of intellectual property, and that is familiar with the worlds of academia and the venture capitalist. The  institute will be a shopfront for all that a smart, successful Scotland can be. It will create a focus that will enable high-growth technology companies to work together and channel ideas into a company-building programme. Scottish Enterprise has outlined proposals for a further two technology institutes. All three institutes will focus on areas of science where we have a clear global competitive advantage, so it is no surprise—especially given the thinking that has been done, to which reference has been made—that energy is the first sector in the detailed development of plans. The work is being undertaken in a way that will benefit from, and link in to, existing initiatives, such as the proof of concept fund and the thinking that has gone into the centre of excellence idea. Detailed proposals, which will also include the criteria for determining the location of the institute and its work, should be completed by the autumn.

Sorry. I have to move on now. Scottish Enterprise will announce the plans in detail tomorrow, when it publishes its operating plan for 2002-03. This is ambitious, long-term thinking. The initiative is groundbreaking and has enormous potential value for Scotland's economic growth. I expect all the stakeholders in the energy, technology and academic sectors to respond positively to Scottish Enterprise's proposals for the operational model. I expect Aberdeen to be at the forefront of that positive response. This is an important moment in defining where Scotland is placed in new energy developments. We can fall behind and follow the lead of others—as we have seen happen in previous technology shifts—and watch technology develop with the big power companies buying the equipment to generate renewable energy from elsewhere. On the other hand, we can grasp the opportunity to enable scientists in Scottish universities to develop the ideas and indigenous companies to translate the technology into commercial equipment and services and to make global connections to compete in the world market. Our aspiration is the latter and Aberdeen is the place to dedicate ourselves to that. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the decision by Scottish Enterprise to work up detailed plans for an Energy Research Institute in Scotland to commercialise the work of Scotland's universities across the energy field; endorses the policy of support for offshore renewable energy developments on the part of the Executive and the Enterprise Networks, and notes the significant potential for the oil and gas industry to diversify into marine renewable energy technology.

New deal: next phase will offer greater flexibility, with more focus on employer needs and people who are hard to help. Pilot projects are under way in a number of areas across Scotland.

There should be. Two aspects of new deal plus provide flexibility. The first is local account managers in each jobcentre plus—as they have been newly named. Part of their job is to gather local labour information and liaise with employers to make sure that barriers to recruitment are dealt with. Further flexibility is provided by the advisers discretionary fund, which makes available up to £300 to tackle the barriers that clients face. It is important that the new deal is made to work for those at whom it is aimed. That is why this week I have refreshed the membership of the Scottish welfare to work task force. If Mr McNulty has examples of specific issues, I am prepared to ask the task force to examine them.

I am aware of recent independent evaluation work performed by the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, which shows that half the drop in youth unemployment since 1997 is due to the new deal and the other half is due to the strength of the Scottish economy. The very fact that the new deal is developing and the next phase, which includes a range of new measures and flexibilities aimed at those who have particular difficulties in accessing employment opportunities, is coming in shows that we have a track record. New deal can deliver, but we are not complacent, and it can be improved. That is important, and we will continue to make improvements. That is the task of the Scottish welfare to work task force.

My CV has been trailed through the press extensively recently. Mr Gallie will know that in the early 1980s I was a teacher, and I can remember the hopelessness felt by young students in schools and their certainty that the labour market had no place for them when they left school. We have almost eradicated long-term youth unemployment, and the new deal has been a significant contributor to that. I am proud of it. It is one of the greatest achievements since 1997.

This is a matter for the enterprise network. I understand that Scottish Enterprise Ayrshire is currently working with Scottish Enterprise Glasgow, Scottish Enterprise Lanarkshire, Scottish Enterprise Dunbartonshire and Scottish Enterprise Renfrewshire to review market demand and supply of research-based accommodation for the biotech sector in support of Scottish Enterprise's biotech cluster. The outcome of the review will determine what additional physical investment is required to support the west of Scotland biotech industry, and it will help to position Ayrshire's Hannah research park in the regional market.

We are already supporting the project. In fact, the Scottish Executive environment and rural affairs department is contributing more than £1 million to the CHARIS food technology centre. I am pleased to say that, only this morning, the Hannah Research Institute received a proof of concept fund award, which will be used to support a study of the preparation of novel milk protein fractions from skim-milk, acid or cheese whey. I am told that that process is likely to be of interest to dairy food, beverage, health care, biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies, so it is fair to say  that the work of the Hannah Research Institute is already supported. I take Mr Scott's point about job losses. Nobody could describe Ayrshire MSPs as either shy or unassuming. At least three of them, including Margaret Jamieson and Irene Oldfather, have already been in touch with me on the matter. As I was plodding through my correspondence the other day, I discovered that Mr Scott himself has already written to me reminding me that my predecessor had agreed to visit Ayrshire to discuss those matters. I am happy to say that I will follow through on the commitment that she made.

The point that I have made—perhaps not directly to Mr Wilson, but more or less on the same round of media interviews that we followed throughout the weekend—is that we are absolutely clear that Scotland's future lies in science and skills and in building on research and development. We have the high-level strategy in place and we must examine what is required to ensure that the pipeline between the ideas and the marketable product is clear. The proof of concept fund is an excellent start and an example of the kind of thing that we must do. One of my priorities will be to consider what else we must do to make the research-based science and skills agenda a reality in the months and years to come.

In closing this debate, I would like first to thank everyone who has contributed in a thoughtful and positive way. I thank the Tories for coming along as well. I note Mr Gibson's apology for his poor performance at football. My contribution to the game this year was also thoughtful and positive: I thought about it and positively sat it out. However, I should point out that when I played in the equivalent fixture last year, we won, so perhaps my decision this year was mistaken. As has been demonstrated this afternoon, the work of the housing improvement task force covers a wide range of issues: housing quality in the private sector; problems faced by owners with common or shared maintenance obligations; making the house-buying process work better; and improving conditions in the private rented sector. All those problems are complex and dynamic. The  housing market—which, of course, provides the context and drivers for the issues—is also diverse, complex and dynamic. There are no easy solutions or quick fixes. That was perhaps demonstrated by the fact that a number of members said that some of the problems have been known about for some time without any solutions being found. Today's debate has demonstrated the breadth and complexity of the issues. It has also demonstrated the Parliament's ability to approach such problems in a sophisticated, thoughtful and mature way. However, once again, I have to exclude the Tories from my remarks. They seem unable to grasp the fact that providing an opportunity for parliamentarians to intervene and take part in the development of recommendations and policy in such an important area is good, open and modern politics. That is exactly the kind of politics in which we should be engaging and is certainly not a waste of time. We acknowledge that, when they had the opportunity, the Tories did not waste a great deal of time on modern, open or constructive politics.

Later on, I want to say a little bit about those who have purchased under the right to buy and about improvement and repair grants. If the member bears with me, I hope to come to the issue. A good feature of today's debate and the work of the task force is that issues are seen in the round. We are given the opportunity to look for innovative solutions that address Scotland-specific problems. I want to mention Robert Brown's speech, which urged an approach that pursues maintenance and repair. I know that he has given a great deal of  thought to that and I am sympathetic to trying to find ways in which to change the culture of maintaining and improving property throughout Scotland. However, there is a difficult balance to be struck between compulsion and encouragement and that is something that I expect the task force to consider carefully. Nora Radcliffe talked about the idea of a logbook and that is an interesting approach. However, it also raises the question of compulsion. Nonetheless, those are the kind of innovative ideas that I expect the task force to investigate further. I have no doubt that the task force will want to consider everything that has been said today as it formulates recommendations over the next year and tackles the problems that we have been discussing. That is the purpose of the past two hours. It might be a short time in which to discuss such diverse concerns, but it is not an unreasonable acknowledgement of the time and effort spent on our behalf—gratis—by the members of the housing improvement task force. Several members raised the issue of right-to-buy purchasers. Cathie Craigie spoke on the subject and Johann Lamont described eloquently the problems and anxieties that can be created when such purchasers face large bills for maintenance. I suspect that all of us have constituents in that position. The task force acknowledges the issue—we can argue about the extent to which it does so —and I believe that it is a significant problem in many parts of Scotland. I look to the housing improvement task force for proposals on that. Improvement and repair grants have a role and we are consulting on amendments to the scheme brought in by the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001, to allow grants of up to 100 per cent, with a ceiling of £20,000. The scheme is not being left unamended. There was an interesting exchange of views on the topic. We must acknowledge that when the ring fence was removed from resources for improvement and repair grants, resources plummeted to about 40 per cent of what had been available before. One of the better moments in the debate was when the Tories acknowledged that they had removed ring fencing, but now saw that the impact had been poor. Similarly, it was good to hear others who often speak in support of local government say that, in that particular case, the effect of removing ring fencing was a reduction in resources and benefits.

The area that I am discussing now might be one of those areas, but we must wait for the task force properly to consider the overall scheme. We can and will make available additional resources for grants for those owner-occupiers who, as a result of stock transfer, have to pay a share for improvements and repairs. Of course, those owners are often people who have bought under the right to buy. I do not know about the specific case of Toryglen, which Kenny Gibson spoke about, and whether it will fit into the scheme. It is possible that it will.

I have no intention whatever of contradicting Ms Curran so I am delighted to hear that. During the passage of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001, Cathie Craigie was responsible for ensuring that, in the future, right-to-buy purchasers will be given advice on the liabilities that they are taking on. The task force must consider whether that is enough or whether we have to do more. Paul Martin made the important point that it is not just right-to-buy first-time buyers who need such information. Whatever part of the market they are buying in, first-time buyers often do not realise the liabilities that they are taking on. That point leads me to multiple surveys and seller surveys. The issue is not only the cost to the purchaser but the level of information about the property that the purchaser is considering buying. There is often confusion between surveys and valuations, which means that buyers do not have all the information that they need. We have said that we will seek to improve the house-buying process and will support measures that avoid additional costs due to multiple surveys. The area is one where the solutions seem obvious, but the work of the task force shows that it is more complicated than folk thought. That is evinced by the different survey results referred to earlier. One of those surveys was specifically commissioned because of that issue. It had a bigger sample than the others, to give more rigorous information and to get round the apparent anomalies.

I need to move on. The task force has already agreed that tolerable standards will be reviewed, so that the comments that have been made about a tolerable standard for the 21 st century can be addressed over a period of time.  A couple of members mentioned cowboy builders. They might be interested to know that, on 12 April, the first formal meeting of the Scottish construction licensing executive took place. That scheme might help to give people confidence in the tradesmen that they use. Sandra White asked a specific question about the costs of HMO licences. Sandra White might know the answer. The costs are set at the discretion of local authorities, which have set them differently. We know that the Social Justice Committee is doing work on the issue. Margaret Curran will speak to the committee next week and we are committed to reviewing the first year of operation of the scheme. The matter will be discussed further. In closing, I want to mention two things about the work of the task force. First, because more than 70 per cent of households are now in the private sector, it is incumbent on us to ensure that the system operates fairly for everyone. That is why the task force has taken seriously the issue of equality. Its work has shown that there are people who, for no reason apart from the community in which they live or were brought up, do not have full access to either the rental or buyer market. We must take that issue seriously and address it. It was disappointing that it was not taken seriously at all at one stage in the debate. Andrew Welsh spoke about housing in rural Scotland. The task force refers to that and is aware of the specific issues in rural Scotland that must be addressed. That is the advantage of taking our time—we have time to consider all the issues and to come up with comprehensive solutions. Those solutions will have to include considering legislation such as the proposed tenement bill, which will also go a long way towards finding a legal framework to resolve the problems of common repairs. Along with other colleagues, I look forward to seeing the recommendations once they are ready, and to debating them with members of the Parliament. We have a promise that the Tories will join in the debate at that stage. We all look forward to that. In the meantime, I place on record my thanks to the task force, I thank members for the interest that has been shown today, and I commend the motion to the Parliament.

The Scottish Executive is fully committed to supporting the voluntary sector and to modernising the legal, financial and infrastructure framework in which it operates. We have increased direct financial support for the sector from £23 million in 1998-99 to £39 million in 2001-02. We are nearing completion of the review of our direct funding of the sector and have announced our response to the review of support for the minority ethnic voluntary sector. We are reviewing the Executive's role in supporting the social economy and we shall shortly be starting a more strategic review of the public sector's support for the sector.

As Sarah Boyack knows, I am aware of the problems that the Edinburgh Streetwork Project recently faced. I am glad that a solution was found and that the excellent work that the project undertakes with the homeless in Edinburgh will continue. The Executive indicates three-year finance levels to local authorities and we believe that that should allow local authorities in turn to indicate three-year finance levels to the voluntary sector organisations that they support. I accept that that does not always happen, which is one of the reasons behind the strategic review of voluntary sector funding that we have now agreed to begin. That review will examine the partnership between the Executive, the voluntary sector and local government to see what can be done to improve funding commitments and make them more effective. Officials have already had informal talks with the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. We are leading by example. Following the review of direct funding, the Executive is now committed to providing three-year funding packages.

The different roles of different layers of government and their relationship with the voluntary sector are important. It is right and proper that local authorities have the autonomy to take decisions about how services are delivered in their area and I would expect such decisions to include consideration of how and where the voluntary sector can make services more efficient and effective. Local authorities rightly have autonomy and rightly must answer to their electorates for their decisions. Our role is to provide a legal framework and support the national infrastructure. In replying to previous questions, I have tried to show that we have done that. The issue of the funding of Scottish Borders Council has been raised a number of times in the chamber  and clear and unequivocal answers have been given to the point that Christine Grahame again raised.

I did not catch the end of Lyndsay McIntosh's question.

If she raised a specific issue, it would be helpful if she gave me details. If she asked whether we should ring fence money that we expect to be used to fund voluntary organisations, I should say that that is not our approach—I have just described our approach. Local authorities are in the lead in respect of responsibility for service delivery in their local areas. They must deliver services through best value and in the best way that they can. We believe that the voluntary sector has a significant role to play and when we make our community regeneration statement, which will be soon, we will elaborate on the additionality that the voluntary sector can bring. In the end, decisions are properly for local authorities, which answer to their electorates for those decisions.

The Executive has been very active in meeting its new statutory duties. In recent weeks, we have brought into force an order that will impose  specific duties on key public bodies to promote race equality. We have published our responses to the report of the race equality advisory forum and to the review of funding for minority ethnic groups. We have also agreed to provide £60,000 over two years to help to develop high-quality translating and interpreting services across Scotland. In addition, the Executive is about to commence work on its race equality scheme, which we will publish by the end of November 2002.

It is fair to say, as Kate Maclean has said, that making progress in race equality is not just about legislation. That is why we have recently doubled the ethnic minority grants scheme budget, raising it to £500,000 a year. We have also provided funding for a development worker in the field of translation and interpretation, which is particularly important. We must recognise that working towards race equality is not an add-on for public bodies, or indeed for any body. I hope that various public bodies are already using their funds to undertake a great deal of the work that they will be required to formalise in their race equality strategies. I am happy to associate the Executive with Kate Maclean's comments about Dr Jogee. He has been a key figure in the fight against racism—recently in this country, but also during the course of his life in South Africa. The Deputy First Minister and I, as well as Kate Maclean, as convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee, will pay tribute to his dedication at his retiral party tonight. We look forward to that.

Councils that do not wish to transfer their housing stock will continue to fund investment in council housing through a combination of new borrowing, usable capital receipts and capital funded from revenue.

The key to how stock transfer proposals are being progressed in a number of local authorities in Scotland is, first, that the facts are laid before the tenants and, secondly, that the tenants are the people who are being given the choice. It is their decision. The rules that apply are the same rules that apply to transfers in other cities in the UK. The fact is that transfer—in particular in Glasgow, because I think that that is where Mr Quinan is thinking about—will allow housing debt to be lifted, will enable public resources to be freed up and will allow Glasgow City Council to access resources that are currently not available to it. The result is that in four years, we will have secure homes for tenants, in six years, we will have warm, dry homes for tenants,  and in 10 and a half years, we will have completely refurbished tenants' homes. All of that will happen with rent guarantees that will last for at least eight years and potentially for 30 years.

Unlike the housing policy of some opponents of transfer, the Executive's housing policy is driven not by ideology, but by tenants' requirements in different parts of Scotland. We must acknowledge that local authorities are in different circumstances. Some authorities do not have a high level of housing debt. They charge low rents and do not need investment as urgently as does Glasgow, for example. In all instances, the decision about how to develop housing is for councils and, as I said, for tenants. Stock transfer is the surest route for local authorities to have transferred development funding that is with Communities Scotland and become a strategic housing authority. We have made it clear that when a case can be made, proper checks and balance are in place and stock is not to be transferred, we will consider the situation case by case.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I am pleased to open this debate on the report of the homelessness task force. I should begin by thanking the task force for its work and acknowledging the leadership of that work through most of its life by my predecessor, Jackie Baillie. Its final report is a blueprint for the prevention of homelessness in Scotland. Those who complain that the task force has taken two and half years to complete the work simply fail to acknowledge the complexity of the task, the quality and scale of the work done, the progress made in the meantime and the audacity of the objective that the task force has pursued. Nowadays, we all understand that homelessness is a complex issue. The provision of accommodation is not, of itself, enough. Many homeless people, particularly those who sleep rough, face a multitude of other problems. Many have poor health or are addicted to drugs or alcohol. Others have been victims of violence or domestic abuse. For all homeless people, whatever has led them to homelessness, the resettlement process can be very difficult, especially for those with no prior experience of managing a home or maintaining a tenancy. Homelessness is a housing problem, but not only a housing problem. People at risk of losing their home require intensive support if the crisis of homelessness is to be averted. Those who have experienced homelessness need intensive support if resettlement is to be sustainable and permanent. That is why we chose to mobilise the widest range of experience and expertise available to us: Shelter Scotland, The Big Issue , the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Scottish Council for Single Homeless, the national health service—a broad base covering all aspects of the problem. The quality of the task force's work is already reflected in statute, with the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 including its interim recommendations. Local authorities are therefore already obliged to  carry out assessments of homelessness in their area and produce homelessness strategies. They must also produce wider local housing strategies, and plan for the economic, efficient and effective provision of housing and related services. Those two things must be interlinked and a wide range of agencies must be brought together in their production. We now have Communities Scotland acting as the regulator of homelessness services. Regulation provides a means of dealing with inconsistent and poor practice. It ensures that the legislation and guidance is followed. Having set that framework, the task force has, in its final report, made 59 specific recommendations. We accept them all. Some of the recommendations are directed towards other Government departments: the Scottish Prison Service; the education department; the Ministry of Defence; and the Department for Work and Pensions. The benefits system has a vital part to play in helping people avoid and resolve homelessness. We will work with the DWP and Westminster ministers to ensure that that part is played to the full. We want to ensure that homeless people are not disadvantaged, particularly in their efforts to develop their skills and move into work.

I think that the task force would like a review of particular aspects of the benefits system. It talks about benefits for 16 to 24-year-olds, and particularly about the way in which housing benefit operates when people move back into work. I am prepared to argue for changes that allow some of those things to work better; indeed, I have already done so. As I said in response to a question last week, I have already ensured that, latterly, the DWP was part of the task force recommendations. Overall, the implementation of the task force report will give homeless people rights that they have never enjoyed before and will change the way in which homelessness is perceived and dealt with in Scotland. Most significantly, within ten years, all homeless people will be entitled to permanent accommodation, except where that right has been suspended for a specific reason. There will no longer be a distinction of priority need—homelessness itself will be enough to confer a right to a permanent home. There are those who criticise the time scale, but it is simply realistic. That pragmatic focus has been a marker  of the task force's work. Its aim was real and realistic changes to address homelessness. Along with the change to priority need, homeless people will be able to apply to any local authority in Scotland without having to establish a local connection. There is no evidence to show that that will lead to a deluge of homeless people in certain areas. In Edinburgh, where such fears were whipped up by Tory councillors, the local authority seldom uses the local connection measure as it is. A new regime for responding to intentionally homeless families will also be established. Accommodation must always be provided within a framework that supports the intentionally homeless household to maintain that accommodation, to address the issues that led to their homelessness and to move on to more secure accommodation. Those measures require legislation. I can confirm today that we will introduce a homelessness bill later this year. The legislative programme is crowded, but that is a clear signal of our determination to implement the recommendations.

The intention of the task force was that we should address those issues together in a homelessness bill, which will provide the stronger statutory force that the task force wanted. Nevertheless, the task force's work is not entirely done, and its successor, the monitoring group, will work with us to develop the homelessness bill. There will be an opportunity to discuss with the monitoring group whether a statutory instrument is required, and the task force has said that expanding priority need is the first step. Responding to homelessness is not all about legislation. Providing the right kind of accommodation is important. For example, the use of bed and breakfast accommodation for families is unacceptable and must be eliminated. Large-scale hostels for homeless people must also be a thing of the past. We need to widen access to housing for homeless people by requiring all local authorities to provide a rent deposit or guarantee scheme by 2004. Furnished tenancies and lead tenancies must also be considered. Support packages must be in place for homeless people, and health care needs must be fully met. Homeless people must be given every  opportunity to participate in education and employment and to rebuild supportive social networks. We take all those things for granted for ourselves and our families. It should not be any different for those who experience homelessness, if for no other reason than that any one of us or our families could face homelessness. Homelessness can result from illness, family breakdown or job loss, which can happen to anyone. A major focus of the report and of our future approach is the prevention of homelessness. In particular, we stress that local authorities should be proactive and should intervene early to avoid the crisis of homelessness. Corporate policies in local authorities on anti-social behaviour, rent arrears or eviction should not lead to avoidable homelessness. The change in culture goes further than a greater emphasis on prevention. We must recognise, and have services that recognise, that homeless people deserve to be treated with respect. Their views should be listened to and acted on. As I said at question time last week, there is an attitude problem that must be addressed. We will act quickly to implement the recommendations of the task force. I am not convinced of the need for further action plans. The recommendations themselves point the way. Work on the forthcoming legislation is already under way, and we will establish a monitoring group to drive and oversee progress. We have already allocated £11 million over the next two years to start the delivery of the recommendations. We should remember that that money is in addition to the £40 million allocated to the rough sleepers initiative, with a further £11 million over the next two years. Our commitment to end the need to sleep rough by next year still stands, and £27 million has been allocated over this and the next two years to fund the implementation of the homelessness provisions of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001. We have allocated £14.5 million to decommission Glasgow hostels and £6 million to provide alternative accommodation for families in bed and breakfast accommodation. Only this morning, Richard Simpson announced the allocation of £250,000 of seized criminal assets to fund drug services for Glasgow's homeless people. We are providing new resources, but we must also focus on more effective use of existing resources. Looking at the amendments to the motion, I fear that at least some of this afternoon's debate will focus on the recital and deconstruction of statistics. I confess that my heart sinks somewhat. However, statistics are important and we do not have statistics that are good and up to date  enough. The last detailed analysis that we have of the issue is over a year old and predates the measures and resources that are already in place, to which I have referred. The task force commissioned research on the statistics and found that homeless applications hide a significant pattern of repeat applications.

I do not think that I have enough time. That is why the task force made so many recommendations to improve the outcomes of homeless applications. We are already improving the collection of data, but we will also look to other sources, such as the Scottish household survey, for better information on hidden homelessness and on those who do not apply at all as they expect a negative response. If we succeed in pursuing the issue, homeless applications might even increase. So be it. The work is about real solutions for real people, rather than statistics. The wider our evidence base, the more effective our solutions will be. Some people are not counted in the statistics to which the amendments refer. We want to get those people into the system. There are new measures and resources that are not yet reflected in the numbers. We are already adding to measures and resources to provide solutions for those people. Much is being done and the task force report provides the blueprint for what we must do now. I sincerely hope that all parties welcome that and add their determination to our determination to make the report's recommendations a reality. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Executive's commitment to preventing and alleviating homelessness in Scotland and endorses the Executive's pledge to implement the wide-ranging recommendations contained in the final report of the Homelessness Task Force, Helping Homeless People: An Action Plan for Prevention and Effective Response .

Yes. As I made clear in launching the report yesterday, the Executive fully endorses the recommendations contained in the task force's report. I also announced that the Executive has  allocated an extra £11 million over the next two financial years to support the task force's recommendations, which are a blueprint for preventing and alleviating homelessness. I was further pleased to announce that the Cabinet has agreed a legislative slot later this year to deliver the task force's recommendations in statute.

Angus MacKay is right. That is not surprising, given his professional background as a campaigner for a homelessness charity. The involvement of such a wide range of experts in the task force gives it its strength. The report includes firm recommendations to improve the provision of health care, employment opportunities and social support for the homeless. All too often, the problems that lead to homelessness are problems that could strike any of us or our families at any time. The monitoring group, which is the successor to the task force, will expect us to do work to ensure that there is wider understanding of that among the public. Addressing homelessness involves addressing a housing problem, but there is often an attitude problem that must be addressed as well.

If Kenny Gibson reads the report, he will find that it makes recommendations on issues that it believes to be major contributors to homelessness. If it does not comment on the issue that he raises, that is perhaps because the experts feel that it is not the issue that has the greatest impact on homelessness. What he will find in the report are recommendations about areas of the benefits system in which the task force believed  changes could and should be made. On the representations that have been made, a representative of the Department for Work and Pensions was a member of the task force, so the answer is that representations are made regularly. I have also discussed the issue directly with the UK ministers responsible. The monitoring group will certainly expect such representations to continue and I will ensure that they do.

No. Conceding the appeal does not necessarily mean that planning permission will be granted. The court is returning the matter to the Scottish ministers for a redetermination.

I appreciate that Mr Gallie feels that the previous determination by Scottish ministers  was not a good one. I must say—I am being egged on from the side—that I would have to go some to match the recent dubious penalty decision that saw Ayr United progress to the league cup final at the expense of Hibernian.

If that is what Mr Gallie was referring to in our latest correspondence, in which he said that Ayr United had amply demonstrated its capacity to join the Premier League, he may not have deployed his best argument. The matter will now be returned to the Scottish ministers and due process will be followed. That will involve seeking the views of the parties who participated in the public inquiry on those matters on which there was disagreement between the Scottish ministers and the reporters. Those comments will be taken into account before Scottish ministers issue a fresh decision. In other words, the views that were expressed at the time will be returned to and will form part of the new determination that is to be made.

More than £5 million of new housing partnership funding was earmarked for the comprehensive regeneration of the Dumbiedykes estate in February 1999. On 25 January this year, the Executive gave a commitment to earmark further funding to meet a potential shortfall—which was identified by the City of Edinburgh Council—provided that the final proposals represent value  for money to the public purse and receive the support of tenants in a secret ballot.

I agree with Sarah Boyack that we must all pull together to progress improvements for the residents. That is the central issue. I acknowledge her relentless efforts in the past few weeks to ensure progress. The council is responsible for preparing a proposal in consultation with tenants and submitting it to the Executive. We issued detailed guidance to councils on preparing transfer proposals, which includes guidance on assessing value for money. When we receive the proposal, our appraisal will be undertaken as quickly as possible and in accordance with the guidance.

I met with George Foulkes, Minister of State at the Scotland Office, and Lord Rooker, Minister of State at the Home Office on Monday 4 February, as part of on-going dialogue, to discuss asylum seekers and refugees.

The detailed arrangements that follow on from the white paper, in this area as well as in others, are under discussion and form part of the discussion to which I referred in my first answer. Provision of support for English language skills and funding arrangements were part of those discussions. Any changes in support would complement three things. First, councils will receive £0.5 billion more grant in 2002-03 than in 2001-02, which means that additional resources are being made available. Secondly, where particular burdens arise, including in Glasgow, which is involved in the asylum seekers dispersal programme, additional funds have been provided through social inclusion partnerships for host communities as a whole. Some of those moneys have been used for language services and improving access. Thirdly, there will be additional support and the freeing-up of rules for further education colleges to enable them to undertake that type of work. In addressing the burdens that might flow from the white paper, there has to be a combination of those three things.

The administration of Dungavel is, of course, reserved entirely to the Home Office. I suggest that Linda Fabiani ask her Westminster colleagues to broach the subject in the proper place. As the question has been raised with me today, I will raise it at the next meeting that I have with United Kingdom Government colleagues. As I have pointed out, such meetings happen regularly.

I recognise fully the importance of the links between our cities and their surrounding regions and am therefore keen to involve neighbouring authorities in the cities review. Ministers have met Aberdeenshire Council and the local authorities neighbouring Glasgow and Edinburgh. A meeting is being arranged with the local authorities neighbouring Dundee.

Developer contributions and planning gains have been raised by several of the parties in the context of the cities review. Some have argued for increased contributions and others have argued for reduced contributions. Members can work out who might have been arguing which way. The review team plans to discuss the issue with local authorities, with Homes for Scotland and with other parties as part of the next phase of the review. The synergy that we are seeking to develop between the cities review and the review of strategic planning is intended to address exactly such planning issues, which are crucial for the regeneration not just of cities but of city regions.

The Scottish Executive is satisfied that the current arrangements for land use development planning and community planning are such that, if local authorities and NHS boards fulfil their respective roles in those processes, there should be adequate liaison between those bodies to ensure that full and proper consideration is given to the provision of local health services.

My point was that planning measures are in place. The partners, who have a role in that process, can be expected to use those processes in order to deliver access to health services for all our people. Fiona Hyslop spun slightly when she described the situation in Livingston. Patients in Livingston have access to general practitioners. I am aware of the problem in Dedridge. However the process that she describes of further closed lists being pursued is not that at all. The local health trust is taking action. It has undertaken to reach an agreed solution to the problem in Livingston in six months and to develop a proper business plan, which may include investment in GP premises and staff. That seems entirely the right approach to take. I know that Bristow Muldoon, the constituency MSP, has spoken to the trust and to the health board. He is playing a constructive role in resolving the situation at the local level, which is exactly where it should be resolved.

I am certainly happy to raise that issue with the Minister for Health and Community Care. In fact, I am sure that he heard what Bristow Muldoon said, because he is sitting right next to me. We must ensure that health boards and trusts have the resources and tools that they require to provide services, including the capacity to provide salaried GPs in areas where it is difficult to attract GPs to practise. In the end, the important thing is that local agencies that know their areas and understand local needs are helped and supported to provide those services. The Minister for Health and Community Care is pursuing changes in governance in health boards, which may have the beneficial effect of ensuring that local authorities are represented on health boards, bringing together two of the key partners  in an important way.

No such data are currently available. I wrote to Mr Brown on 21 December, advising him that we would consult local authorities on whether details for individual authorities might be published in their second progress reports, which are due on 31 January. I will receive a report soon on the outcome of that consultation and I will advise Mr Brown when a decision is made.

I appreciate Mr Brown's intention in pursuing the matter, as well as his concern that we move towards the long term 10-to-15 year targets that HECA places on local authorities. I have an open mind about publishing data on individual performance, but we must take account of the fact that local authorities are our partners in delivering improved home energy efficiency, and that it is right and proper to seek their views on the form in which the data are published. In considering whether it is possible to move in the direction that Mr Brown suggests, we must think about how we can prevent misleading and unfair comparisons that might, for example, fail to take account of the different baselines from which different local authorities begin. I repeat that I have an open mind about publishing the data, and I will make a decision soon regarding the second HECA progress reports.

As I said in answer to Mr Brown's question, as part of their response to HECA, authorities have been asked to submit current progress reports by the end of this month. Those reports will be issued soon. Under the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001, we are committed to tackling fuel poverty. The act requires us to make a statement on that matter in the next 12 months. That statement will provide us with an opportunity to address the issue that Mr Harper raises.

Repairs are certainly not being held back because of the Glasgow housing stock transfer. However, if the member is aware of specific instances in which she fears that that  might be the case, and if she can provide me with the relevant information, I will be more than happy to investigate those cases.

The Scottish Executive has provided more than £9 million to the City of Edinburgh Council over the past five years, and will provide a further £2 million in each of the next two years to address the problem of rough sleeping in Edinburgh. An additional £1 million was provided last year to help reduce the use of inappropriate forms of temporary accommodation for people assessed as homeless. To ensure effective delivery of the increased duties placed on local authorities by the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001, £27 million has been allocated to authorities over the next three years, of which Edinburgh will receive an agreed share.

The great thing about statistics is that one can use them to build a particular story. The statistics to which the question referred are statistics about homelessness applications, which do indeed show a rise. Those statistics refer to a period that ended some 18 months ago. The point that I tried to make is that we are placing on local authorities the highest-ever level of duty to respond to homelessness applications. As Fiona Hyslop's supplementary question indicated, the level of applications is less important than the outcome. In the same period, the outcome for applicants in priority need categories was that 82 per cent of applicants were found accommodation. With the homelessness task force, we will continue to consider what further measures we need to take to ensure that the outcomes improve for those who find themselves in need of a homelessness application. We have yet to see the impact of many of the measures that have already been taken. One of those impacts might be an increase in homelessness applications, because people believe and have confidence that a solution will be available for them if they seek it. That remains our priority.

We are absolutely clear that the progress that we have made, particularly with the rough sleepers initiative, has depended very much on the work that has been done by the voluntary sector. New as I am to the social justice brief, I have already met voluntary sector leaders to discuss how to improve the way in which we work with that sector. Voluntary organisations are also key players in the homelessness task force, whose second phase report will be published in the next few weeks. We will respond to the task force's recommendations as quickly as we can,  and I am sure that suggestions on how we cement support from the voluntary sector in addressing homelessness will be among those recommendations.

The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities is represented on the homelessness task force, the housing improvement task force and a number of other Executive-led groups. I hope to meet the COSLA housing group in the new year.

I am certainly aware that homelessness is a major issue in Fife, although I note that homelessness application figures are 12 per cent down for the last year for which we have complete figures, compared with the year before. Ultimately, the local councils have statutory responsibility for addressing homelessness in Fife and Angus. I said in answer to a previous question that what is important in homelessness applications is the outcome. It is worth looking at the statistics. For example, Fife Council secures a permanent accommodation solution for 89 per cent of homeless households that are in priority need. That is a high figure for permanent solutions. A balance must be struck between securing a quick solution, which might break down, and securing a solution that takes slightly longer to achieve but is permanent. Local authorities must strike that balance, but we remain interested in how they do that.

As part of the cities review process Peter Peacock intends to meet representatives from Angus Council. He will write to the council leader to set up a meeting.

There were two sides to that question. The cities review is not primarily about considering local authority boundaries. It is a listening exercise, and if issues about boundaries are raised, we will listen to them. However, the substantive question from Mr Johnstone was whether we will meet neighbouring authorities. The answer to that is yes, the authorities surrounding cities will be invited to meet ministers. The cities review is intended to consider the relationship between cities and their surrounding regions.

The remit of the cities review is before me. It is quite clear:  "To review the current prospects for the economic, environmental and social development of our five cities; and to identify Executive policies which will improve those prospects, taking account of interactions between the cities, their surrounding areas and the rest of Scotland." It is not a front for a review of local authority boundaries. To my knowledge, Angus Council was not singled out for exclusion. As I have already explained to Mr Johnstone, we are in the process of arranging a meeting between Mr Peacock and representatives of Angus Council in the near future.

The cities review is in its first phase, which is a listening phase. Some of the issues that Mr McAllion has referred to were raised and discussed on the Dundee day visit, but perhaps not in quite such trenchant terms as he has used—no surprises there. I have already made it clear that the cities review is not primarily about local authority boundaries. It is about listening to the issues facing our cities, and we will listen to the issues, whatever they are, that face Dundee or any of the other five cities.

As I said in my speech earlier, there are a number of different ways to examine and  define poverty. Income is one of those ways. In the report, the central definition of absolute poverty measures income against a fixed baseline, which, in this case, is 60 per cent of the Great Britain median income in 1996-97. That figure is then uprated to remove the effects of inflation. The figure is a comparison with the median income across the country.

rose—

It is unfortunate that this year's debate is a little shorter. However, I have read the Official Report  of Mr Gibson's speech last year and I hope that he will save time by not repeating any of his points.

I am delighted to open the debate. Social justice is about delivering for people and their priorities. It is about improving the lives of disadvantaged people in Scotland. It is about removing inequality at every level. That has been at the heart of all that I have done in my adult life, whether as a teacher in schools whose pupils have faced many barriers to attainment, campaigning for international development, or as a political activist in Wester Hailes and in west Pilton. It is a privilege to serve in an Executive that has social justice at its heart. It is also a privilege to follow my predecessor, Jackie Baillie, who did so much to put social justice at the heart of the Executive. When we set out our long-term targets and milestones in the social justice framework, we committed ourselves to moving beyond a focus on processes and narrow, short-term objectives. We committed ourselves to measuring the outcomes that matter for people and tracking whether things were improving for the most disadvantaged over the medium and long term. Curiously, the Opposition seems to believe that areas in which progress is slower or for which we have insufficient data are evidence of some weakness on our part. As so often, the Opposition misses the point.

I say that we should work in partnership, as we do, with our colleagues in Westminster to address income poverty. However, that is not the only social justice issue that must be addressed. I will say a little more about that later. We produce the social justice annual report exactly to expose where we need to do more and where we need to focus our effort to maximise its effect. Cynical politics would never produce this information for opponents to nit-pick over long into the night. Principled pragmatic and practical politics welcomes the information, faces up to the reality, and acts effectively. That is openness, transparency and accountability, and not only as far as the Executive  is concerned. Delivering the social justice agenda is not just our responsibility. Leaders in the delivery of social justice must be found in the council chambers, health boards, schools, businesses, voluntary organisations, communities, factories and universities of Scotland. The social justice milestones are now at the heart of the community planning process and provide focus on the real priorities on which agencies and people need to work together to deliver for communities. The milestones have been adopted by many organisations in setting outcomes and measuring performance. Some local authorities have even produced their own version of the report at local level to track communities with particular problems; Edinburgh and North Lanarkshire warrant particular attention in that respect. We are also investing in better small area data gathering to allow more targeted and more effective interventions at local level. In all this, we pretty well started from scratch. When the Executive came to power, we had little or no data for most of the areas in the report, which meant that we did not really know how Scotland was faring on many of today's key issues. However, we knew that those issues were important. Last year, we provided a huge amount of data for the first time and have added considerably to that total this year. We are pushing at the boundaries of our knowledge. For example, reducing the unacceptable gap in health between affluent and deprived communities is a top priority for this Government. This year, for the first time, we have provided data that reveal the size of the gap between deprived and affluent areas on key determinants of health such as breast feeding, women smoking in pregnancy and mortality rates caused by heart and respiratory disease. Those gaps are too large and turning them round will take time. That said, taking the first step of disaggregating our milestones is crucial to introducing effective strategies to reduce inequalities in health. Also for the first time, we have comprehensive information on rough sleepers through a new study that has been warmly endorsed and welcomed by the voluntary sector. We have been able to disaggregate more milestones than last year on urban and rural classifications, an issue that was quite properly raised in the debate on last year's report. All the statistical information in the report and the technical annexe is produced by Government statisticians to a code of practice. Their work is open to review through the statistical plan and to professional scrutiny by organisations, including by the independent Statistics Commission. The fact that the information is open to professional  scrutiny also demonstrates openness and transparency.

As I have said—and will say more about later—we are continuing to invest in the disaggregation of milestones to smaller areas, which will significantly affect the effectiveness of local plans in rural and urban Scotland. I promise Mr Lochhead that the process towards disaggregation will continue. Of course, the ministerial group on rural development has a considerable interest in pursuing progress on this issue. We are also making progress on accountability. For example, claimant count unemployment is at its lowest level for a generation. The level of underage smoking has dropped and there are signs of a fall in teenage pregnancy rates. The employment position of disadvantaged groups such as lone parents has improved and there appears to be an increase in the employment of disabled and older people. Finally, mortality rates caused by heart disease for older people are falling. Although it is very early days, there are signs of improvement across many of the milestones. The big question for our country's future is how we are doing as far as Scotland's poorest children are concerned. Are there fewer children in income poverty and are their prospects better? On both counts, the answer is a straightforward yes. Families on low incomes in Scotland have more money than they had five years ago. Furthermore, more help is available for disadvantaged families, and that help is better delivered through programmes such as sure start and new community schools and our investment in child care. We have also turned round the rising trend that we inherited in child poverty. The proportion of children in low income households rose from 19 per cent in 1979-81 to 34 per cent in 1996-97. The figure is now down to 29 per cent in relative terms and 25 per cent in absolute terms. All the children's social justice milestones on which we have data are going in the right direction, except one—the milestone on low birth weight babies—which is static. Against what we inherited, that is a remarkable achievement.

I need to make progress. I will say something later about how we define poverty. The fact that that has been achieved against a moving threshold is even more remarkable. Earnings have risen by 8 per cent over the past three years, but the position of the poorest children has continued to improve. The message is plain: poor children are better off and the gap between them and the average is narrowing, although it is still too great. It is also plain that the foundation of that progress is the rise in general prosperity that is being delivered by successful management of the economy. The SNP's separatist ambitions, as couched in its amendment, would destroy that foundation by creating economic instability. As we have said endlessly, there is no single definition of poverty, and poverty is about more than low income. Last year, as well as providing income data across 20 different indicators in the report, we quoted the survey results as they relate to numbers of children. This year, I am not in a position to give numbers in addition to the comprehensive collection of indicators on low income, because there are technical difficulties with the survey information. However, that does not affect the proportion data, nor the data in the report. We have committed £230,000 to double the size of the sample in Scotland and have agreed on a programme to change the way in which Scottish information is generated, to put the matter right in future. Year on year, the quality of our data gets better; but we also need to ensure the quality of action such as that which has been taken in Blantyre and North Hamilton, where the social inclusion partnership, working from the social justice milestones, found that there were particular problems with low birth weight babies. Following discussion with local mothers about their needs, an innovative new project—the baby weight gain programme—has just started with the support of the NHS and a major food retailer. That approach is the key—working with communities to identify the action that is required and then forging the alliances that can deliver it. That is one of the ways in which public services can deliver better for our people. There is no easy or quick way to turn round the situation that we inherited. We still have a great deal to do to ensure that public services such as health, education, housing and the police are delivering for the most excluded and disadvantaged people. We are focusing on what is needed and what works, and we are measuring ourselves against what is possible, not what has always been. That is how we will make our public services better. The aspiration of social justice and the will to  achieve it come not from the Government, but from the people themselves. We have committed resources so that, in time, the statistical information that will be available at a local level can arm that will with evidence. In support of that, we must unleash the talent of those in the front line of services and allow them the opportunity to input into decision making, to shape and deliver their task, as described by the First Minister when he cited the example of Stirling royal infirmary not 30 minutes ago. We are making progress in key areas and we will build on those achievements, year on year, to meet the commitments that we have made. John F Kennedy said: "We are not here to curse the darkness, but to light the candle". Poverty is the darkness at the heart of our national life. It robs the individual of opportunity and it robs the nation of the enrichment that every one of us can bring to it. We need that light to see clearly the reality and to light our task of dismantling it. I do not doubt that we will hear much cursing of the darkness this afternoon, but it is the light that we need. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Executive's publication of the Social Justice Annual Report 2001 ; notes the progress which is being made, and supports the work of the Executive, local government and other public agencies and the voluntary, community and private sectors in working together to deliver social justice in Scotland.

I thank all the members who have contributed to what has been a valuable debate. I am glad of the support that many members have expressed for the bill. I am impressed—if not terrified—by the detailed nature of some of the  comments, not least those by Christine Grahame. I fear that responding to some of those points will have to wait until stage 2, given the time constraints if nothing else. We have talked a lot about balance today—there is a bit of a balance in getting the privilege of opening and closing a stage 1 debate for the Executive. It has given me the opportunity to orate for about 20 minutes, which is unusual in the Parliament. Unfortunately, I have to make about an hour's worth of elaboration, acknowledgement and promises of amendment, which means that I am unlikely to deliver a rhetorical performance that will get me into the speech of the year contest—especially as I also have a cold. This subject has powerful emotion at its core. I may be running the risk of matching Stewart Stevenson for cross-party sycophancy, but I thought that Roseanna Cunningham got it eloquently right in her opening speech. She talked about the importance of balance: not only the balance of rights, but the balance of power within the courtroom in dealing with a crime that is, she is right to say, about the unacceptable exercise and abuse of power. I am pleased to have had the support of the Tories for the general principles of the bill. However, following the speeches by Bill Aitken and Lyndsay McIntosh, I wonder how much of the bill they foresee being left if they are successful in amending the bill to the extent that they promised. That is a debate for another day. It is worth saying which day that will be, as Margaret Ewing asked about the timetable for the progress of the legislation. We expect stage 2 to begin around 12 December. Beyond that, the timetable is to some extent in the hands of the committee. There is no delay in moving forward. I will return to the brief exchange that I had with Bill Aitken about the polarisation of views on the need for change, because several members have quite rightly referred to that matter. The point was very marked. Mr Aitken drew attention to the fact that, in research that asked complainers whether the law protected them during these kinds of trials, the answer received was an overwhelming no. He then quite correctly pointed out that if we ask practitioners in the legal profession—as the committee did—whether the law protects those complainers, the answer is an overwhelming yes. The key point is that both those groups have experience of this kind of trial in our courts, because the researchers spoke to complainers, not the general public. However, the experience clearly feels very different to each group. Given that polarisation, we simply have to choose. Do we respond to the experience of victims of rape or to the experience of practitioners of law? Unashamedly, I think that we must choose to  respond to the victims of rape.

Bill Aitken raises an entirely fair point, to which—if he bears with me—I will return when I address the issue of monitoring. As I said, we have to choose between the victims of rape and the practitioners of law. Johann Lamont explained much better than I can why we must respond as we are doing. We mean no offence to the legal profession, but that is our choice and indeed our purpose today. That said, we have to get the detail right; as Christine Grahame pointed out, we have to make law that is "good law". I will address some points, not all of which were raised in the debate. I start with one that was raised by Bill Aitken, Roseanna Cunningham and Pauline McNeill. In making our decision, we would have found it helpful to have had more—and more up-to-date—information. I agree that we could not even say how often a defendant had chosen to represent themselves; we know only of the cases that appeared in the press. As a result, we intend to undertake research to ensure that, if the bill is passed, its impact on sexual offence trials will be monitored.

That is a fair point. As we have to make the research as valuable as possible, we will undertake baseline research to update the previous Brown, Burman and Jamieson study on the impact of current sexual history provisions so that we have a baseline to start from. We will then monitor how the new provisions take effect. However, as members will understand, doing so will take some time. Members have also pointed out that, in requiring the accused to be legally represented for the whole of a trial, we have gone further than is strictly needed to protect the complainer. I tried to explain that we have done that partly because of procedures in Scottish trials, which mean that evidence is disclosed in the course of the trial. That means that a solicitor who had to take over representation in the middle of a trial would, at the very least, need to have shadowed the whole trial to be aware of the evidence. Our option made better sense and indeed, as several members have pointed out, might provide better-quality  representation for the accused. Stewart Stevenson also pointed to a further benefit involving other witnesses and he is probably right. The bill states that when a solicitor is appointed by the court, he or she has to get instructions from the accused. We must recognise that, occasionally, an accused may refuse to co-operate. Where a solicitor cannot obtain instructions or receives inadequate or perverse instructions, his or her duty is only to act in the best interests of the accused. It is likely that, in that position and with regard to professional ethics, the solicitor will be able to perform only a very limited role. However, that will have demonstrably been the result of the accused's own action. As Pauline McNeill helpfully pointed out, we now have experience of similar circumstances through the Public Defence Solicitors Office pilot scheme It is true that the bill gives the accused no right to dismiss a solicitor who has been appointed by a court. By the time the court appoints a solicitor, it will already have received a number of warnings. We believe that the court should be in control of the appointment process and that it should have the power to discharge the solicitor during the trial if, for example, there is a clear clash of personalities or if the accused has approached the court and given an acceptable reason for that to happen. We intend to lodge an amendment at stage 2 to make the court's power clear. The Law Society of Scotland put forward a proposal that several members have referred to—the idea of an amicus curiae. Our key reason for not pursuing that idea is straightforward: it does not deal with the basic issue of personal confrontation between complainer and accused. That is what we seek to make impossible through the bill. However, the proposal may warrant further discussion and I expect that it will be discussed when we consider wider issues concerning the protection of vulnerable witnesses. I do not support the idea—I have concerns about it—but time will be found to discuss it further, as some members have asked for that. Members have asked why the bill is drawn so widely. There has to be a specific list, so that it is clear whether the provisions of the bill apply. Some of the minor offences that are given as examples, such as flashing, would normally be charged as a breach of the peace and would not automatically be covered by the bill. However, I agree that there is still debate to be had on the contents of the list, especially regarding homosexual offences—as I acknowledged—which is a similar issue. I appreciate the fact that, of the three effects of the bill, the one about which members are most lukewarm is prior notice defence. It takes us back  to the question of balancing the experience of those whose experience is intense but limited and that of those who have wide experience. Almost all trials of this kind may involve a defence of consent. Bill Aitken may know that. The procurator fiscal may, as a matter of course, tell victims that they are likely to face such an accusation. I see no reason why we should not make sure that the victims know what they will have to face. Let me be clear. We cannot protect a victim from a defence of consent: that is not the purpose of the bill. Similarly, we are not stopping the accused from defending himself; we are only insisting that he does so through instructing a lawyer. We are not outlawing evidence of character or sexual history but regulating its use more stringently, so that it is allowed only when it should properly be used. Nothing that we do today will make facing a trial as a victim of rape anything other than a distressing, traumatic nightmare, but we can ensure that victims know what they will have to face and that they will never face direct cross-examination by their attacker. With the backing of the Parliament, that is what we will do.

Mr Aitken makes a fair point about the research being difficult. Will he accept that one construction of what he has related is that when we ask complainers whether they feel whether the process in court was distressing and intrusive, the answer is yes, but when we ask those in the legal profession, the answer is no? Their perceptions might be different because the levels of distress that they suffered are different.

This is a short but important bill, whereby the Executive fulfils a commitment to improve significantly the way victims of sexual crimes are treated in our criminal justice system, while still ensuring that those accused of such crimes receive a fair trial. Those have been our twin objectives throughout the process leading up to today's debate. I am therefore encouraged to see that the Justice 2 Committee's stage 1 report concludes that the bill strikes the right balance between the protection of the complainer and the rights of the accused, and that the committee recommends that the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the bill. The committee's conclusion was reached after a searching process of evidence taking from a wide range of interests. I would therefore like to record my thanks to the members of the committee and their staff for the hard work that has gone into producing the report. The report highlights a number of issues for us to consider further. If, at the conclusion of the debate, the Parliament sees fit to support the general principles of the bill, we will ensure that those issues are addressed in full before stage 2. The Executive made a commitment to introduce the bill in June 2000. A pre-legislative consultation document, "Redressing the Balance: Cross-examination in Rape and Sexual Offence Trials", was issued on 9 November 2000 and the consultation period officially closed on 31 January 2001. Our deadline for introducing the bill was 28 June. That was a very challenging deadline, but one that we were able to meet. I would like to thank everyone who took the time and trouble to participate in our consultation exercise. Without their contributions we would not have been able to introduce the bill on time. The single most important aim of the bill is to reduce the fear factor that alienates victims of sexual crimes from our criminal justice system. That aim is an integral part of the Executive's commitment to support the victims of crime, which we made in our programme for government and confirmed in the Scottish strategy for victims. Although the bill focuses particularly on  complainer witnesses in sexual offence cases, it is part of a wider programme of work. Next year, we will be consulting on whether further changes to the law of evidence are needed to help other vulnerable or intimidated witnesses testify in court. We will be considering the whole range of witnesses who may have additional needs and examining whether changes to practices and procedures are needed. The bill slots into a much wider framework, within which it is designed to tackle some of the particular problems faced by victims of sexual offences. We all know that the majority of such victims are women, but we should not forget that there are also male victims of sexual abuse and assault. They share the feelings of shame, humiliation, fear and anger that all victims experience. The Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Bill will protect them, too. If it is passed, the bill will do three things. It will ban an accused in a sexual offence case from conducting his or her own defence. It will strengthen the existing law regulating the use of evidence about the complainer's character and past behaviour. Finally, it will require any defence of consent or belief in consent to be notified before the trial. The first part of the bill responds to the concern created by three recent cases where an accused charged with a sexual offence did not have a lawyer and questioned the complainers himself. We have always acknowledged that such cases are rare, but their small number does not diminish the trauma caused to those individuals most closely involved. Furthermore, the publicity about recent cases may have exacerbated the fear of going to court among victims. A victim is always likely to dread questioning about the humiliating details of a sexual attack. That dread can only be made worse if there is a possibility of the questioning being done by the person who may be responsible for the attack. If someone were to ask us today whether that could happen, we would have to admit that it could; passing the bill would mean that we would be able to say in truth that it could not. The bill bans an accused charged with a sexual offence from conducting his or her defence in person at the trial. We are taking a different approach from that adopted in England and Wales. We considered carefully the solution chosen in England and Wales, but came to the conclusion that there are significant differences between our respective systems, which mean that a different approach is needed here. In Scotland, there is usually no disclosure of evidence by each side to the other before the trial. In England and Wales there are rules that require pre-trial disclosure. In England and Wales the defence will  have seen the statements of the prosecution witnesses before the trial starts. In Scotland each side will interview witnesses separately as they see fit, and usually neither side will see the other's statements. A full picture of the evidence will emerge only during the trial itself. A lawyer brought into the case for the sole purpose of questioning the complainer—who may not be the first witness—without having access to the prosecution statements, and without having had an opportunity to prepare the defence case in advance, would be unlikely to be able to represent the accused effectively. In our view, requiring the accused to be legally represented for the whole trial protects the interests of the complainer and the accused. We have been careful in the bill to provide other protections for the accused. The schedule provides for a series of notices to be given, from arrest onwards, alerting an accused to the need to appoint a solicitor. He or she will have plenty of time to select their own lawyer, but if they refuse to appoint anyone, ultimately the court will choose a solicitor for them. That solicitor will be under a duty to try to get instructions from the accused. Where the accused does not co-operate, the solicitor will have the authority to act in the accused's best interests on the basis of the material available. The other major change proposed by the bill is in relation to questioning about the complainer's character and past behaviour. At the moment, applications to introduce sexual history evidence about the complainer can be made orally in the course of the trial with no prior notice. Discussion of those applications may be fairly brief. Sometimes, the evidence slips through without application and before any objection can be made to stop it. Furthermore, there is currently no need to make an application when the evidence is about the complainer's general character or non-sexual behaviour, rather than about sexual activity. Questioning of the complainer as to whether she is an alcoholic, has used drugs, or has suffered mental illness, may be made without any formal application at all, and with little, if any, examination as to whether such questioning is relevant to the issues at trial. Published research suggests that there are subtle character attacks, using non-sexual evidence to hint at sexual behaviour or to undermine the complainer's credibility, which the current law does little or nothing to prevent. That research is not recent, and it may be that that situation is now less common, but the perception is that it happens. The bill must give confidence that it will not. The bill tackles those problems in two ways. First, it brings the question of the relevance of the evidence, and the purpose for which it is to be  used, much more to the forefront. Secondly, it sets down a clear process by which the admissibility of the evidence is to be determined, a process that involves consideration of the rights of the complainer as well as of the accused. The bill sets out the criteria to be used to decide whether an application to introduce character or sexual history evidence should be granted. There is a series of stages at which the evidence must be assessed before it can be admitted. First, the evidence must be about specific instances of behaviour by the complainer or specific facts. Secondly, the evidence must be relevant to an issue at stake in the trial. Thirdly, the evidence will have to have significant probative value, that is, it will need to be of potentially significant help to the judge or jury in resolving the case. Fourthly, that significant value must outweigh any prejudice to the proper administration of justice that will be caused by admitting the evidence. The proper administration of justice, of course, includes ensuring that the accused can present a full and fair defence. That is a fundamental pillar of our system of justice. The bill does, however, draw the court's attention to two other factors in assessing whether justice requires that the evidence be admitted. One of those is the possibility of diverting the jury's attention from the major issues it has to decide. It is not, after all, the function of the trial to pass judgment on the character of the complainer. The other factor is the need to give appropriate protection to the complainer's privacy and dignity. This is the first time that the complainer's rights and interests have been given any express status in the process. I hope that members will agree that that is a major step forward. The bill also introduces a written application process for the admission of that evidence and, unless there is a good reason for lateness, the application must be lodged before the trial. As the Justice 2 Committee recognised in its report, that is intended to ensure that such evidence is considered in a thorough, detailed and structured way. It is also intended to ensure that the issues are clarified and dealt with before the trial begins. However, I note the concerns that the committee has expressed about some aspects of the application process and the potential for delay, either before or during the trial. I assure members that we will consider carefully how to address those concerns before stage 2 of the bill. The bill will also require the accused to give notice before the trial of any intended defence of consent, including a defence of belief in consent. That would be the third effect of the bill, should it become law. Late notification will still be permitted on cause shown. I know that, at the committee stage, doubts were expressed about the practical  benefit of such a provision to the complainer. I will therefore take a moment to set out clearly the aims of the provision. First, the provision will give the complainer fair warning that consent will be an issue and will allow her to prepare psychologically for the type of questioning that she might face. Of course, in most sexual offence cases, the absence of consent is an essential element of the crime. Evidence of that will have to be led by the prosecution, and that might involve evidence of the use of force or threats. In cases where the accused and the complainer are known to one another, the complainer might expect that the accused's position will be that the complainer consented. However, there are other cases where such a defence might be entirely unexpected—for example, in a case where the complainer has suffered injuries, clearly showing that force was used. It is not unknown for an accuser to counter such evidence with argument that the complainer enjoyed being treated roughly and that consent was given. Even in cases where the accused and the complainer are total strangers, and where there is a strong prosecution case, the accused might still argue that the complainer consented. In such cases, the suggestion that she actually consented to the violence against her could come as a complete shock to the complainer. Advance notification will prevent that happening. The provision also links in with the requirement to make an application to lead evidence about the complainer's character or sexual history. That sort of evidence will rarely be relevant, unless the defence is consent. Before considering any application, it is important that the court knows that the accused is alleging consent. In combination with the provisions on sexual history evidence, the provision tries to create a situation where, before the trial begins, both sides are clear on what the issues are and what evidence about the complainer the accused will be seeking to lead, if any. The trial should be concerned primarily with whether the accused did or did not commit the alleged offence and not with the conduct of the complainer. During stage 1 evidence, it was suggested to the committee that the provision is an attempt to shift the burden of proof from the prosecution to the accused. That has never been our intention and I am pleased to see that the committee's report accepts that the provision would not have that effect. We acknowledge, however, that some of the words in the bill could be used to be imply that a burden has been placed on the accused. We will consider that wording carefully and see whether a stage 2 amendment might be needed in order to  dispel that ambiguity. Some concerns have also been expressed about the range of offences to which the bill applies. The Equality Network has made some good points about the treatment of homosexual offences. We are committed to ensuring that the bill does not have a discriminatory impact based on sexual orientation. There are some practical problems with certain aspects of the Equality Network's suggested amendments. However, we intend to lodge an Executive amendment at stage 2 to deal with the issues that have been raised. In the consultation document "Redressing the Balance: Cross-Examination in Rape and Sexual Offence Trials", we sought views on whether an accused's previous convictions for sexual offences should automatically go before the court following a successful application to lead character or sexual history evidence about the complainer. Large numbers of consultees backed that proposal. However, arguments were made in opposition to it. At the time that the bill was drafted, it was felt that such a provision could be too sweeping and that we should consider the matter further. After further consideration, we have decided to introduce a modified proposal. If members agree to the general principles of the bill, we will lodge an amendment at stage 2 that will require the judge, following a successful application by the accused to lead evidence about the complainer's past, to consider whether any previous sexual offence convictions of the accused should be disclosed. A presumption will be made in favour of disclosure, but it will be open to the accused to overturn that by satisfying the court that revealing his or her record would be contrary to the interests of justice. The normal presumption of innocence will apply in relation to the offence being tried, and it will be for the prosecution to convince the jury of the accused's guilt beyond any reasonable doubt. Under current law, it is open to the court to grant a prosecution application to admit evidence of the accused's previous convictions when the defence has attacked the complainer's character. However, members of the Justice 2 Committee will be aware from Professor Gane's evidence to them that that provision is rarely used in sexual offence trials. In the months preceding this debate, concerns have been voiced about whether the bill is compatible with the European convention on human rights. Such compatibility is a fundamental requirement of our legislative process. At the heart of most human rights issues lies a balance that must be struck. The bill is no different. Article 6.3(c) of the convention confers on an accused the right  "to defend himself in person or through legal assistance of his own choosing". The question is whether that gives him an absolute right to conduct his defence personally. In our view, it does not. The body of case law that the European Court of Human Rights has built up suggests that a rule that requires an accused to be legally represented is usually regarded as legitimate. It is clear that limitations on the rights conferred by article 6.3(c) may be justified by circumstances that make them appropriate in the interests of justice. Such circumstances may arise when the accused's rights under article 6 must be balanced against the rights of others under the convention.

Mr Gallie raises an interesting question, but it is perhaps not for this debate, because the bill would set such a situation right by changing the legislative framework. I might take advice on that issue and write to Phil Gallie. The questioning that complainers experience in sexual offence trials may relate to rights that are protected by article 8 of the convention. Article 8 does not confer any absolute right to non-interference in privacy, but it requires such interference to be in the public interest and proportionate. Some interference with article 8 rights is justifiable as an unavoidable part of the prosecution of a crime. When an accused conducts his or her own defence, the complainer and alleged attacker are in direct confrontation. Such a confrontation is unnecessary for a fair trial. There have been very few Scottish sexual offence cases in which the accused has conducted his own defence, but there have been some. The courts have a duty to protect complainers from harassment and intimidation. I do not suggest that they failed to observe that duty in the three cases that we know have occurred, but even legitimate questioning of complainers in sexual offence trials is likely to be embarrassing, humiliating and intrusive. That position is aggravated if the alleged attacker conducts the questioning. In relation to character and sexual history evidence, article 6.3(d) of the ECHR confers on the accused the right "to examine or have examined witnesses against him".  That does not entitle an accused to put whatever questions he chooses to witnesses. It is permissible to restrict the evidence that is admissible, provided that the fundamental right to a fair trial is not infringed. Those provisions in the bill are also directed towards protecting the right of complainers to respect for their private lives under article 8. Questioning about character and sexual history that is intended to back up a consent defence could cause a complainer great distress and be a considerable invasion of his or her privacy. The law already accepts that that needs to be regulated, but the law is too loosely drawn to ensure that aim. Once again, a balance must be struck between the rights of the complainer and those of the accused. The bill's consultation document was not called "Redressing the Balance" for nothing. That title describes what the bill is intended to do. It should redress the balance between the rights of the complainer and those of the accused. The bill represents a reasoned, just and realistic balance for sexual offence trials. I urge members to support it. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Bill.

I acknowledge—I will return to this point—that the bill is large and complex. Roseanna Cunningham is right: it deals with many important issues, some of which are very difficult. In normal circumstances, such matters would not proceed without lengthy and protracted scrutiny. However, these are not normal circumstances, as we all agree. The Government decided that the attacks on New York and the associated risks warranted a quick response—although not a rushed response. Two months have passed. That is not a long time but it means that this is not an immediate or knee-jerk response. The Executive supports that robust and comprehensive UK response to the terrorist threat. It is important to put on record once again that the bill does not represent a rewriting of our legislation on terrorism, criminal offences or policing. Such an overhaul certainly could not be conducted properly in the space of two months.  The bill is a targeted collection of specific measures. It is true, as Roseanna Cunningham says, that some of those measures have been considered previously, as they were thought to be of use. However, the point is that they are now more urgent. That is why they are included in the bill.

The clauses to which Roseanna Cunningham refers deal with issues where there may be a connection between terrorist offences and criminal offences. For example, under the Terrorism Act 2000, DNA and fingerprint samples may be taken. The changes that we want to make will mean that fingerprint evidence taken from a stolen vehicle may be cross-referenced to records taken during previous terrorism investigations. Terrorism and ordinary criminal activity are linked. The bill tries to fine-tune and make more effective the existing legal framework in different ways. In the circumstances, its introduction is not inappropriate. I made it clear that on issues to which we want, and there is a reason for, a distinctive approach, we have effectively opted out of the Westminster bill. I am pleased that nearly every speaker has welcomed that. The issues that require a distinctive approach are religious hatred, corruption and the removal of face coverings. Because we do not see the need for a distinctive Scottish approach on the other measures, we have sought to proceed with them by way of a Sewel motion. In the circumstances, the advantages of a rapid UK-wide approach take precedence. It is extremely important that it is open to the Parliament to amend in future any of the proposals that we sanction today for inclusion in the Westminster bill. The fact that we are using a Sewel motion does not mean that we will somehow lose our competence to legislate on such matters. Roseanna Cunningham is right that some of the measures—on hoaxes or the others that she referred to—might require further examination, with more time and perhaps the consideration of amendments. That is entirely within the power of the Parliament. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton quoted Councillor Bashir Maan. I take this opportunity to associate the Executive with Councillor Maan's remarks on UK citizens who encourage other UK citizens to take up arms against their country, which is deplorable. Councillor Maan expressed his views  on the issue eloquently, as we heard today.

I said that I deplored those actions, and I deplore them in the circumstances that Lloyd Quinan describes. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and Roseanna Cunningham mentioned the power to implement European Union measures by secondary legislation. I have two points on that. First, the bill will provide an option, not an obligation, to use secondary legislation. Secondly—I repeat an earlier point—with devolved matters, the power is an option that would be exercised by Scottish ministers, so it would be subject to the scrutiny of the Parliament, although scrutiny of secondary legislation is different from that of primary legislation. I reassure Phil Gallie that if Osama bin Laden were captured in the UK, including Scotland, it is our understanding that he could be extradited to the United States of America. When murderers have been extradited to the USA in the past, an undertaking that they will not be subjected to the death penalty has been given—that is what allows them to be extradited. In any case, New York state does not have the death penalty, although I am not 100 per cent certain of that. I believe that the situation that Phil Gallie described is resolvable. The people of Scotland expect to benefit from the same protections that the bill will provide for the rest of the UK. They would not appreciate the constitutional niceties of an approach that could leave Scotland behind in time or in the rigour of the measures. The Scottish people would prefer us to compromise on our powers of legislation rather than to risk compromise on their security. I think that the people of Scotland would be surprised and baffled by the SNP's arguments. The SNP argue that the devolved aspects of the bill are so important that we need more time to debate them. I agree that those aspects of the bill are important. However, the SNP used the time that it had to debate those measures, first, to debate the procedures of the Parliament—legitimately, in respect of a Sewel motion—and, secondly, to debate an issue over which we manifestly have no legislative power, as it is a reserved matter. Charged with that, Stewart Stevenson claimed that the devolved matters involved are trivial issues of less interest than tabloid gossip. Which case is the SNP arguing?

No. I am sorry.

Which is it? Are the issues so important that we should spend more time on them, or are they unimportant, the only issues that matter being the reserved ones, over which we do not have legislative power? We are not being asked today to pass the measures in the anti-terrorism legislation; we are being asked to allow the UK Parliament to legislate in devolved areas after it has considered the legislation. We are certainly not being asked to extend powers of detention—we do not have that legislative power. I have made it clear that I support that extension. Other members have made it clear that they do not support it, but that they will still support the Sewel motion. That is an entirely consistent position. I can only assume that those members have confidence in their Westminster colleagues to do their job when the time comes. The question that has to be posed is why the SNP has so little confidence in its famous five, whom it sent to Westminster to stand for Scotland. They were going to stand for Scotland, yet Michael Russell says that they will be cut out. They will presumably be cut out because of the ineffectiveness of their voice in Westminster. The Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Bill will help to undermine terrorist finance and it will prevent abuse of our immigration and asylum procedures by international terrorists. It will discourage the use of dangerous substances and associated hoaxes. The bill is a major one, but the circumstances are such that we are right to use the Sewel convention to move forward quickly and consistently throughout the UK. That must be our paramount concern. That is what Scotland's people would accept and it is for that reason above all that I commend the Sewel motion to the chamber.

rose—

Fiona Hyslop makes an absolutely correct point: that is exactly the purpose of the debate. The question that members have been asking is why, therefore, so much of SNP members' time has been devoted to discussion of a matter that is manifestly reserved and manifestly not the subject of today's debate.

Does Mr Brown acknowledge that, although the use of the word "detention" is correct, the bill proposes a detention that can be ended at any time by the decision of the person involved to leave the country? The detention is intended to avoid the necessity of deporting someone to a country where they might be tortured or executed. That puts a slightly different gloss on the arguments that are being presented, although I do not deny that there are arguments to be made.

Will the member give way?

Earlier this week, the Government introduced the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Bill in the House of Commons. The genesis of the bill needs little explanation. The terrorists who struck at New York struck at us all. They killed without discrimination, and those who died were men, women and children of all ages and of many nationalities, races, and religious and political persuasions. It was truly an act of terror. Tragically, we are not strangers to acts of terrorism. However, 11 September saw the manifestation of a threat of terrorism of a scale, audacity, single-mindedness, global reach and disruptiveness that we have not previously faced. It is therefore right that we respond not only to the actual act, but to the threat of similar outrages. The recent advances that have been made in Afghanistan do not diminish that imperative; indeed, they may arguably increase it. On this issue, we walk a fine and difficult line. We aspire to tolerance and respect for all and to uphold fundamental civil liberties. However, to do so, we must deal with those who exploit our liberties with threats to life and limb. I do not say that that is easy; however, it is inescapable. The Executive believes that the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Bill is a proportionate response to the events of 11 September. It is not a wholesale revision of our legal and security framework, but a collection of carefully targeted improvements. The bill has a number of strands. First, it enhances information disclosure to aid policing and prosecution; it enhances financial controls in much the same way as the Proceeds of Crime Bill;  and it strengthens existing asylum and immigration powers. Secondly, the bill contains new criminal offences on religious hatred, corruption, weapons of mass destruction, associated hoaxes, and failure to disclose information about terrorist offences. Thirdly, the bill requires enhanced security for the storage of pathogens, civil nuclear installations, and airports, which form the tools and targets of the new terrorism. Fourthly, the bill enhances policing, with new powers on DNA and fingerprint evidence; an extended jurisdiction for British Transport and Ministry of Defence police; and extended access to passenger information. Finally, the bill allows for fast-track implementation of any European Union agreements on justice and home affairs. I will now deal with the devolved provisions that we recommend be included in the Westminster bill and those that we propose to exclude. That is the purpose of our debate this morning; we are not debating aspects of the bill that are clearly reserved and would, in any circumstances, be a matter for the United Kingdom Parliament. That is why the SNP amendment is not appropriate. Our rationale for a Sewel motion is essentially pragmatic. We do not think it acceptable to delay these matters until the introduction of the criminal justice bill next year, and we do not think that emergency legislation of our own is appropriate for proposals that are unlikely to differ on either side of the border. It is right to move quickly and, as far as possible, on a common UK front. We recommend that the enabling power on EU criminal measures be extended to Scotland, which will allow Scottish Ministers to introduce secondary legislation on devolved, criminal, police and judicial co-operation initiatives. That safeguards this Parliament's role and strikes the right balance between parliamentary scrutiny and the ability to legislate quickly when necessary. We recommend that the bill's provisions on dangerous substances be extended to Scotland, which will make it an offence for a person to use nuclear, biological, chemical, radiological or any other noxious substance, or to threaten to do so. We recommend that the bill's provisions on disclosure of information be extended to Scotland. The provisions will enable Government departments and other public authorities to disclose information for possible criminal investigations or proceedings. The Parliament has already passed a Sewel motion on this in relation to the Criminal Justice and Police Bill. However, the measures were dropped and are now being reintroduced with some modifications. We recommend that the new powers relating to the security of premises holding harmful  substances be extended to Scotland. The powers are primarily designed to address security arrangements at laboratories where there are stocks of potentially dangerous substances such as viruses, bacteria and toxins. The substances will be specified in secondary legislation and examples of the new controls are given in the memorandum that accompanies the Sewel motion. We recommend that the new police powers on passenger information be extended to Scotland, which would enable the police to request information in relation to ships and aircraft arriving anywhere in the UK from any other country. The current powers are limited to travel between the UK mainland, Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. We recommend that the extension of powers for the MOD and British Transport police be extended to Scotland. That would extend their jurisdiction so that they could assist other police forces on request. Members will recall that the Parliament previously approved this approach for the MOD police, but the proposals were subsequently dropped from the Armed Forces Bill. We recommend making use of the bill to allow fingerprints and samples that are taken under Terrorism Act 2000 powers to be used in the investigation of the whole range of crime. That will ensure that links can be drawn between terrorist suspects and other criminal acts that might have terrorist connections. I will now address the aspects of the bill that we do not wish to be extended to Scotland. First, we will pursue a distinctive approach on religious hatred. I shall chair a ministerial working group with cross-party representation and a remit to report by the end of February. The Deputy First Minister has written to invite the Commission for Racial Equality and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland to participate in that group. We intend to invite others to participate and will of course consult widely. Our aim will be to ensure that any new legislation is workable and effective in the Scottish context. In the meantime, we will deal with religious hatred firmly under the current law. Religious aggravation already exists at common law in Scotland. Furthermore, because of different rules of evidence and procedure in Scotland, we have decided to introduce international corruption provisions in our own criminal justice bill, which will be introduced next year. Finally, we have decided not to extend to Scotland the new police powers to remove face coverings. The police in Scotland were lukewarm in their support for the proposal and pointed out that there could be practical difficulties, for  example, with some forms of traditional dress. In the circumstances, we believe that the benefits would be marginal. The UK bill will be amended to exclude Scotland from this provision. We consider the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Bill to be a proportionate and carefully targeted piece of legislation. With the three exceptions that I have mentioned, we commend its extension to Scotland and I therefore invite the chamber's support for this Sewel motion. I move, That the Parliament recognises the urgency of enhancing anti-terrorist capability and security in the current international situation and agrees that the provisions of the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Bill specified in the Scottish Executive's memorandum that relate to devolved matters should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The Police and Fire Services (Finance) (Scotland) Bill is a small but almost perfect piece of legislation. It is sensible and pragmatic and has benefited from some useful discussion at stage 1. Compromise from the generous Executive has moved us towards the position where we can all agree. At this last moment, I hesitate to rob the bill of its final virtue, which is brevity. I commend the bill to members. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Police and Fire Services (Finance) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

During the stage 1 debate on the Police and Fire Services (Finance) (Scotland) Bill, ministers gave a commitment to lodge amendments that would remove the need for constituent authorities to consent to the carry-forward of their share of any requisition money that remains unspent at the year end. Amendment 1 meets that aim by deleting the reference to "constituent authorities". It also removes the blanket requirement for ministerial consent to the carry-forward of unspent balances. I will return to that point in a moment. Amendment 2 is a consequential drafting change. At stage 1, there was some debate about the extent to which joint boards should need to seek the consent of ministers before they can carry forward any balances that are unspent at the end of the year. The Scottish Executive proposes a compromise that means that there will be ministerial involvement only when certain preconditions occur. Those preconditions will arise when the amount of unspent requisition money and police grant to be carried forward as a working balance, when added to existing accumulated reserves of unspent requisition money and police grant, exceeds 5 per cent of the requisition and grant received in that year. The 5 per cent threshold, if applied across the eight Scottish forces, would represent about £40 million. It would be unusual for the police to need reserves of that size. Amendment 3, which relates only to joint police boards, looks a bit long and complicated, but it  simply puts into effect the points that I have mentioned: it defines the conditions under which ministerial consent will need to be sought. In addition, it allows Scottish ministers, by order, to vary the 5 per cent trigger.

The 5 per cent trigger is cumulative, so the carry-forward limit is 3 per cent in the first year and 5 per cent in the second year, but unspent reserves that were carried forward again would count towards the 5 per cent trigger. That is slightly different from what Sylvia Jackson posited. Amendment 4 is a consequential amendment. Amendments 1, 2, 3 and 4 put into effect a sensible way of balancing the interests of joint police boards and constituent authorities. I move amendment 1.

The only point to which I want to respond is one raised by Tricia Marwick. I can give assurances on behalf of the present Executive only, but it is certainly not our intention to use the order that is provided for in the amendments to reduce the trigger percentage. Indeed, we have no intention of changing that level at all. Our idea in including that provision is to provide an additional protection. The committee expressed some concerns about the danger of a hold-up because of the bureaucratic process of seeking consent. If that proved to be the case, it would be possible to vary the trigger percentage under the order that is provided for in the amendments. The inclusion of that provision was seen as a further attempt to assuage come of the concerns that had been expressed. As secondary legislation would be required for an order, there would be the potential for parliamentary scrutiny of any such change, which would come about only with the agreement of the Parliament.  Amendment 1 agreed to.  [Amendments 2 to 4 moved—[Iain Gray]—and agreed to.]

The amendments in the second group are much the same in purpose and effect as those debated in the first group, with the difference that they relate solely to police grant. Amendment 6 is the substantive amendment in the group; the others are consequential. I move amendment 5.  Amendment 5 agreed to.  Amendments 6 to 9 moved—[Iain Gray]—and agreed to.  Section 1, as amended, agreed to.

This group of amendments replicates for the fire service the carry-forward provisions that we discussed in relation to the police service. I move amendment 10.  Amendment 10 agreed to.  Amendments 11 to 13 moved—[Iain Gray]—and agreed to.  Section 2, as amended, agreed to. Section 3 agreed to. Long title agreed to.  Meeting closed at 15:45.

There are two reasons for the fall in planned expenditure. The first reason is the end of the period of increased training of probationers arising from the additional funding provided by the Scottish Executive to enable forces to employ higher numbers of police officers. The second reason is the completion of a major upgrading of the Tulliallan college's physical education block.

I can only agree with James Douglas-Hamilton that Tulliallan has established itself as a centre of excellence. It provides 80 per cent of police training in Scotland. The other 20 per cent is delivered in local police forces. The college's reputation is such that it attracts students from across the world. Its training provides one of our key opportunities to ensure that matters such as domestic assaults, children's welfare and crimes involving issues of race are dealt with sensitively by our police officers. That is why Tulliallan's underlying budget is increasing year on year.

This has been a short but useful debate. I welcome the agreement that criminals and their associates should not enjoy the proceeds of crime. That is the purpose of the bill. It will hit drug dealers and other criminals where it hurts—in their pockets. It will hit them across the range of crimes which fill those pockets—very few criminals limit themselves to one type of crime. It will hit them even if they escape conviction, as Christine Grahame discussed. It will hit their ill-gotten gains whether they are held in cash or property. The provisions relate to a complex mix of devolved and reserved issues. That is the basis for taking the Sewel motion approach and asking the UK Parliament to legislate on Scotland's behalf. It is incumbent on us to say that there are protections for Scotland, Scotland's people and  this Parliament. The bill is fully aligned to Scots law and procedure. It has separate clauses where necessary and takes fully into account the different institutional arrangements in Scotland. The Lord Advocate will remain responsible for criminal confiscation in Scotland, while responsibility for civil recovery will rest with Scottish ministers and will be pursued to the civil standards familiar in the Court of Session, with the burden of proof on the Scottish ministers. The First Minister is likely to delegate day-to-day administrative responsibility for civil recovery to the Lord Advocate, but there will be a clear demarcation between the Lord Advocate's civil recovery and prosecution functions. The bill will confer a number of powers to make subordinate legislation on Scottish ministers, subject to procedure before this Parliament. In other cases, the secretary of state will be required to consult Scottish ministers. I will address some of the points that have been raised. The matter of ECHR compliance was a consistent theme. We are confident that the legislation is compliant with the ECHR. The position is laid out in section 19 of the Human Rights Act 1998. It requires the minister in charge of a bill in either House of Parliament to make a statement about the compatibility of the provisions of the bill with convention rights. The right hon David Blunkett, Secretary of State for the Home Department, has made the following statement: "In my view the provisions of the Proceeds of Crime Bill are compatible with the Convention rights."

I appreciate and understand that point, but the question that was raised was whether we believe that the legislation is ECHR-compliant and the answer to that is that we do. That includes compliance with article 6.2, which Christine Grahame read out. The point is that article 6.2, which is the right to presumption of innocence, refers to criminal proceedings so, as civil recovery is a civil process, article 6.2 would not apply. As the civil recovery process carries no presumption of crime, the presumption of innocence would remain if it were decided later to pursue criminal proceedings  against the individual. I think that that was Christine Grahame's point.

Perhaps we can return to the issue at another time. I take Mr Matheson's well-made point on the issue of resources. Crown Office resources are under scrutiny on a number of fronts, even today. As far as civil recovery is concerned, we intend to create a civil recovery unit and have earmarked resources for such a purpose. Before he had to desist, Mr Martin raised the possibility of using seized proceeds of crime. I can confirm that we plan to invest a significant proportion of recovered assets in a fund that will be used to repair some of the damage done in communities that have been blighted by crime. As for Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's point, we feel that the Drug Trafficking Act 1994 would indeed be caught by the reservation on drug trafficking, even though that is not specifically mentioned in the Scotland Act 1998. We are clear that UK legislation will be more workable and effective than complex complementary legislation by both Parliaments. For that reason, we seek Parliament's support for today's motion.

I am grateful to Mary Mulligan and Margaret Curran for agreeing to my participating in the debate from the back benches. I wanted to do so because I worked for Oxfam in Scotland for 12 years prior to being elected. Those years taught me the power of people in seemingly hopeless circumstances to transcend despair and make a collective effort to improve their lives and those of their families and neighbours. Oxfam was started in the darkest of times—1942—by a handful of people determined to do something about the plight of people in occupied Europe. Indeed, sending aid to occupied Greece in 1942 was not popular with the Government of the day. The refusal to temper its humanitarian instinct to suit the circumstance has continued to characterise Oxfam throughout its life. From being the first aid agency into the nightmare of post-Khmer Rouge Cambodia to engaging in the moral maze that was Rwanda in 1994, Oxfam has never flinched from the most difficult theatres of humanitarianism. It does not do so today and, as many members have said, it is playing its part, as we speak, in the provision of aid to the people of Afghanistan. Oxfam has long refused to respond only to emergencies. Rather, it engages with the structures of poverty and conflict that create them and is at the forefront of campaigning on issues such as debt. It is a leader in the development education movement in Scotland and I am pleased that Currie High School in my constituency is part of the sustainable schools project that Mary Mulligan referred to. Neither does Oxfam flinch from issues of poverty at home. Oxfam's reach is astonishing. I once visited a relief programme in northern Mozambique, which saw supplies trucked from Malawi into Mozambique and back out again to Zimbabwe, where they were loaded on to the Beira railway and taken to a remote rail junction. They were then trucked to an airfield, airlifted to towns that could be reached only by air, and then trucked out again another 200km to camps that people had walked for a fortnight to reach. People who might have been thought to be geographically beyond help were not beyond Oxfam's determination to reach them. Of course, that astonishing chain actually stretched all the way back to the groups of supporters and activists who have always been the driving force of that kind of effort. Those links are very real. Of those groups, there is no better example in Scotland than the Linlithgow Oxfam group. As we have heard, its members have raised a great deal of money but, more than that, they understand that the effectiveness of  international solidarity depends on the depth of the roots that we put down in our own communities. They have made themselves, and therefore their cause, a part of Linlithgow. They work in schools, campaign on the street and participate in annual marches—and they held their once-legendary raft races on Linlithgow loch. In contributing to the world, they contribute to their own town. Someone once described Oxfam as a bridge of people. That is exactly what it is. It is a bridge built on the unshakeable belief that people acting together can overcome almost anything. The Linlithgow group is part of that bridge, and so are we for this hour at least—and so we should be.

I thank the Local Government Committee for its careful consideration of the Police and Fire Services (Finance) (Scotland) Bill and for its report, which provides a considered assessment of the issues that arise from that small, but quite intricate, piece of legislation. I welcome the committee's broad agreement with the general principles of the bill, although I recognise that it has some concerns about the detail. Before dealing with the matters raised by the committee, I would like to give some background about the need for the bill and to set it in context. It would probably be easier if I deal with each service in turn and, if I may, I shall begin with the police. As I am sure members are aware, the police are funded differently from other local authority services. Each force has a police authority or joint police board, which has responsibility for setting force budgets. The Scottish Executive pays a grant of 51 per cent to cover eligible police expenditure up to a cash limit. Joint police boards then requisition the balance from their constituent local authorities or, in the case of unitary police authorities, from the local authority. Until 1996, the Scottish Office set a maximum number of police officers for each force, and police grant was paid at 51 per cent of all eligible police costs. Since then, the controls on police officer numbers have been removed, and police grant has been paid up to a cash limit. That change has given chief constables and police authorities more freedom to manage their budgets. However, it has left the police facing something of a quandary. As an emergency service, they have to keep in hand sufficient reserves to enable them to meet unusual demands, but at present they are obliged to return any money unspent at the end of each financial year. That creates a pressure to rush to spend money at the end of the year to avoid its being lost to the force. In November 1998, the Accounts Commission for Scotland and HM inspectorate of constabulary investigated police funding and published a report called "Credit to the Force". Among other things, it concluded that better value would be obtained if forces could carry forward a working balance from  year to year. The report argued that working balances, in conjunction with greater stability in funding, would make the financial planning process more efficient and effective. The report suggested that the amount that could be carried forward should be limited to 3 per cent of a force's annual budget.

The limit on carry-forward carries with it an element of control. The reason for making similar proposals for the fire service and the police service is a matter that, if Richard Lochhead is willing to wait, I shall come to later in my speech. As members will know, we have introduced three-year budgets for local authorities, including the police service, giving the stability sought by the "Credit to the Force" report. The ability to manage spends at the end of each year is of even greater significance if forces have to budget for three years at a time, so that underspends in one year can be compensated for in the next. In fact, we have gone beyond the recommendation in "Credit to the Force" and have allowed joint police boards to accumulate balances year on year. I shall return to that point later. The bill amends the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 to make provision for the carry-forward of working balances. Section 1(1) of the bill deals with the carry-forward of unspent police funds by joint police boards. It does so by amending the 1967 act to require the amalgamation orders that set up the boards to make provision with regard to the payment by the constituent authorities of the amounts that the joint police board estimates will be incurred. Section 1(2) of the bill amends the 1967 act to ensure that both joint police boards and unitary police authorities can carry forward unspent police grant. At present police grant is paid after an order is laid under section 32 of the 1967 act before the beginning of each financial year. That order is redetermined to show the actual grant paid after the end of the financial year when actual figures are known. The bill ensures that, given the approval of ministers, boards will be able to carry forward police grant. I mentioned the origin of the proposals in the report "Credit to the Force". As Mr Lochhead correctly pointed out, that report related only to the  police. However, it would have been remiss of us not to have regard to the read-across to the fire service. Many of the same considerations apply and we have therefore included provisions in the bill relating to the carry-forward of working balances by joint fire boards. No equivalent to police grant is payable to fire authorities so, to that extent, the provision for joint fire boards is shorter. Apart from that, and some minor adjustments to the existing legislation in respect of administration schemes, the provision for those boards has the same effect as the provision for joint police boards. Part of the answer to Mr Lochhead's question is that a unitary fire authority with a single local authority would be able to carry forward using the other arrangements for local authorities to carry forward; however, where a joint board is in place, the proposed legislation would be required to allow that carry-forward too. The fire service is, of course, also an emergency service and, although most of the imperative for the legislation came from the police side, it seemed right to mirror arrangements for the fire service. I hope that members will understand that the bill's intention is to provide for better financial management, to avoid a rush to spend at the end of each year in particular, and to underpin the three-year budgeting cycle that has been introduced. The bill is a sensible amendment to existing legislation and the Local Government Committee's report commends the general principles of the bill. I hope that the report's conclusions will be endorsed by Parliament today. The committee had some concerns about the constraints in the bill. If the bill becomes law, there will be issues about the building-up of large balances and the impact on local taxation of not returning unspent requisitions to local authorities. Consequently, some safeguards have been built into the bill. The first safeguard is that balances can be carried forward only with the consent of the constituent authority whose contribution constitutes, or is part of, the money that is intended to be carried forward. Secondly, any proposal to carry forward requisitioned funds or police grant should have the consent of the Scottish ministers. In addition, as discussed earlier, there is a 3 per cent limit on the amount that can be carried forward from individual years, although that carry-forward can be accumulated year on year. The committee, and many of the witnesses who gave evidence, had some difficulty with the first safeguard. The fear was that if a single authority opted out of carrying forward its share of any underspend, the difficulties caused would undermine the whole principle of the bill. The  proposal was introduced to protect the position of individual authorities since, at present, any unspent requisitions are returned to them in full. We have carefully considered the committee's report and the evidence submitted by the witnesses and concluded that the provision could be removed from the bill. We will lodge an amendment to that effect at stage 2, assuming that members approve the motion. The committee was also concerned about the need for ministerial consent before a carry-forward could take place. Again, we have carefully considered the committee's report and the evidence submitted; however, we still think that there is a case for involving ministers and I will explain why. As I mentioned, we have gone beyond the recommendations in "Credit to the Force". The bill as drafted allows authorities to accumulate carried-forward amounts and so build up large balances to meet anticipated financial pressures. The ability to build up reserves may have an impact on local council tax levels and we therefore think that some sort of safeguard is necessary. However, we acknowledge that misuse of the facility is unlikely and we do not wish to get involved in day-to-day police and fire board issues. Some witnesses expressed concerns about the time that it might take to get the ministerial consent that is required. We therefore propose to allow boards blanket consent to carry forward balances without reference to the justice department, except in exceptional circumstances. The details have yet to be worked out but, for example, automatic consent might be based on the accumulated amount not exceeding, say, 5 per cent of that year's budget. That approach would give the boards the certainty they need, but protect the interests of taxpayers at both national and local level. That is a significant qualification, and I hope that committee members in particular will agree that it is one that goes a long way towards meeting the concerns raised about that provision. Some people have argued that the provision is not necessary because, at least in the case of police grant, the Executive can react to excessive reserves by simply reducing the amount of police grant available in subsequent years. Fire boards could apply the same approach to any reserves accumulated by brigades. However, I think that most of us would agree that it is better to avoid difficult situations arising rather than to apply sanctions later in the process. There is another reason why ministerial consent is important, particularly in relation to the police. Given that police grant and local authority requisitions are treated separately, it would be possible for a board to deliberately set a budget  above its requirements, draw down police grant and then carry forward police grant, but not requisitions. That would distort the balance between police grant and local authority expenditure. I do not want to suggest for a moment that that kind of devious machination is likely, but safeguards should be put in place to stop it occurring. The final safeguard is a limit of 3 per cent on the amount that can be carried forward. That limit is based on the recommendation in "Credit to the Force". The limit may prove generous or restrictive in practice, but it can be varied by means of a statutory instrument subject to the negative resolution procedure. In conclusion, we think that the bill is sensible and that it will help financial management in the police and fire services. I am glad that the Local Government Committee approves the general principles of the bill. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Police and Fire Services (Finance) (Scotland) Bill.

Planning the future long-term shape of the prison estate is the purpose behind the on-going estates review, on which the Executive plans to consult shortly.

The position of the Scottish Executive is very clear. It was described by the previous First Minister, Donald Dewar, when he said:  "The evidence is that the private sector can deliver prison services competently and competitively, and I have no problem in principle with that". That was the position then and it is the position now. The purpose of the estates review is to come to a clear, transparent, open-minded decision about how, over the next 10 to 15 years, we put in place a prison service that serves Scotland.

I can, of course, confirm that. The opening or building of a new prison is subject to the full planning process. A result of that—and of the fact that that is an unusual and particularly complex project—is that the process may be long and extended. It is quite proper that consideration is given to the possibilities while we await the final figures in the estates review—and what those figures might tell us—and the outcome of the public consultation.

I am aware of the report of the chief inspector of prisons, and that 12 examples of good practice were drawn from Kilmarnock prison. In his report, the chief inspector pointed out that the examples of good practice tended to be drawn from those prisons where there had been a recent full inspection. In this case, those included Kilmarnock and Cornton Vale. Mr Gallie's later point echoes the comments of Mr Fairweather, who stated: "I have always said that there are good things at Kilmarnock, just as there are good things in the public sector. Both need to learn from those examples."—[ Official Report , Justice 1 Committee , 11 September 2001; c 2639.] That is a good example of the sort of open-mindedness that sets dogma to one side. I hope that we will bring that to bear in the important debate that we will require once the options stemming from the estates review are before us.

The Scottish Prison Service has received £17 million in end-year flexibility funding in 2001-02. That funding has been allocated to the capital building programme, which includes investment in prisoner accommodation.

I do not disagree with Lord James's key point—that slopping out is a practice that all members want to be ended as soon as is practically possible. In 1990 only 40 per cent of Scotland's prisoners had access to night sanitation. That figure has risen to 70 per cent and the target for this financial year is 76 per cent. The key opportunity to end slopping out completely will come following the publication of the estates review. That is not to say that the Prison Service is not working day in, day out to improve the situation. The figures that I have cited amply demonstrate that.

I am not sure what Mr Neil's question was, but I think that he asked about the impact on morale of the uncertainty surrounding the estates review. It is to be regretted that the estates review process has taken rather longer than was hoped. The reason for that is straightforward. It is the responsibility not of Scottish Prison Service management but, as has been made clear before, of the Minister for Justice. He has insisted that the figures relating to estates review options are  rigorously audited by an independent financial organisation. That has led to a delay. However, when we come to take a decision on the estates review, it will be based on proper and rigorously assessed figures. Those steps are necessary if we are to have an outcome that will build morale in the service, as staff will know what is going to happen over the next 10 to 15 years. We must get the review right, not get it quickly.

Patients do not require to be registered before receiving methadone treatment. However, the Scottish drug misuse database provides a profile of new problem drug users seen by services. For the year ended March 2001, 2,307 of those were reported to be using prescribed methadone.

It is interesting to note that methadone treatment is one of the few treatments about which we have proper research evidence. The research shows how beneficial that treatment is in stabilising people's lives and allowing them to contemplate the possibility of rehabilitation. Over recent years, methadone treatment has benefited many thousands of people and it continues to do so. Different treatments will work for different people who are drug-dependent at different times of their lives. We are in favour of providing a range of treatments. As Mary Scanlon said, that means that an individual can find the support that they need. For the first time ever, because of our current investment and the expansion of drug treatment services, that aspiration has some likelihood of becoming a reality. I expect to see it happen over the next couple of years.

In recent years, progress has been made to get GPs to participate in methadone-prescribing programmes. In Lanarkshire, the percentage of GPs who are involved in such programmes has risen from somewhere in the low 20 per cents to nearer 80 per cent, but even in Lanarkshire there are gaps. We are working hard to ensure that training is available for GPs, so that they feel confident about getting involved in such programmes. We believe that the best way of  delivering methadone treatment is through shared-care arrangements, with GPs at the heart. Who is better placed than GPs to ensure the full and proper management of the health needs of the drug user, including substitute prescribing? We will encourage and invest in that to ensure an expansion of those services.

A report on the work of the ministerial group on women's offending, including the time out proposal, will be published shortly after the group completes its work in December.

That is the purpose of the time out proposal developed by the ministerial group. What is proposed is a centre that provides a safe environment for women who are serving community sentences, so that there is a greater chance of compliance with those sentences and a greater degree of confidence from sentencers in conferring community service sentences on women. There are many women for whom Cornton Vale is not the most appropriate sanction.

Phil Gallie is absolutely right. The fact that some 50 per cent of the women who pass through Cornton Vale in a year are there as a result of defaulting on fines for crimes for which custody is not the consistent and accepted sanction is the reason that more alternatives must be provided. Those women are currently being placed inappropriately, according to the logic that Phil Gallie espouses.

There is some difference between what is often referred to as a halfway house and what, in my previous answers, I have called a time out centre. Time out centres support a community sentence, whereas halfway houses are more often seen as prisons in the community. The proposal that we developed is the one that the ministerial group felt had the greatest likelihood of having the biggest impact on numbers in Cornton Vale. I have put my clout, such as it is, behind the ministerial group by chairing it and pressing for the proposal to move forward. I hope that, some time next year, the proposal will turn into a reality and that, soon after that, it will have an impact on numbers in the prison.

Lyndsay McIntosh makes a fair point. In Sweden, public opinion was with the Government when it moved towards a complete ban on smacking. The consultation that we have undertaken shows that 77 per cent of those who responded are completely behind us in moving towards the partial ban that we have outlined in the proposals. I would therefore expect Lyndsay McIntosh to welcome them.

Will the member give way?

If I understand Lord James's point, I think that he feels that the matter should be left alone. That puzzles me, because when the Parliament debated the matter previously, the Tories moved an amendment that called "upon the Scottish Executive to clarify the definition of reasonable chastisement so that both parents and children are sure of their rights within the law." What has happened in the meantime to ensure that parents and children are sure of their rights within the law?

rose—

Will the member give way?

My point is simple. All the proposals will require legislation. An indication of the legislative vehicle that we intend to use has been given. We will debate the full legislative proposals when they are introduced. Is Mr Russell saying that he would have preferred not to have any opportunity to discuss the proposals today, and that he would prefer to have waited for the legislative vehicle? That seems quite contradictory to the argument that he is making.

Last week, we announced the results of our consultation on the physical punishment of children. That announcement generated a good deal of comment, reinforcing the importance of the subject and justifying the devotion of parliamentary time to it today. On the basis of the incorporation of the European convention on human rights into our domestic law, any punishment that constitutes "inhuman or degrading treatment" can never now be acceptable under Scots law. Our proposals seek to clarify what that means in practice. Let me begin with a crucial piece of clarification that has, I fear, been missed by some commentators. We are not proposing to ban smacking. Our consultation paper did not propose a ban, the responses did not show a majority opinion in favour of a ban and our announcement confirmed that position. Our intention is to clarify the law and to set clearer guidelines for the courts and parents. In particular, we do not think that parents should have a right to hit very young children, to hit children with implements, to shake them or to strike them on the head. The right to administer reasonable physical punishment to children who are old enough to understand what is happening will remain. Parents who use physical punishment as part of a principled and caring system of family discipline have nothing to fear from our proposals. That right will extend to anybody who has control of a child in the child's own home. Parents will be free to set the ground rules for discipline in the home, just as they are at present. Most of us face difficult, daunting and even scary times in our lives. For those of us who have children, parenting often seems to be the single most scary and difficult role that we undertake. The decisions that we have to take from day to day, particularly in respect of very young children, can have far-reaching effects. We are often told that children need role models. They need to learn from their role models that  violence is not the right way to get other people to do what they want. A balance must be struck between acceptable intervention by the state for the welfare of children, and the freedom of parents to use their own good judgement. That balance is not new in this country. It was established in the Children and Young Persons (Scotland) Act 1937. That act has stood the test of time and it makes it quite clear that cruelty towards or neglect of a child is an offence, but it does not interfere with a parent's right to administer reasonable chastisement. We are not proposing to change that. The only area in which we propose a complete ban is in respect of children up to and including the age of two. The reaction to that in some quarters has been extraordinary. I ask members to reflect for a moment on what is meant by punishment. Punishment is designed to signal disapproval of wrong actions by inflicting retribution on the person who has done wrong. It might, incidentally, also be designed to rehabilitate and deter, but its primary purpose is retribution. It is quite wrong to punish someone who can understand neither that they have done wrong, nor the relationship between the punishment and the wrongdoing.

I will give way.

I was actually giving way to—

Yes, I was giving way to Mr Rumbles.

I acknowledge that chastisement might be about rehabilitation or deterrence, and I will say more about chastisement in relation to danger in a moment. We are dealing with chastisement, the primary purpose of which is punishment. We do not punish adults who are incapable of understanding the connection between punishment and their  wrongdoing. The courts are able instead to make orders to ensure that the offender and society can be protected. There has been much talk of danger in relation to our proposals. However, if a two-year-old runs on to the road, or picks up a hot drink or opens a bottle of chemicals, their parent may take physical action to protect the child from the immediate danger—that is not punishment. The law is perfectly capable of making that distinction in exactly the same way as it makes that distinction with regard to a person of any age who needs to be saved from immediate danger. There is no question of our proposals endangering the safety of any child.

The primary reassurance that can be given is that any legislation following our proposals would require evil intent to be demonstrated. In the circumstances that Mr Henry describes that would clearly not be the case.

I must move on. The reason for banning the physical punishment of children under three is to signal that a line must be drawn somewhere. No one would want to hit a small baby. Everybody knows that babies can sometimes be incredibly difficult, but smacking them achieves nothing. Children reach an age at which they understand that some behaviour is acceptable to their parents, while other behaviour is not. Smacking as a last resort might be an effective sanction. We must accept that that age will vary, but the law must draw a line somewhere. We have opted for the age of three, but that could be debated further. Our remaining proposals will provide guidance to the courts as to how to decide whether punishment was reasonable, and clarity for parents and others who will administer punishment.

No. I do not accept the premise of Mr Ewing's question. The consultation on the proposals goes back to 1998 and was drawn very broadly. If the proposals are to become law, they will be subject to the full scrutiny of the legislative process. As proposed in that consultation paper, the courts would be required to take the following factors into account: the nature and context of the treatment; its duration and frequency; its physical and mental effects; and the sex, age and state of health of the child. Legislation would contain a list of punishments that would never be permitted. It would prohibit absolutely blows to the head, shaking and the use of implements. The response to our consultation paper showed majority support for banning the use of implements. The use of implements carries the clear risk of injury to a child—indeed that was the occasion of the case of A v the United Kingdom. Banning the use of all implements will create a clear guideline for parents and is in line with the recommendations of the Scottish Law Commission and the public opinion surveys that were quoted in our consultation paper. Finally, in accordance with an overwhelming response by people who are involved in child care, we will extend the ban on corporal punishment to all regulated child care. However, the ban will not cover baby-sitters or nannies who work in the family home, where parents will be able to agree with the carer what forms of discipline can be used. In the debate on the subject last year, members asked that special efforts be made to obtain the views of children. I am glad to reassure the Parliament that we have asked bodies such as local authorities to seek the views of children. We are especially grateful to bodies such as Clackmannanshire Council, which made great efforts to obtain the views of many hundreds of children and parents. We also commissioned research by Children In Scotland on the views of children. Overall, the weight of children's views was against smacking. That research has been placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre and on the Scottish Executive's internet site. We will seek to legislate at an early opportunity. Most of our proposals would be suitable for inclusion in the criminal justice bill that was announced by the First Minister on 5 September.  The Children (Scotland) Act 1995 makes it clear that the primary consideration in decisions about children is the welfare of the child. Our legislation will tighten the definition of reasonable chastisement and it will prohibit specific actions. The proposed changes should discourage casual or excessive use of physical punishment, or its use for inappropriate purposes. The proposed changes reflect the view of the great majority in Scotland, that parents should retain the right to smack their children in certain circumstances.

I am winding up. The proposals will also provide greater clarity for courts and parents as to the intention of the law but—most important—the proposals will send out a signal to Scotland's children that they are valued. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Executive's proposals, following on from an extensive consultation process, to clarify the law on physical punishment of children.

It is pleasing to note that, despite our disagreements on the most appropriate form of jurisdiction, there is nonetheless overwhelming support in all quarters of the Parliament for the concept and the reality of a permanent international criminal court. When the target date of July 2002—the fourth anniversary of the promulgation of the statute—was first mooted for achievement of the 60 ratifications necessary to establish the ICC, cynics said that that was unrealistic. I am glad that, in this case, the cynics might be proved wrong and that we will have played our part in that today. The debate began with Christine Grahame's appropriate and respectful reference to the acts of terror perpetrated earlier this week. Although it has been made clear that the bill does not address terrorism, it is right that the debate should end in a similar vein. The truth is that there is a link between our business today and the atrocities in New York and Washington. Brian Fitzpatrick pointed out that link. Yesterday, our Presiding Officer said: "we seemed determined to create a more civilised global society in the 21st century."—[ Official Report , 12 September 2001; c 2407.] We are so determined. The internationalisation of the rule of law at the heart of the bill is a manifestation of that determination. Like Christine Grahame, I hope that the USA, which has signed the treaty, will also ratify it in due course. Yesterday, our First Minister said: "let us remember quietly and proudly the values that the perpetrators of yesterday's atrocities can never overcome."— [ Official Report , 12 September 2001; c 2410-11.]  The rule of law—justice—was one of those values. The combination of many domestic jurisdictions in the structure of an international criminal court and the extension of the cover of responsibility under the law to most of the world and to the most extreme circumstances of war and tyranny are marks of progress that terror might delay but cannot halt. Our small contribution to that has been delayed by 18 hours; it should be delayed no longer. I ask members to support the bill.

Members of the Justice 2 Committee will recall that, during our stage 2 discussion of the bill on 26 June, I agreed to reconsider the provisions in section 12(4). Having reflected on the matter, I am now persuaded that the most suitable course of action—and that which is most consistent with domestic procedure—is to remove the provisions in section 12(4) that refer to consent being given by an appropriate person to questioning on behalf of another person. The effect of amendment 43 is that only the person to be questioned can give consent. I have also given consideration to the amendment 47, in the name of Christine Grahame. Although I sympathise with its intentions, I am not inclined to agree in this instance that it represents the best way forward. Our objectives are twofold: to fulfil our obligations to provide assistance to the ICC; and to reflect as far as is practicable similar domestic arrangements, where such arrangements exist. In that respect, what amendment 43 proposes does not differ significantly from what takes place daily in Scotland. For example, any suspect may be advised that they are to be questioned, but that they are not bound to answer. Furthermore, if it is thought that questioning by the police has been carried out in an unfair manner, it is highly likely that it will not be admissible in court in evidence thereafter. The same will apply to questioning undertaken at the behest of the ICC and will be covered by its regulations on admissibility. For example, article 69 of the Rome statute states: "Evidence obtained by means of a violation of this Statute or internationally recognised human rights shall not be admissible". Attempting to define exactly the circumstances in which a person can give consent to questioning not only is unnecessary for the reasons I have just outlined, but might be unworkable in practice. The High Court has consistently declined to set out exactly when a person is considered incapable. Each case must be considered on its merits. Any attempt to provide a fixed definition to be applied in all circumstances could have the unintentional effect of obstructing our obligation to provide assistance to the ICC. It is worth pointing out what usually happens in Scotland—under this bill or any other similar domestic circumstances—if the police wish to question an individual who is thought, for example, to have a mental disorder. The relevant details are to be found in the current Scottish appropriate  adult scheme, which was introduced in June 1998 by the then Scottish Office. That code of practice, which is based on a multi-agency, non-statutory model, gives comprehensive guidance on such matters, and I believe that it accounts for the legitimate concerns that were raised by the Justice 2 Committee during its stage 2 consideration. For instance, the guidance specifies that if the officer in charge of the investigation detects signs of mental disorder in the interviewee, he or she must arrange for a medical examination to establish whether an interview can take place. If the interview does proceed, an appropriate adult, as defined by the code, is to be present to ensure, among other things, that the interviewee understands the questions being put to him or her and the implications of their answers. As a result, I am satisfied that if members accept amendment 43, section 12 will allow us both to fulfil our obligations under the Rome statute and to retain consistency with current domestic procedure and—given the key issue in this regard—that of admissibility of evidence before the competent court. I move amendment 43.

I have nothing further to add.  Amendment 43 agreed to.  [Amendment 47 not moved.]

We are indeed a modern Executive. The matter is generally under consideration for possible inclusion in future legislation. However, some aspects about the most suitable way to make the required provision have still to be worked out. As a result, it would not be desirable to use the bill as a vehicle to pre-empt what may or may not come along after due consideration. Any legislation that might be introduced on this issue is likely to be all-embracing and cover all appropriate situations where signatures are required by statute and common law. Although I recognise Lord James's modernity, I ask him to withdraw amendment 3.

Amendment 42 concerns another matter to which I undertook to give further consideration following the stage 2 debate. Having done so, I believe that the amendment would maintain consistency with the current procedures in domestic law. We are therefore happy to accept amendment 42.

Amendment 44 is a technical amendment. The purpose of section 24 is to disapply any domestic provisions that could affect the sentence calculation of ICC prisoners who are accepted to serve their sentences in Scotland. The ICC alone will determine the length of sentences of prisoners whom it convicts. As chapter 1 of part III of the Crime and Punishment (Scotland) Act 1997 has been repealed, it seems appropriate to remove reference to it from the bill. That is what the amendment does. I move amendment 44.

That is my understanding. Someone who served an ICC-imposed sentence in Scotland would be likely to face deportation on release from that sentence. Indeed, it is difficult to foresee circumstances in which they would not.  Amendment 44 agreed to.

Like amendment 44, amendment 45 is a technical amendment. It is necessary to ensure that when an ICC prisoner is finally released by order of the ICC, he or she will not remain subject to any transfer directions and restriction directions that may have been ordered under the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984. I move amendment 45.

That argument is wrong—it undermines the ICC's credibility before it has been constructed. It has been pointed out that Scottish legal traditions are reflected consistently in the International Criminal Court (Scotland) Bill. The most important tradition is the principle that territorial jurisdiction is central to the prosecution of crimes in Scotland. In Scots law, criminal jurisdiction is based on the territorial principle. In the absence of legislation to the contrary, the jurisdiction of the Scottish criminal courts is limited to crimes that are committed in Scotland. That jurisdiction has been changed in a number of instances that lend argument to the Executive's position. Two statutes that extend jurisdiction of the Scottish courts to offences that are committed outwith Scotland are the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 and the Sex Offenders Act 1997, section 8 of which inserted section 16B into the 1995 act. That level of jurisdiction is contained in the International Criminal Court (Scotland) Bill. Perhaps more relevantly, universal jurisdiction as described by Christine Grahame is taken through the Geneva Conventions Act 1957 and section  134 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988, which provides for the prosecution of the offence of torture committed in the UK or elsewhere by a public official of any nationality. The key point is that in the two latter instances, universal jurisdiction was taken in UK law specifically because it was required by international agreement. That is not the situation in respect of the Rome statute. Many of Christine Grahame's examples refer to countries with a tradition of universal jurisdiction in their domestic law, which is why it has been carried through to their ratification of the Rome statute. The information is difficult to find, given that many countries have not yet ratified the statute. Switzerland, for example, was mentioned, but it has not ratified it. I understand that Australia and France will not take universal jurisdiction. Many of the 139 countries that have signed the statute have not yet ratified it and some have ratified it without domestic legislation prior to ratification. The situation is complex, but the principle is that countries stick to the principles of their own legal systems. We are not doing the minimum required by the statute, as Christine Grahame said. Our provisions are perfectly in tune with the principles and philosophy of the treaty, which attempts to build an international approach to dealing with instances where war crimes, for example, cannot be dealt with by domestic courts. Amendments 40 and 41 suggest that we turn our back on that consensus. Not only is such an approach impractical, it risks diverting us from the key business at hand, which is to establish and support the ICC. There are also practical considerations. If a suspected war criminal with whom there was no Scottish connection were simply on a fleeting visit—shopping in Princes Street perhaps—can it realistically be expected that sufficient information could be gathered against them to meet the time requirements that are an important safeguard in our legal system? It would be much better to arrest and extradite the suspect to a country where there is a connection, or indeed to the ICC itself.

If extradition were sought against the person, he would similarly be arrested and detained. Christine Grahame's concern that they would immediately hop on the nearest plane and leave would not apply.  There is the real risk that the encouragement of universal jurisdiction as the route for dealing with such issues would undermine the very institution we are seeking to establish. Christine Grahame's comments add some weight to that argument. It is not hard to see that if the ICC investigated an individual and decided not to take action against him but another country with perhaps no connection at all with the crime or the suspect subsequently decided that they would step in and prosecute, the credibility and robustness of the ICC would be undermined. There are good reasons of principle why we should not take universal jurisdiction, such as our wish to be consistent with our own traditions and the international consensus. There are also practical considerations, such as the difficulty of prosecuting within the stipulated time limits. For those reasons, we remain convinced that we should stick with the extended jurisdiction in the bill and resist the idea of universal jurisdiction. I invite Christine Grahame to withdraw amendment 40 and not move 41.

rose—

I did not intend to say that Christine Grahame wanted deliberately to undermine the ICC. As the bill has progressed, her commitment to its primary purpose has been manifest. My point is that the argument for universal jurisdiction runs the risk of leading inadvertently to the undermining of the credibility of the ICC. I did not intend to imply that she meant deliberately to undermine the ICC.

During stages 1 and 2, the Executive position was that universal jurisdiction is not the most appropriate approach. There are several key reasons why that is so, which are worth repeating.  We believe that the strongest guiding principle that should inform our approach to this matter is the will of the international community; the clear will of the international community in this respect is the Rome statute. A departure from the international consensus would surely constitute parochialism on our part. It is therefore important to focus on the Rome statute as our legislation moves through its final stage in the Scottish Parliament and particularly as we discuss amendments 40 and 41. After all, the main purpose of the bill is to ensure that Scotland and the United Kingdom are able to ratify the Rome statute on the international criminal court. The statute is a carefully drafted document that was finalised only after many years of debate and discussion, so it represents the clearest expression of the thinking of the international community on how we should tackle the gravest of crimes. It envisages an approach that encourages individual countries to live up to their own responsibilities in the prosecution of war crimes and other crimes that have been committed by their own citizens. The preamble to the statute says: "the International Criminal Court established under this Statute shall be complementary to national criminal jurisdictions". Therefore, national courts will retain primary jurisdiction. However, where individual countries are unable or unwilling genuinely to take action, perhaps for some of the reasons that Christine Grahame has outlined, where conflict has led to a collapse of the local judicial system, or where a dictatorial Government refuses to punish its own abuses, the statute envisages that the ICC will be established, as provided for in article 1, "to exercise its jurisdiction over persons for the most serious crimes of international concern". That contrasts clearly with an alternative approach, which the international community might have chosen to take, whereby ratifying countries would ensure that they had universal jurisdiction to deal with war criminals no matter where they were found or where the crimes occurred. Had that approach been taken, the need for the international criminal court itself would have been much less clear. That was explicitly not the consensus. Nowhere does the statute stipulate that individual countries should head down the path of prosecuting individuals who have no connection to them. Given the often enormously complex nature of the international conflicts that engender such situations, it is not difficult to see why that is the case.

Let me address the approaches that other countries have taken a little later in my speech. There were two alternative routes that the discussions on the Rome statute could have chosen to take. One was to promote the idea of universal jurisdiction in as many countries as possible to allow international crimes to be brought to justice and the alternative was to set up the international criminal court as the institution to bring such cases to justice. Setting up the court would not have been required if the alternative approach had been taken. The construction of the international criminal court in and of itself is clear evidence of the non-requirement for universal jurisdiction to be adopted, except in countries where that is the legal tradition, which is not the case in Scotland.

Members of all committees know the effort that lies behind the committees' work—I know that not from experience, but because members often point it out to me. No committee has a wider range than the Justice 1 Committee: the committee that was so good, we named it twice—or three times, or more. I am pleased that the Justice 1 Committee has  been rewarded by the widespread support today for the principle of its bill—that there should be no occasions when help is denied simply because the threat comes from someone who is not a spouse or cohabitant, or because the threat has not been repeated often enough. Christine Grahame is right: changes in the law will help—indeed, they are necessary—but they are not sufficient and must take their place in a wider range of practical assistance to those who are vulnerable. That is why we have a national strategy to address domestic abuse in Scotland and an action plan, which we are already implementing. That work has been developed by the national group to address domestic abuse in Scotland, which met earlier this month under the chairpersonship of Margaret Curran. That group will review legislation in this area and may advise on a more comprehensive amendment on modernisation of legislation. However, where we can see something that needs to be done, that is not a reason to wait. We have allocated £10 million for refuge development over the next three years. The first ten projects, which will provide more than 40 completely new refuge spaces and more than 20 improved spaces for women and children, have recently been approved. Those are measures of profound practicality and a significant investment of resources. I can assure members that our support for the bill is a commitment to make it practical legislation, which is used and useful for the purpose for which it is being developed. We are working to develop effective and affordable ways of getting advice to victims and of getting access to courts where necessary. Legislation is of no value if those who could benefit from its use cannot receive the advice that they need in order to benefit. We are debating principles this morning. On the broader issue of domestic violence, the principle is simple and straightforward: there is never, ever an excuse, nor should there ever be a loophole. This has been a short debate—perhaps not the best-attended debate—but a good morning's work for all that.

I am glad to give the Executive's support to the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Bill, which is an important bill in two ways. As the Justice 1 Committee convener said, it is the first bill to be promoted by a committee, but its greater importance lies in the fact that it will give better protection to people in Scotland who are at risk from violence and abuse, no matter what their relationship to the potential abuser is. Combating domestic abuse is an important aim and a key part of the Executive's programme, but  it is fair to say that it is driven by the Parliament as a whole. I am conscious that many of the measures that we have taken on domestic abuse had their origin in an important members' business debate early in the session. Today, we progress that agenda through the Justice 1 Committee's bill. Domestic abuse is a key factor in social exclusion. It has an unimaginably disruptive effect on people's everyday lives, so we must offer as much protection as possible under the law to its victims. In September, our family law white paper "Parents and Children" set out our proposals to reform the Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981, to which Alasdair Morgan referred. That act protects occupancy rights for spouses and cohabitants whose home is with the abuser and allows interdicts with powers of arrest. Our proposed changes are essential to keep the act up to date. The bill goes further than the 1981 act, as the protection that the bill provides does not depend on occupancy rights, which means that any victim of abuse can benefit, whether or not she or he lives with the abuser or has ever done so. I note in passing that the drafters of the bill have gone to great lengths to eliminate gender-based language. Although the great majority of victims of domestic violence in Scotland are women, men can also be victims. Nevertheless, it is a fact that in 92 per cent of recorded domestic abuse cases a woman is the victim of a male attacker. That was amply borne out in the evidence that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee heard last year. It is right that the bill is comprehensive. As I said in the debate on the proposal for the bill, we commend the work of the Justice 1 Committee—formerly the Justice and Home Affairs Committee—in considering a wide range of evidence and introducing the bill. I, too, single out the contribution of Maureen Macmillan as reporter to the committee and in many ways the originator of the bill. I also pay tribute to the constructive convenership of Mr Morgan and his predecessor, Roseanna Cunningham. To many, the distinctions between bills that are introduced by the Executive, by members and by committees may seem unimportant and an uninteresting aspect of parliamentary procedures, but members know well that a big gap exists between the resources that are available to the Executive and those that even the best-organised member can bring to a subject. The standing orders that allow committees to introduce bills are a most important and interesting innovation in the Parliament. The committees have developed their knowledge of, and experience in, particular interests. With the non-Executive bills unit, they now have the resources to give legislative effect to their policy proposals. It is no insult to the drafters  in that unit to say that we are scrutinising the drafting of the bill and that we may wish to lodge Executive amendments at stage 2. They are likely to be technical and designed to help achieve the purposes of the bill. We will consider them further over the recess. As members will appreciate, much legislation has financial and resource implications. As I said to the Justice 1 Committee on 19 June, the Parliament and the committee will have to bear it in mind when developing policies that have financial implications that our Scottish budget is finite. Resources that are committed to one area are denied to another. The financial memorandum that is attached to the bill estimates that if the take-up is between 2,000 and 5,000 interdicts a year, the cost will be between £800,000 and £2 million each year. That money will have to be found from the justice department's budget. I cannot predict the exact terms of the financial resolution that the Executive will lodge in due course, but I fully expect it to allow the bill to progress. Compliance with the European convention on human rights has provoked a little interest this week, so members will understand that we must consider carefully legislative competence. A virtue of the bill is that it has broad coverage. We must ensure that it is not so broad as to be oppressive and that it restricts liberty or private life only in proportion to the aim of protecting others. As with all other cases, the rights of the people involved must be balanced when the bill is used. We all agree on the objectives of the bill: to provide effective laws and to give all the people of Scotland the protection that they need from violence and abuse. We will do our best to find the means. We are delighted that the first committee bill should be so worth while. I pledge the Executive's support for the principles of the bill.

I am glad to have the opportunity today to discuss another aspect of the Scottish Executive's work that is aimed at protecting our communities. Managing the risk that offenders pose and safeguarding the public are about protecting our communities and are crucial in creating a safer Scotland—a Scotland in which our people feel  safer because they are safer. Community safety links all the initiatives that have been touched on this afternoon. It also underscores other work that is being done, which will interact with the proposals in the white paper. It is important that we remain aware that the work of improving community safety does not begin and end with our proposals for high-risk offenders—of whom, as Jim Wallace indicated, there is a relatively small number in any year—nor with the review of the Sex Offenders Act 1997. We also need to help people on the ground to act and act together to improve community safety. That is why police forces and local councils, with our support, have set up local community safety partnerships throughout Scotland—indeed, in all 32 local authority areas. Those partnerships involve the public, private and voluntary sectors working together in tackling crime. From the grass roots to the high tariffs, all measures must work towards the safety and security of our people. The debate has rightly focused on our new proposals for serious violent and sexual offenders, which we presented in our white paper that was published on 11 June. The proposals are comprehensive and innovative. One of the key innovations in the proposals is the new body that we propose to set up: the risk management authority. That is a new approach to assessing and managing risk. The RMA will exist to ensure that best practice is followed by every agency throughout Scotland. A number of speakers have made the point that a large range of agencies throughout Scotland have a role to play in managing and minimising risk. That is the case. No longer can we accept a situation in which pockets of excellence are isolated throughout the country. More to the point, and as Pauline McNeill made clear, no longer can we tolerate gaps in practice in the field. The RMA will have the role of spreading best practice throughout the agencies and throughout Scotland. The point has been made on various occasions that the risk management authority may feel that the agencies with which it is working or which it is advising have difficulty in delivering what is required of them because of problems with funding. The RMA will be able to advise and recommend to the Scottish Executive specific funding that might be required to be allocated to agencies with whom it works in order for it to deliver its responsibilities. The final decision on that funding will of course remain with Scottish Executive ministers. In discussing the risk management authority, I would like to reassure one or two members, including Roseanna Cunningham, who spoke about the status of the RMA, specifically about  the fact that it will be a non-departmental public body, that we considered very carefully the question of whether there was any other way in which to deliver our proposals effectively. The body of course has to be efficient and effective, and has to be independent. Believe me, following what the Minister for Finance and Local Government has announced on the matter, this is not a good time to argue for the setting-up of a new NDPB, unless it is the right thing to do. In the circumstances, we believe that that is the correct way to go. On funding, which of course is required for the RMA to work, we have budgeted £3 million for the set-up and initial running costs of the RMA in 2002-03, and £5 million in the following year, within the justice budget. The RMA will be able to provide advice and guidance whenever that is needed. When it comes to the highest-risk offenders, it will be required to ensure that the multi-agency risk management plans meet the best standards. In response to Phil Gallie, it is true that the decision on release will lie with the Parole Board, which indeed holds that function for other categories of prisoner. That will parallel the arrangements for mandatory and discretionary life prisoners, and we believe that to be the fairest approach: it guarantees the offender's rights to a regular review of his or her detention while using the Parole Board's expertise to ensure public safety. As is the case with life prisoners, either the Parole Board or Scottish ministers can recall an order-for-lifelong-restriction prisoner for breach of conditions. If the offender is recalled, the Parole Board will have to be again satisfied that he or she does not pose a high risk, before it will consider re-releasing the offender.

The two bodies will have different roles. The risk management authority's job is to ensure that the best possible assessment of potential risk can be made, and that the best advice can be given on the measures that may be required to manage that risk. It is right and proper that the judiciary decides whether that potential risk is an argument for a particular initial sentence—an order for lifelong restriction, or OLR, for example—and it is right that the Parole Board takes the final judgment on the balance between public safety and the level of risk, as assessed by the RMA. The role of the Parole Board is, I think, the right one. We are ensuring that the board's  role is underpinned by a much more rigorous, up-to-date assessment of risk. It is about making the quality of the Parole Board's decisions even better. It is worth remembering that the other main element of our proposals is a sentence—the OLR. It is important to remember that it is a sentence, and that it is lifelong; it is only when the punishment part of the sentence is served, and if risk has sufficiently diminished, that the offender will be released from prison. It is in the community where an important element of the proposals will be seen at work. The offender's risk management plan will have been drafted as soon as the offender starts his or her prison sentence, and it will travel with the offender into the community. Interventions that have been offered in prison, which are both vital and exemplary—I am thinking of those offered in Peterhead, as referred to by a number of speakers—can be continued and built upon. However, firm controls will be maintained and, should licence conditions be breached, the return to custody will be swift. Phil Gallie said that in a previous consultation on electronic monitoring only he had expressed support for it. As I have already indicated to him, the consultation on our recent pilot produced more positive results. This morning I announced that we would develop the use of electronic monitoring. Restriction of liberty orders will be rolled out as a community sentence and provision will be made for allowing the imposition of monitoring as a condition for a probation order or a drug treatment and testing order. It will also be possible to use electronic monitoring as a condition of release from custody on licence. That links in with the MacLean committee's recommendations on the use of electronic monitoring. All the measures that I have outlined require legislation. I assure members that that will be introduced at the earliest opportunity. I mean that genuinely. When we published the white paper, some press reports suggested that all violent sexual offenders would automatically be tagged. That is not what the white paper says. Tagging is one option, depending on specific risk factors. However, we plan to frame the provisions for electronic monitoring broadly so that they can encompass new developments, such as tracking the movements of an offender, should that become feasible in the future. Some speakers expressed concerns about the compliance of our proposals with the European convention on human rights. The human rights of the offender must, of course, be protected. That is why we are introducing checks and balances at every stage. We would never place before the Parliament legislation that we felt was not  compliant with the ECHR. Indeed, we are not permitted to do that, as members know. I assure the Parliament that we are content that these proposals fully satisfy human rights requirements. Concern has been expressed about the fact that the risk assessment will be able to include the facts of previous acquittals and allegations of criminality. However, presenting those facts is crucial to getting the most accurate picture of risk possible, which is in everyone's interests. The defence can challenge any part of the risk assessment that is brought before the court. That is one of the checks and balances to which I referred. When making a decision on sentencing, the sentencing judge will disregard any evidence that has been successfully challenged. I assure James Douglas-Hamilton that we will require any offender who is mentally disordered and may, therefore, pose a high risk during the assessment period to be assessed by means of an interim hospital order before the court makes a final disposal. That assessment will be made in hospital, in secure conditions. It will cover both the mental state of offenders and the risk that they pose, and may last for up to a year. The public needs protection from offenders who suffer from a mental disorder. Under our proposals it will be possible for such offenders to receive a hospital direction—and therefore any medical treatment that they need—but also to be made subject to an order for lifelong restriction. Once they have been treated, they will be transferred to prison to serve any remaining part of the punishment period. They will remain there until they are no longer high risk. Finally, I turn to today's Tory amendment. I am glad that the Conservatives were able to find the generosity to leave in the motion's welcome for the white paper. Indeed, the contributions to the debate of Phil Gallie and other Tory speakers were reasoned and constructive. However, in general, the Tory amendment is rather backward looking. It smacks of an attempt to rerun some of the arguments that Tories used during the recent general election to frighten the electorate. That certainly worked: the electorate was so frightened of the Tories that it left them firmly buried in fourth place in Scotland. The Crime and Punishment (Scotland) Act 1997 included some rushed provisions that were approved during the dog days of the previous Tory Government. By comparison—even Phil Gallie admitted this—the white paper that we are debating today is the result of rigorous and exhaustive work by the MacLean committee. It synthesises best practice from around the world with our criminal justice traditions. By setting punishment powers in open court, it ensures honesty in sentencing. Through the work of the  RMA and the Parole Board, the white paper offers the reassurance sought by the public that serious sexual and violent offenders will be dealt with justly and safely. I commend the white paper to the Parliament.

I repeat the Deputy First Minister's thanks to the Justice 2 Committee for its consideration of the bill and for the comments and conclusions that are contained in its report. Much criticism has been voiced about the timetable and the time that the committee had available for its consideration of the bill. It has been claimed that the bill was rushed through unnecessarily. However, I remind members that Jim Wallace sympathised with that point in his opening speech. It is ironic that such criticism was heard today from Roseanna Cunningham, who, during last year's debate on the legislative programme, was somewhat disparaging of the priority that had been given to the bill. The International Criminal Court (Scotland) Bill is the first bill to be considered by the new Justice 2 Committee, which was set up to try to expedite business. It is therefore not true to say that no measures have been taken to address the problems of timing. As many members have said, the bill is complex. It needed careful preparation and involves complicated cross-border provisions. Moreover, it followed the UK bill for good reasons.  The two bills together had to provide a watertight package throughout the UK and, in preparing the Scottish bill, we have been able to take account of relevant developments in the passage of the UK bill. I see nothing wrong in that, as this is legislation for the world—the world that we live in, not the one that Opposition members would like to see. I agree with Phil Gallie, if only because that gives me the chance to say how pleased I am to see him back here with us, where he belongs. As I said, we have some sympathy with the point about the tight timetable. Nevertheless, as many members have indicated, that is at least partly a consequence of the requirement for the UK to be among the first 60 nations to ratify the treaty. The Executive's desire for us to be among those first 60 nations comes not simply from our wish to express political willingness or to secure good public relations in playing our part in ratifying the treaty; the first 60 nations will form the assembly of state parties that will have a key role in shaping the structures and procedures of the new court. It is therefore more than important that the UK is among the first 60 nations to ratify the treaty. Pressure has been created by the fact that many countries are ratifying the treaty more quickly than was first anticipated. That is a welcome development, but it means that we must ensure that our ratification happens as quickly as possible. I am pleased to close this debate, as I spent many years, in my previous job, campaigning for the formation of a criminal court. In the course of that work, I saw the after-effects of war crimes and genocide—the continuing effects some 20 years after the crimes took place in Cambodia and the situation in Rwanda only a couple of months after a significant proportion of the population had been murdered and more had been displaced from the country. The poet Hugh MacDiarmid wrote of the tragedy of an unevolved people. Perhaps he had in mind something closer to home, but anyone who was in Kigali—a city emptied of its people—in late 1994 will recognise what he meant. The truth is that tyrants stalked such countries for 50 years after the Nuremburg and Tokyo trials, secure in the knowledge that they would never be held to account. Happily, for some of them that assumption proved to be wrong. Even in Cambodia, where Pol Pot escaped trial, the likes of Khieu Samphan eventually did not. Nevertheless, the difficulty and delay in setting up the specific tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia demonstrate powerfully the need for a standing court and properly codified procedures. We do not believe that the ICC will be some sort of panacea, as some members have said. It will not immediately put an end to war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. However,  it should be remembered that the Yugoslav and Rwandan tribunals have led to a former Bosnian Serb president handing herself in and a former Rwandan prime minister pleading guilty to genocide. We can be too cynical about the impact that the ICC can have, and Pauline McNeill is right to say that the establishment of a permanent court after 50 years of gestation will be a significant step in the right direction.

The key principle of any law is that it should apply equally to everyone. The infrastructures and codes of practice should be in place to ensure that anyone who is guilty of a war crime or genocide can be brought to justice. That is the purpose of our debate today. The central issue in the debate has been universal jurisdiction. Jim Wallace and other members have put forward the Executive's arguments, but I shall summarise them. There are three reasons for opposing universal jurisdiction, which bear repetition, because Margo MacDonald, for one, seems not to have heard them. The first is that we should not accept universal jurisdiction unless it is clearly the will of the international community, as expressed in the treaty, that we do so. We have recognised that the clear will of the international community is not to incorporate universal jurisdiction in the ICC.

The test of international consensus in this case has been the Rome statute. The treaty does not require universal jurisdiction, unlike previous treaties in which the position was different. The second argument against universal jurisdiction is the principle of territoriality in Scots law. Many members have spoken of the importance of maintaining the fundamental principles of Scots law in the bill, and territoriality is a fundamental principle of our law. The third argument concerns the practical difficulties of raising a prosecution in a case in which there are only tentative links to Scotland, and doing so  within the strict time limits that are stipulated in Scots legal procedure.

Nonetheless, the concept of residence, as interpreted by the courts, exists in other legislation—for example, in the Sex Offenders Act 1997 and the War Crimes Act 1991. There is no reason why that concept cannot be included in the bill.

Given the time constraints, I should move on. Of the three arguments, the most important is that which concerns international consensus. We should act according to, and reflect, that consensus. Reference has been made to evidence that was given to the committee that appeared to suggest that many other countries were accepting universal jurisdiction, but the situation is less than clear. An example that has been cited repeatedly is that of Canada, whereas, in fact, Canada has opted not for full universal jurisdiction, but for jurisdiction over persons who are present in Canada. I agree that that is different from what we propose, but nonetheless it is not universal jurisdiction. We know that other countries, such as France, will not accept universal jurisdiction and we understand that Australia will adopt the same position. Neither our legal traditions nor the obligations that are placed on us by our international agreements support the arguments for universal jurisdiction. It is wrong to say that the bill represents the minimum standard for compliance. The Rome statute does not require domestic legislation to take jurisdiction over war criminals and many countries will ratify the statute without passing substantive domestic legislation. In response to James Douglas-Hamilton and Phil Gallie, I point out that the combination of our domestic law and the ratification of the statute gives the reassurance that was sought. Our bill and the UK act together mean that there is no possible scenario in which the ICC would have jurisdiction over a British national or serviceman while the British courts did not. If serious allegations were made against British servicemen, the UK authorities would examine them. There is nothing new in that situation. I do not have time to deal with all the issues that were raised in today's debate. However, in the stage 2 debate in the committee, we will address  the concerns that have been expressed. The key principle of the debate today is that the Scottish Executive is fully committed to playing its part in bringing the ICC into being. That is a noble purpose. We believe that the International Criminal Court (Scotland) Bill will allow us to fulfil that commitment and that, along with the International Criminal Court Act 2001, it will enable us to be among the first 60 countries to ratify the Rome statute and will bring nearer the day that the ICC is established. I am pleased to note that, despite the concerns that have been raised today, the Justice 2 Committee's report recommends agreement with the general principles of the bill. I am happy to commend the bill to the Parliament this morning.

rose—

My intervention follows on from Scott Barrie's. I want to ask Lyndsay McIntosh—

Surely Lyndsay McIntosh has answered her own question in considering the evidence that was provided. Is there not a conflict between the desire to maintain the consistency and traditions of Scots law and the idea of moving towards universal jurisdiction, which is manifestly  not part of those traditions or the principles behind them?

We have funded record numbers of police officers in Scotland. Exactly how those officers are deployed is an operational matter for chief constables, but I know that those chief constables understand the benefits that can be obtained from visible policing. In addition, Her Majesty's chief inspector of constabulary will be undertaking a review of visible policing across Scotland.

Yes. It is certainly the case that our police forces should be policing in a way that meets the needs and aspirations of the communities that they serve. We set national performance targets for the police—Jim Wallace announced them relatively recently. Of course, it is easy to set national performance targets; the important thing is their delivery at a local level. I believe that police and communities have to engage locally to ensure that the people's priorities are met. The likeliest forums for that are the community safety partnerships, which allow crime prevention and community safety to be considered in their totality. That will allow issues such as closed-circuit television to be addressed. Of course, if specific concerns arise in Airdrie and Shotts, and Karen Whitefield wants to write to me, I would be happy to look into them.

The key piece of progress was that cognisance was taken of Grampian's historical position when the current financial year's police  funds were agreed. However, we continue to work with police forces and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland to examine how police funds should be distributed in future years. On visible policing in Grampian, I return to the point that I made: it is important that local policing meets local needs. That will raise different issues in urban situations and rural situations and I look to a review by the chief inspectors to give us advice on how visible policing can be made a possibility throughout Scotland.

I agree up to a point. Our communities want results from their policing. If Bill Aitken examines the recently released safer Scotland drugs campaign, he will see that covert intelligence-gathering police work has produced visible results. The first eight weeks of covert enforcement resulted in the arrest of 3,490 people for drug offences, the charging of 847 people on drug supply charges and the seizure of drugs worth £3.7 million. There is a debate to be had about the most effective way in which to deploy our police officers. That is what people want and we are delivering it.

We intend to publish in September an action plan for the Scottish Executive on preventing violence against women.

I agree with Elaine Smith that domestic abuse is a problem, but not the only problem, when it comes to violence against women. We are pursuing policies on other aspects of the issue—for example, we are committed to  legislating on those who give evidence in court in cases of rape and other sexual offences. A key part of our approach is the national group to address domestic abuse in Scotland, which will be chaired by Margaret Curran, the Deputy Minister for Social Justice. The first group meeting is next week. The group has an interesting remit, which is to oversee strategic developments in relation to violence against women. Domestic abuse is a central part of the remit, so the group will examine closely our legislative and funding strategies. That process will begin imminently; indeed, it will begin next week.

I agree that worrying evidence exists. Not long ago, a survey discovered worrying cultural attitudes, particularly among young men. We must address that issue soon. That is why we aim to support the work on that issue that the Zero Tolerance Trust is conducting.

We have a significant funding package for expanding the number of refuge places. Those funds will begin to play through and make a significant difference. Christine Grahame asked about ring-fencing funds that are disbursed through local government. Like many other issues, that question concerns the funding relationship between the Executive and local authorities. We will make it clear to local authorities that we expect the number of refuge places to be increased. The funding was calculated on the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities formula, so we are clear about the number of new places into which we expect it to translate.

I am pleased to be able to speak in the debate. I am sorry that I could not be here in November when Duncan McNeil's motion on compensation for asbestos disease sufferers was debated. I have constituents who are suffering from asbestos-related diseases, and my sympathy goes out to all those who suffer and to their families, as well as to those who have lost people close to them through asbestos-related diseases. It is impossible to know what to say to people who are in such a position; one can only give as much help and support as possible to the campaign that they are running. I am happy to agree with Des McNulty, that all those who were involved in securing the arrangement that is now in place—following the insolvency of Chester Street Insurance Holdings—are to be congratulated on their work. However, as Duncan McNeil said, that returns us to the latter part of the motion, which concerns the assistance that the Executive can give to prevent legal actions from being subject to delays in the courts. We must approach that issue in a way that does not interfere with the management of court business. We must leave to the courts the responsibility for deciding on the order of business and the application of procedure. Nonetheless, when we can take action we will do so. It cannot  be denied that there is scope for such cases reaching conclusions more quickly, which would be commensurate with the interests of justice. Many of the cases that we are discussing are not easy to resolve when they reach court. We must accept—as Des McNulty does—that employers have a right to defend against claims for compensation. The medical issues can also be complicated, and there is often more than one employer involved. Moreover, some claims relate to employment of 50 or more years ago and it is difficult to establish who was doing what for which employer at that time. Both sides must cope with those complexities, but it cannot be denied that the time that is taken to deal with such matters adds to the distress of sufferers. Nonetheless, the interests of sufferers and of employers alike require all reasonable steps to be taken to make the facts as clear as possible for the court. That should not, however, be taken as an excuse for prevarication; nor should it be used as an attempt to cause deliberate delay, such as would cause sufferers to give up on their claims. It would be even worse if the delay were to extend beyond the tragic death of some of the sufferers. The use of blanket denials by employers has been criticised as a cause of delay. It was criticised most recently in a petition from Frank Maguire, who is a solicitor advocate, and Harry McCluskey, of Clydeside Action on Asbestos, which was submitted to the Public Petitions Committee. That petition is—as Mrs Ewing said—being considered by the Justice 2 Committee. Lord Coulsfield's proposals for the reform of procedure in reparation actions, which I shall mention again in a moment, would result in less reliance on the written case and would put more emphasis on the disclosure of material issues such as medical reports and the value of the claim. In either event, in the case of a blanket denial, employers would leave themselves open to an application for a summary decree on the ground that a defence to the action has not been disclosed. I encourage pursuers to make best use of that remedy. I would also like appropriate use to be made by pursuers of interim and provisional awards of damages so that, at the very least, suitable arrangements for the care of sufferers can be made pending the determination of cases by the courts. Although the management of claims by courts is, as I said, a matter for the courts, there is no reason why those cases cannot be dealt with reasonably expeditiously. Indeed, the issue of how to process reparation cases has already been the subject of thorough consideration under the direction of Lord Coulsfield. Lord Coulsfield's proposals, which are at present under  consideration by the Court of Session's rules council, involve the courts taking a more active part in ensuring that time limits for case preparation are adhered to. The proposals also include a proposal to set dates for hearing cases much earlier in the proceedings than is done at the moment. The proposals also call for fuller disclosure of the position of defenders or employers, particularly with regard to the value that they would place on a claim, assuming that liability to pay compensation was not an issue. The point of that is to encourage parties to settle earlier, because over 90 per cent of cases ultimately settle without evidence being heard. The Executive has previously stated its support for the comprehensive package of procedural reform that is proposed by Lord Coulsfield and I do so again today. One of Lord Coulsfield's other recommendations is that pursuers' offers should be reintroduced. A pursuer's offer is an offer to settle a case for a specified sum which, if it is not accepted by the defender, could have significant consequences for the amount of legal expenses that are awarded against the defender if the court subsequently awards the pursuer the sum that was offered, or a higher sum. Those offers provide an important inducement to employers to settle claims and that recommendation also has our support. However, primary legislation is required to extend the rule-making powers of the Court of Session to enable the necessary procedure rules to be put in place. We will consider how that might best be achieved. The rules and administrative practices of the Court of Session, where most of the cases are heard, allow 13 weeks for the parties to state their case in written pleadings, and then 19 weeks to prepare for a proof or jury trial. As members will know, that 19-week period is a target that is agreed between the Lord President and ministers. Accordingly, the court should be ready to hear those cases after about 32 weeks, which I consider to be sufficient time for even the most complex issues to be properly addressed. That said, I am aware that most cases take longer than 32 weeks—often considerably longer—to reach a conclusion. That is usually because the court has been persuaded on the application of one of the parties that it is in the interests of justice to allow more time for case preparation. The reasons for that can be many, but the court must be alive to the need to weed out applications that are simply delaying tactics. In response to earlier representations that were made in previous debates—which have been referred to this evening—I say that the Executive is exploring with the Lord President what further action might be taken to expedite the cases, consistent with the recommendations of Lord  Coulsfield's report. That is further demonstration of our determination to act where we can. I ask Parliament to note the support that the Executive is already providing to improve arrangements for the management of claims by the court, while respecting the independence of our judiciary and the reliance that we place on it to uphold the interests of justice. We will continue in those efforts because there is no doubt that asbestos disease sufferers deserve justice.  Meeting closed at 17:04.

I take the opportunity to thank the members of the Justice 1 Committee and the Parliament for their careful consideration of the Convention Rights (Compliance) (Scotland) Bill. I agree with Gordon Jackson—what we have in front of us is a solid, workable piece of legislation that will continue to ensure that Scotland is a place in which human rights are respected and protected. We have debated the roles of Winston Churchill, through signing the United Kingdom up to the ECHR, and Westminster, through the Scotland Act 1998, which incorporates human rights into our legal system. That is the important thing, I say to Mr Gallie. It allows the principles that were signed up to in the 1950s to be exercised in Scottish courts and the Scottish legal system. It has not always been the most exciting legislating that we have done, but it is important. It is time to stake the Parliament's place in the history of human rights in Scotland. I commend the bill to the chamber.

Part 1 of the schedule to the bill makes provision for existing life prisoners. Amendment 31 proposes the insertion into that part of the schedule of a new part 1A, which will make transitional provision for existing life prisoners with a designated part that is fixed under section 2(2) of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993, before part 1 of the bill is brought into force. Amendment 31 provides that a designated part that is set in respect of an existing life prisoner before part 1 of the bill comes into force shall be treated as if it were a punishment part after part 1 comes into force. I move amendment 31.  Amendment 31 agreed to.

Amendment 32 extends the provision  of part 3 of the schedule to transferred under-18 lifers who have been given a certified part by the Home Secretary under section 28(4) of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997. The effect of the amendment is to require such prisoners to be given a hearing to have a punishment part set. Amendment 34 provides for a copy of any certificate that has been issued under section 28(4) of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 to be produced to the court when the part is being set. Amendment 34 is consequential on amendment 32. I move amendment 32.  Amendment 32 agreed to.  [Amendments 33 to 37, 11, 12, 38, 13 and 39 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to.]

Mercifully, amendment 40 is a purely technical amendment to the long title of the bill. It reflects an amendment at stage 2, which introduced the power to make it an offence under the rules that ministers provide for the Parole Board for Scotland for a person to fail to attend or to produce documents for a board hearing, if cited to do so. I move amendment 40.

Mr Gallie is rather on the margins because he refers to one of the principles—perhaps more than one of the principles—that underlie the bill. He refers to the key principle that we ensure that our jurisdiction is compliant with the ECHR. Mr Gallie has lost the debate on a number of occasions, most notably at stage 1 when the bill's principles were debated. Amendment 40 will ensure that we can take forward the stage 2 amendments to ensure that the function of the Parole Board is ECHR-compliant and that the board does the proper job of assessing the risk to the public. That is the role that we have given the Parole Board through the changes that we have considered.

We have debated that point on a number of occasions. There were debates at stages 1 and 2 and Mr Gallie lost the argument. He is about to lose the argument at stage 3. Mr Gallie must accept that.

As Mr Matheson has explained, his amendments 22 and 23 would amend section 12(2)(d), so that modification in a remedial order of any instrument or document that was not an enactment or prerogative instrument could be carried out only if it was an "instrument or document relating to the exercise or purported exercise of functions by the Scottish Ministers". Mr Matheson lodged a similar amendment at stage 2, and he is quite right to say that, at that time, he asked me for an example of particular instruments or documents that we had in mind that would fit in the category of being neither enactments nor prerogative instruments, but which would be likely to need amendment by way of the remedial order power.  I fear that Mr Matheson is, again, correct to say that I could not provide an example. My position was that we needed to be flexible, because we were unsure what the future could bring. It is difficult to predict exactly what amendments may need to be made to our law in future as ECHR case law develops before the domestic courts. I confess, further, that I find myself still unable to give an example. In recognition of the points that have been raised by Mr Matheson, in all humility and to show our disinterest in catch-all phrases, I am happy to accept amendments 22 and 23.

Amendments 30 and 39 propose transitional provisions to be made in consequence of amendments that were agreed to during stage 2 to alter the Parole Board's system of review of life prisoners in the light of the judgment in Oldham v UK. Amendment 30 provides that existing life prisoners who have been released before the bill comes into force and subsequently recalled, or who have been recalled and reviewed, but whom the Parole Board has declined to release, will have a date set for the next hearing by the Parole Board "as soon as reasonably practicable". That date will be no more than two years from the Parole Board's previous consideration of the case, or two years from the date of recall, whichever is the later. Amendment 39 has the same effect for existing transferred life prisoners. I move amendment 30.  Amendment 30 agreed to.

Amendments 4, 5 and 6 are essentially technical changes that will ensure that similar rules about client contributions apply where the Scottish Legal Aid Board employs solicitors to provide criminal legal assistance in individual cases, and where the plans of Scottish ministers and SLAB to pilot different delivery methods for legal services are being delivered. Section 26(2) of the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986 empowers SLAB to employ solicitors to assist local organisations in its functions of giving advice, promoting contacts with solicitors and giving oral advice to applicants. Scottish ministers will commence that section, along with sections 27 and 28 of the 1986 act, to allow the Scottish Legal Aid Board to run a series of pilot projects throughout Scotland. Indeed, the board has sought from outside bodies proposals for pilot schemes that will meet those aims. Although I have not yet seen any of the proposals, they are expected to be innovative schemes that are likely to come from both advice-giving organisations and partnerships that involve such organisations, as well as firms of solicitors and local authorities. The first pilots will commence as soon as the necessary arrangements can be made. It is possible that SLAB solicitors who are involved in such pilots might be asked to give advice to a client on a particular problem. However, present drafting would allow clients' contributions to be collected only where advice was being provided in relation to criminal matters. That was not the intention and the amendments serve to ensure that appropriate contributions may be collected where advice and assistance on civil matters are given. There is no question of any client having to pay a larger contribution than would be the case where assistance was being provided by a private solicitor. The provision that will be made by way of section 9(2)(b) of the bill makes that clear. Amendments 4, 5 and 6 will ensure that solicitors who are employed by SLAB under sections 26 to 28 of the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986 can provide both criminal and civil advice and assistance, as necessary. We are keen that  the pilots do not meet any obstacles when they are trying out various options and we therefore commend the amendments to members. I move amendment 4.  Amendment 4 agreed to.  [Amendments 5 and 6 moved—[Iain Gray]—and agreed to.]

The amendments in the group all relate to an issue that Gordon Jackson raised at stage 2. He asked what provision there was for prisoners who required to have a punishment part set, but who are incapable of properly instructing a solicitor because of mental illness. We have considered carefully the point that Mr Jackson raised. Amendments 20, 24, 25, 27, 33 and 36 will have the effect that when a life prisoner's case comes before the court for the setting of a punishment part, and the court is satisfied that the life prisoner—by reason of mental disorder or inability to communicate because of physical disability, which cannot be made good by human or mechanical aid—is unable to provide instructions to his solicitor, the court will not set a punishment part. The prisoner will continue to be detained until such time as he becomes well enough to instruct a solicitor. Such prisoners are unlikely to be able to be returned to prison, but as soon as they are considered capable of instructing legal representation, their case will be referred back to the High Court for a punishment part to be set. If such a life prisoner was never considered capable of instructing legal representation, and so could not have a punishment part set, but was deemed to be no longer detainable on mental health grounds, consideration could be given at that point to release on licence on compassionate grounds. I hope that the amendments address the issue that Gordon Jackson raised. I move amendment 20.

The prisoner will be called to the High Court and it will be for the court to make the decision. It will use the same means, including background reports and psychiatric reports, as it would do if it were, for example, making a decision about whether someone was fit to plead: it would use the means that it wanted to use. The decision will be based on the wording in amendment 20,  but it will be taken in the High Court.  Amendment 20 agreed to.  [Amendments 21, 41 and 3 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to.]

Amendment 2 re-enacts the whole of section 10(1) of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993 to make the provision easier to read. I fear that it does not make it easy to read, but it does make it easier. The only further changes that amendment 2 makes to section 3 are the addition of subsections (1)(b) and (1)(c), which relate to transfers of life prisoners from the Isle of Man and Northern Ireland, and the insertion of section 3(1A), which provides a power for ministers by order to specify the relevant provisions in relation to Northern Ireland. I will take a moment to explain why the Executive has taken that approach. At present, in Northern Ireland, the release of a life prisoner is a matter for the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland. There is no system of judicial tariffs in relation to discretionary lifers and under-18 murderers as there is in Scotland. However, the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland is in the process of changing the law in Northern Ireland to provide that, in future, discretionary lifers, under-18 murderers and adult mandatory life prisoners are given a judicial tariff that is fixed in open court. It is expected that the order making those changes—the draft Life Sentences (Northern Ireland) Order 2001—will be made soon. The changes to the law in Northern Ireland mean that, in future, Scottish ministers will be in a position to accept restricted or unrestricted transfers from Northern Ireland on the following basis. Restricted transfer prisoners with a judicial tariff set in open court will remain subject to Northern Ireland law and will retain the judicial tariff that was set there. Unrestricted transfer prisoners with a judicial tariff set in open court in Northern Ireland will have that tariff treated as if it were a punishment part set by a Scottish court, unless it is a whole-life tariff. Amendment 2 deals in the same way with discretionary life detainees from the Isle of Man. The new section 10A(3) of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993, which is inserted by section 3(1A) currently applies only to prisoners who are released on compassionate grounds in England and Wales. The effect of that is that, on transfer to Scotland, the offender will have a punishment part set by the High Court if he is recalled to custody and the Parole Board does not order his immediate release. Amendment 3 extends the provision to prisoners who are released on compassionate grounds in Northern Ireland. During stage 2, I advised the Justice 1 Committee that provision would be  required to bring such prisoners into the new system, but that it would be held back until stage 3, in the hope that the draft Life Sentences (Northern Ireland) Order 2001 would have been made. Unfortunately, that has not happened yet, so the exact provisions of the legislation, which the bill should specify, are not yet settled. Amendments 2 and 3 give the Scottish ministers a power to identify the relevant provisions of Northern Ireland legislation by subordinate legislation when that is possible. Amendment 41 inserts the relevant Isle of Man and Northern Ireland provisions into section 10(5) of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993, which provides that a transferred lifer who is serving two or more life sentences will not be released until he has served the punishment part of both sentences. Amendment 21 is technical. I move amendment 2.

We have attempted to cover all the jurisdictions for which different arrangements must be made. I hope that we have achieved that aim. Some aspects of the position in the Isle of Man and Northern Ireland have to be dealt with. We intend to cover all the jurisdictions in the UK so that we can make arrangements for transfer of prisoners. I confess that I cannot answer Mr Gallie's question about the Channel Islands, but I am happy to look into that and provide reassurance.  Amendment 2 agreed to.

Amendments 14 and 15 are required following amendments that were made at stage 2 to alter the Parole Board's system of review of life prisoners in the light of the judgment in Oldham v UK. The amendments bring into the new system existing life prisoners who have been released under the Prisons (Scotland) Act 1989 and recalled to prison. The 1989 act continues to apply to life prisoners who were sentenced before the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993 came into force on 1 October 1993. Amendments 14 and 15 provide that a life prisoner released under the provisions of the 1989 act and subsequently recalled to prison will fall within the new provisions and, if not released by the Parole Board, will have the date of his next  review set not later than two years from the previous review. Amendment 15 also makes provision to remove the right of a life prisoner recalled to prison under section 28 of the Prisons (Scotland) Act 1989, or section 17 of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993, to refer his case to the Parole Board once his case has been considered by the board. That brings the application of the new system to such life prisoners into line with its application to other life prisoners. I move amendment 14.  Amendment 14 agreed to.  [Amendment 15 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to.]

An evaluation of the pilot restriction of liberty orders schemes was carried out by Professor David Smith and David Lobley of Lancaster University. The evaluation report was published in July 2000.

I am happy to acknowledge Karen Whitefield's interest in the pilot study of restriction of liberty orders. She will probably agree that the evaluation shows that the experience has been fairly positive, as 72 per cent of the orders were successfully completed. The monitoring company that provides the service to Hamilton sheriff court faxes copies of orders to the police liaison officer who is based in Hamilton. If Karen Whitefield has evidence of a local problem with the dissemination of that information within the police force, she should write to me with the details and I will be happy to look into the matter. We are always trying to improve the operation of this kind of disposal.

Mr Gallie will not be surprised to hear that I am significantly more interested in our own consultation process. We are examining the responses to that. Decisions and announcements have still to be made, but he will not be surprised to hear that the results of our consultation seem  rather better than those of the Tory consultation.

Mr Matheson makes a fair point, but he fails to acknowledge that I was saying not that the issue did not need to be addressed, but that perhaps resources in the Crown Office and the Procurator Fiscal Service were not the problem, and that therefore we needed a better answer that might take more than one hour and a quarter to find.

It is quite astonishing for the Executive to be accused of putting its head in the sand, simply because it is giving one of the committees of this Parliament its proper place. If we did not do that, we would—quite properly—be criticised. Acknowledging that the Justice 2 Committee is investigating the issues that we have debated this morning does not mean that nothing can happen in the meantime. I have pointed to the increases in staffing and resources for the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. We are also investing in the witness support scheme and victim liaison offices. That is central, because—as can be seen from the title of the consultation paper that we published on the sexual evidence (Scotland) bill—we must redress the balance in our justice system between offender and victim. That is proper, and we are moving forward with it. We are looking not just at human resources, but at the technological resources that we can deploy in our justice system to improve the way in which it works and the way in which different parts of the justice system communicate with each other. All those things can happen, and will happen, without pre-empting the results of the Justice 2 Committee inquiry.

That matter has been raised before. It is unacceptable that the police cannot be contacted by e-mail. That is why we are investing in and rolling out the Scottish police management information network, which will ensure that every  police officer has an e-mail address. Christine Grahame quoted at some length from evidence that was given to the justice committees and I acknowledge that that evidence was given in relation to the budget process, rather than the Justice 2 Committee inquiry. Of course, that information is in the public domain and Christine Grahame is at liberty to quote from it, but the issue, first and foremost, is in the domain of the justice committees and their decision, having heard the evidence, was to take the issue seriously enough for the Justice 2 Committee to launch an inquiry, which it believes will last for up to a year. Nonetheless, I repeat that more resources are being invested. In particular, more staff are being taken on in the Procurator Fiscal Service. In 1997, 250 lawyers were employed in the service. Today, there are 369 and 20 more posts are being filled. I am genuinely puzzled by Christine Grahame's point that the new staff will be new to the job. I cannot conceive how we could meet the demand, which has been made repeatedly this morning, to increase staffing in the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service without taking on new staff who will, in essence, be new to the job.

The Justice 2 Committee will probably examine, and take evidence on, the structure of the service. Mr Gallie made a similar point about police numbers. Even when he acknowledges that we have record numbers of police officers, he criticises us because they are recruits and we are training them. How we could increase the number of police officers without recruiting new recruits and training them is inconceivable to me. I am glad that Mr Gallie acknowledged this morning—albeit from a seated position—that we have record numbers of police officers. I cannot help feeling anxious that he may fail to do that in other circumstances in the coming two weeks, but I hope that I am wrong. Phil Gallie talked about drug driving, which I want to address because it is a serious issue. For clarity's sake, driving under the influence of drugs is illegal, although the legal position is reserved to Westminster. The problem with drug driving, as Mr Gallie probably knows, is the lack of a reliable roadside test, but we are investing in a pilot of a potential roadside test so that we can treat this crime with the seriousness that it deserves. That is the most important thing. Mr Gallie also made the point that he often makes about sentencing meaning what it says. I was surprised that he talked about that in the  context of the forthcoming debate on the Convention Rights (Compliance) (Scotland) Bill. Mr Gallie acknowledged in previous debates that the bill will introduce punishment parts that the judiciary will set, which are, in essence, sentences that mean what they say. However, he repeated this morning that the Conservatives would continue to oppose the bill. Richard Lochhead spoke, as he has done before, of the north-east's potential as a site for a pilot drug court. We have discussed the reasons for Glasgow being our first-line pilot, but I reassure Mr Lochhead that I was with the drugs action team in Aberdeen earlier this week and that we discussed at some length the possibilities for using Aberdeen for a further pilot. That is not to say that we will be able to use it, but Mr Lochhead can be assured that the arguments were put at some length in Aberdeen. Gordon Jackson made what was perhaps the most important point of a short debate when he said that we should not, and cannot, be complacent about our prosecution service and the operation of our courts. If we are serious about finding answers to make improvements, those answers are likely to be complex. I will give two quick examples. Members have talked about cases that are marked for no proceedings on a time-expiry basis. Most cases that fail on that basis stem from the problem of late reporting of case to the procurator fiscal and the overwhelming majority of such cases are reported by agencies other than the police or the Executive. We must address that issue, which does not relate to staffing or resources in the Procurator Fiscal Service. Members have mentioned cases that are lost through delays. Such cases form a small proportion of the cases in which challenges have been made. That delay follows a change in the law. We must address that in different ways. The Scottish criminal justice system works with the most demanding time scales of any criminal justice system in Europe and perhaps the world. It is a tribute to the effectiveness of the system that we meet those time scales in all but a small minority of cases. The Executive's amendment is neither hand-washing nor complacent. It is simply good sense on a serious matter.

Perhaps Nora Radcliffe will note that the Scottish Police Federation was at the front of the queue to congratulate us on the increase in the number of police officers. Although it went on to criticise the way in which those officers are deployed, it welcomed the record number of police officers in Scotland, a fact that is ignored by the SNP and the Conservatives.

I admit that, when I first saw the SNP's choice of topic for today's debate, I was a little surprised because, as Roseanna Cunningham admitted, the last time that we debated issues relating to justice, she complained bitterly of the "Groundhog Day"  feeling. Of course, one of the themes of that movie was that, by changing slightly the way in which one approaches the recurring day, one will eventually move forward into the next day. I see that the SNP has entered into that spirit as today's debate features a change of emphasis. However, many of the criticisms that Ms Cunningham has made today were made in previous debates. Her speech did not say anything particularly different, so we are unlikely to break through into the new tomorrow. Nonetheless, we are happy to take the opportunity to debate our justice system for the same reason as we were happy to do so before. Working to make Scotland a place where people are safer and feel safer is a priority for us. To deliver that priority, we have to build public confidence in the justice system. The public view the system of justice as a whole and judge it based on how they feel it serves to protect them. There are some encouraging indicators. The Scottish crime survey shows that, since 1992, the proportion of people feeling unsafe walking alone in their area after dark has fallen from 39 per cent to 28 per cent. Between 1996 and 2000, the public's level of concern about crime fell across all the survey measures. The resources that the Scottish Executive continues to put into the whole justice system are bringing results in helping to increase that confidence in the system. I appreciate that neither our amendment nor Roseanna Cunningham's motion refers to the number of police. Of course, the police are the front line of the criminal justice system. In any case, I can hardly believe that Phil Gallie will be able to resist using the rewind and replay buttons on his own ludicrous spin on police cuts. In order to get in first, I will point out that police funding is 35 per cent higher in real terms than it was 10 years ago. The number of police officers in Scotland has reached an all-time high of 15,149. The figure in March 1997 was 14,872. There are no police cuts, and we have the first indication of resources being used to bolster confidence in the justice system. Not only the police have more resources. The number of permanent sheriffs has increased from 100 in 1995 to 129 at the end of 2000. That is another record, and that number will increase again to 136 once we have the recommendations of the recent selection board. We have also created a new statutory office of part-time sheriff to replace the temporary sheriffs, and 31 part-time sheriffs are already making a contribution to tackling delays. We have increased the number of judges from 27 to 32. It is true that the courts are under pressure. In particular, solemn business is increasing; for example, the number of indictments  in the High Court increased from 1,151 to 1,478 in the single year between 1998-99 and 1999-2000, an increase of 28 per cent. More police and clear-up rates the like of which have not been seen since the second world war mean that more criminals are being caught. That has obvious consequences for the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, which is already coping with the consequences of historical underfunding through the 1980s and 1990s. New initiatives also put pressure on courts, which is why, for example, in introducing a drug court to Scotland, we are careful to provide the additional resources to Glasgow sheriff court in order to allow that to happen. We want to ensure that the historical underfunding that has afflicted the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service remains entirely historical. A general process of strengthening Crown Office resources is under way, and will continue. The provision for 2001-02 is £55 million, which is 17.8 per cent higher than that for 1997. Recent claims in the press that there have been repeated cuts are simply untrue. In real terms, there will be an increase of around 11 per cent between now and 2003-04. Roseanna Cunningham acknowledged that more staff are being recruited and trained, including 20 additional lawyers this year and a further 10 next year. That is on top of the fact that the Crown Office now employs 369 lawyers, as of today, compared with 250 in January 1997. The service is also introducing improved technology, which will give it a powerful tool for dealing with an ever more complex work load. That new technology will allow information to be transmitted and exchanged more efficiently in the criminal justice system. Public confidence in the criminal justice system is influenced by the way in which the system treats not just the accused but, above all, the victims. That is why the Scottish strategy for victims has been allocated resources to initiate action on the ground. Among its early achievements has been the completion of a major phase of the witness service in sheriff courts. That service provides general advice and support to people attending court, and has now been rolled out to courts in Aberdeen, Edinburgh and Glasgow. This year, £860,000 has been provided through Victim Support Scotland. The Crown Office is running pilots of its own victim liaison service, which is designed to make improvements in the flow of information to victims. That service will be operating in all regions by 2002. The Justice 2 Committee intends to undertake a proper review of those matters, which will take  something like a year. We welcome that, and think that it is quite right and proper to wait and see what the committee's recommendations are. It seems that the real purpose of today's hour-and-a-quarter debate is not to address those issues seriously. The truth is that we have to finish this debate early, because Roseanna Cunningham has a bus to catch to get to a press conference, for which today's debate is just the opener. That is not a proper use of this Parliament; it is no way to treat a Parliament, but that is not a surprise. I move amendment S1M-1958.1, to leave out from "with concern" to end and insert: "the increased resources going into the justice system as a whole; further notes the decision of the Justice 2 Committee to hold an inquiry into the operation of the Crown Office and the Procurator Fiscal Service, and looks forward to their report."

Tackling drug misuse at grass-roots level is at the heart of our drugs strategy. We reinforced that through additional funding in the £100 million package for drugs over the next three years. We issued with that package a planning framework for drug misuse services, which makes it a requirement that community views should inform the work of drug action teams and constituent agencies. Last week, the First Minister and I launched a £500,000 campaign, Scottish communities against drugs, to help support Scotland's communities in taking action against drugs.

When I launched our targets against drug misuse in December, I said that if we were to succeed in achieving them, everyone in every sector in Scotland must be involved. That includes not only health boards and local authorities, but the business and sports sectors. I welcome this kind of innovative partnership. It is worth noting that sportsmen and sportswomen are often regarded as role models by young people. I welcome their involvement in tackling drug misuse. When we launched the Scottish communities against drugs campaign, we did so with the footballer, Billy Dodds. He is, of course, not a Kilmarnock player but I understand that there is a vacancy and a background at Ibrox is no impediment, so who knows?

The answer to that question comes in two parts. We are currently involved in examining the response of drug action teams to the planning framework. As I say, there is a requirement that they involve the community in their planning and clearly respond to needs that are identified by the community. Beyond that, the Scottish communities against drugs fund is specifically geared at providing support for small, community-led organisations, which are often very good at  ensuring that the services that are required in their communities and neighbourhoods are provided. That is essentially the purpose of the fund and over the next months it will begin to make the kind of contribution that we all want.

The Scottish communities against drugs fund will have a board and administration and accountability matters will be handled for the Executive by Scotland Against Drugs, which has considerable experience in ensuring that applications for any funding—whether for its own funding or for challenge funding—have an impact and are sustainable beyond the initial funding period. Because 80 per cent of the projects that the organisation has supported have continued beyond that initial three-year funding period by finding new sources of support, I am confident it will be able to help us to ensure that the fund has the impact that it is designed to have.

A good number of speakers have queried why we have returned to the topic of crime relatively quickly after the recent criminal justice debate. I make no apology for that. It is simply a reflection of the priority that the Executive gives to fighting crime. Those who suffer crime, particularly those who live where crime is most common and where the fear of crime is greatest, do not have a choice. They live this debate on crime, and the fear of crime, day in and day out. Roseanna Cunningham made a flippant comment about "Groundhog Day", but for many of those whom we represent, crime is their "Groundhog Day." Their sense of déjà vu is the fear of crime day after day, so we will return to the issue again and again, because it lies at the heart of creating and nurturing a Scotland that is at ease with itself, secure, confident and safe for all its citizens.

The police targets, which underpin the strategy that we are pursuing, are new to this debate. I will address Mr Gallie's points later. It is exactly because we know that there is more to do that we give the chamber the opportunity to debate crime again. We celebrate the fact that the level of recorded crime in Scotland has fallen, and that additional investment last year and this year has ensured the highest number of police officers that Scotland has ever seen. We also bring those facts to the chamber to debate how we can build on that platform to make Scotland safer still. We do so not in a self-congratulatory manner—Mr Rumbles said that the motion is modest—but with a simple motion to allow an open and wide- ranging debate. However, that has been to no great purpose, as far as the Opposition is concerned. An open motion is just another reason to whinge. By and large, the Opposition has simply taken the opportunity to try to deconstruct the good-news headlines, to divert the debate into arcane claims about the small print, or to reconstruct its own amendments to somehow—anyhow—deny the progress that has been made. The people of Scotland deserve a better-quality debate. We have to move the debate on crime beyond arguments about how many police officers dance on the head of which pin. There are 15,149 officers. Those are the police's figures. As for current police budgets, they are exactly that—police budgets. This year's budgets were developed by asking all forces to submit the budget that they needed to deliver policing in their areas. Every one of those budgets was delivered in full, or indeed was slightly exceeded. That is how the budgets that we are debating were developed. Pauline McNeill is right. We should accept the good news, then begin to engage in the debate about what we want from our police and other criminal justice agencies. How can we best achieve a safer Scotland? Where should we place the emphasis in policing and other activities? We need to make choices about the benefits of targeting organised crime. We should discuss the use of targeted policing to disrupt some criminal behaviour. We must focus not only on what we can do to target crime and criminals, but on what more we can do to tackle the causes of crime. I listened in vain this afternoon for positive speeches from Opposition members. Most of what we heard was negative, nit-picking and narrow. None of it was new.

I accept that SNP members read out many quotations from members of the Scottish Police Federation, but I note that they chose not to select the quotation in which we were given credit for delivering record police numbers in Scotland. That does not surprise me. We must consider how the range of modern police activity contributes to the fight against crime. Some members spoke as if any police officer who was not out walking a traditional beat was not doing a worthwhile job. That is not true. The other officers are not doing office work, because we have provided for a record number of civilian staff to free even more officers for front-line work. Some officers are in the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency, which has made more than  100 major arrests and seized drugs with a street value in excess of £15 million in the past year. Other officers are in domestic abuse units or child abuse units and are targeting the crime that the Parliament has demanded should be a priority. Those officers are doing the work that Gil Paterson was right to say is desperately needed to address such crimes. Other officers are policing road traffic and saving lives, or undertaking a range of prevention duties, not only with schools and clubs, but with many agencies. Many police officers are gathering the intelligence that allows front-line officers to be deployed to the greatest effect. Are not they also front-line officers? Some are undercover and are risking their lives to infiltrate criminal networks. They are not visible, but are not they on the front line? We owe them a debt of gratitude. We should not belittle them for not being bobbies on the beat. It seems to suit some Opposition members to talk down Scotland as being in a "Blade Runner"-like nightmare of unfettered crime. They counterpoise to that a vision of the police that seems to be based on PC Murdoch in "Oor Wullie". We are funding the development of a 21 st century police force with the Scottish intelligence database, the new control centre in Lothian and Borders, the DNA labs in Strathclyde and Tayside and the restructuring of common police services to make them more effective. A properly equipped modern police force is now delivering crime clear-up rates that have not been seen since 1940. We could be discussing priority choices, but only Richard Lochhead addressed that issue briefly when he talked about the helicopter bid from Tayside and Fife. Sophisticated policing involves not just high technology. Grass-roots disruption of patterns of crime, problem-solving policing and partnership with other agencies are all crucial. That is why we seek ways of building community safety partnerships that know where the new lighting, closed-circuit television camera or youth drop-in centre will cut local crime. Those local partnerships place policing in a positive anti-crime framework and enhance and enable efforts. As Gordon Jackson described, they engage communities in reclaiming their own neighbourhoods. I accept that the elderly often feel more vulnerable than others. I am seeking ways of engaging older people more in our community safety work. That is important. I accept what many members said—if we want lower crime rates in the future, we must nip future crime in the bud now. We do not deny that the matter of young offenders is of great importance. That is why, across the Executive, we are taking action to support young people. Last month I visited the Tayside working in new enterprises— TWINE—programme in Forfar, where the police are taking the lead in giving young offenders a fresh start by encouraging them to participate in training, education or employment. Three of the graduates that I was supposed to meet could not be there as they had already taken up their first jobs. TWINE is the kind of thoughtful activity that will stop longer-term offending and make our streets safer now and in the future. Crime flourishes where communities are weak. That is why crime hit record levels in 1991. We had a Government then that sought to deny and undermine the value of society. Do we need more police? Yes. Do we need better-equipped police? Yes. Do we need robust sanctions, such as anti-social behaviour orders and the seizure of criminal assets? Yes. However, the real debate must be about how we bind those together into the strengthening of our neighbourhoods to turn falling crime rates into a rising sense of security. Roseanna Cunningham should not forget that the real message of "Groundhog Day" was that, if one goes round in circles long enough, one breaks through to a better future. On crime, because it is so important, we will be back.

Is it all-ticket?

Surely the member realises that if the officers were funded through the underspend, they would last for precisely one year?

Does the member accept that the indication of the incidence of crime, which includes unreported crime, has come from the Scottish crime survey and shows that we are moving in the right direction, with crime falling in the vast majority of categories?

I have a simple answer to a straight question. The Scottish Parliament pays Lothian and Borders police for the policing of the Parliament.

The difference between the two figures is the policing time for the periods that the Parliament is not meeting. The Executive is currently in negotiation on that matter.

I will again give a straight answer to a straight question. Yes, we are aware of Sir John Orr's concerns. Is Lord James Douglas-Hamilton aware that the allocation was made on the basis of the formula agreed by Sir John Orr and his colleagues in the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland?

That quote has been raised before. I make the point that I made then. Sir John Orr spoke of Strathclyde police's share of a capital budget that had increased by 25 per cent. He complained that his colleagues got more than he did; he did not complain about global allocations to the police.

Will the member give way?

There are no plans for the Executive to conduct such a review. It is for Glasgow City Council, the agencies involved in delivering all aspects of drug rehabilitation and the greater Glasgow drug action team to determine how to use the additional resources provided by the Executive to develop the methadone programme in Glasgow.

It is important to acknowledge that the debate in Glasgow about the methadone programme and its development is taking place simply because close to £9 million in additional resources is being provided over the next three years and more will come from parts of the £100 million package that is still to be allocated. Although treatment resources in Glasgow have increased by 10 per cent, we acknowledge that that will not be adequate to fund the 7,000 places that the methadone review indicated might be the demand. The agencies that sit around the Glasgow drug action team table must work together to improve the integration of the pathways that people use to move on from the methadone programme. The local council also has  additional resources for rehabilitation. Taken together, all that will create opportunities for others to take up the service that the methadone programme provides.

I make the point again that we have significantly increased resources for drug treatment and rehabilitation in Glasgow. I expect that a significant proportion of that money will improve integrated working, so that, after being stabilised on the methadone programme, people will have the opportunities to move on, particularly into training and employment. It would be quite wrong for me to tell Glasgow how those strategies should be delivered at a local level. The Glasgow drug action team is planning how it will deliver its programme over the next three years and I look forward to receiving its plans. The current debate is a welcome part of that process.

The debate has highlighted well the varied and often sensitive issues that are associated with sexual crimes, and rape in particular. The standard of the debate shows once again Parliament's commitment to tackling those issues. I want to make the Executive's commitment clear. We unequivocally condemn all types of sexual assault and violence against women. We are committed to tackling those crimes and to supporting victims of rape and sexual assault through every stage of the criminal justice process, and beyond. The motion was prompted by the outcome of a recent rape trial. Today, Parliament's concerns about the implications of the judge's ruling in that case have been eloquently expressed. Although it has been said before, I must stress that it is not for the Executive to comment on individual court cases. Judicial independence is the cornerstone of the Scottish legal system and Parliament would not want it any other way. However, we are not blind to, nor are we ignoring, the current concerns about the treatment of rape in law. I agree that victims of rape and sexual assault need to be properly protected by the law and that all women must have confidence that they will be protected. A change in the law on rape might seem to be an attractive option. However, Johann Lamont was correct when she said that we simply do not know whether the law needs to be changed. First, we need to clarify how the law stands at present. Roseanna Cunningham was right to explain that to act before we are clear about the present position of the law would be to risk making mistakes that cannot easily be rectified later. Indeed the approach in England, to which Mr Gallie and others referred, is itself under review because it is not without problems. I will return to that.  However, that is not to say that we can do nothing in the meantime. The victims of the crime must be protected. That is why we will bring forward a bill that will contain proposals to change aspects of the law of evidence for rape and other sexual offences so that the complainer will be further protected. We are considering how to improve the protection from sexual abuse of people who are made vulnerable by mental disorder. We are looking at new arrangements for the sentencing and management of serious violent and sexual offenders. Violence against women in any context cannot be tolerated. The national strategy to address domestic abuse in Scotland, which was launched last November, recognises that domestic abuse is linked to other forms of male violence, such as rape and sexual abuse. That work will be taken forward by a working group on protection issues, which will be established by the national group to address domestic abuse. Mention was made in the debate of the Scottish strategy for victims, which was launched in January 2001. The strategy is designed to ensure that when people are unfortunate enough to become victims of crime, they have a central place in the criminal justice system. It is a clear indication that we are committed to ensuring that victims get proper treatment, particularly where the victim has suffered a sexual assault. Johann Lamont was right to mention the role of the police. The police are usually the first point of contact in the criminal justice system for victims of rape and sexual assault. The police must treat victims properly from that earliest encounter. The importance of tact and sensitivity in handling all victims of sex offences is now recognised by the police and is covered by extensive guidance. All probationers are given training in dealing with victims of sex offence cases, which is followed up by in-depth training at all levels. I want to return to what has been identified as the key question of whether the law on rape needs to be changed. When Gil Paterson met Jim Wallace yesterday, Gil Paterson urged us not to lose sight of that matter and Johann Lamont's motion also makes it clear that we must move decisively. I am therefore pleased to be able to tell the Parliament that this afternoon I spoke with the Lord Advocate, who said that he had concluded his consideration of the transcript of the trial and of the trial advocate depute's report. The Lord Advocate told me that he intends to make a reference to the High Court to seek clarification of the law on rape. At this juncture, the Lord Advocate is unable to provide details on the full terms of the reference. He has instructed that that reference should now be drafted. Some further work will be done on the  precise form of the questions for the determination of the court. I should make it plain that there is no time limit on making a reference of this kind, but the Lord Advocate has instructed that it be lodged with the court next month. We cannot say how long the court will take to reach an opinion; it will properly take the time that is required for serious consideration. This evening, we are signalling clearly the urgency with which the Executive views the matter. This is the first necessary step in addressing the issue that was raised by Lord Abernethy's ruling. It might not be the last necessary step, but it has been taken.  Meeting closed at 18:0

Information of the kind the member has asked for is not recorded, but the careless use of fireworks still causes too many injuries. The message to be driven home is that fireworks are explosives and must be handled accordingly.

That was a lengthy and erudite question, although I think that Mr Young will find that the Explosives Act was passed in 1875, not 1876. The important thing is that we do the work that is required to drive down the incidence of accidents related to fireworks. It is disappointing to note that in 1999 there was an increase in firework accidents, although that may have been related to the extended celebrations in the lead-up to the millennium. If Mr Young has a particular instance of why he thinks that fireworks regulation is not serving its purpose and how it could be improved, I would be happy to look at that and to make appropriate representations to the Department of Trade and Industry.

Presiding Officer, you make the important point that this is a Sewel motion, which will allow the issues to be debated at Westminster. The Scottish people will be represented there by Scottish MPs, who will scrutinise the legislation on our behalf. I have already given evidence on the Armed Forces Bill to the Justice 1 Committee of the Scottish Parliament. The motion refers to that UK bill, the purpose of which is to allow MOD police officers, while travelling between MOD sites, to intervene as police officers in strictly defined emergencies, such as stopping acts of violence or saving lives.  I move, That the Parliament agrees the principles contained in the provisions of the Armed Forces Bill as they relate to the Ministry of Defence Police in Scotland and that the Scottish Ministers should consent to the measures on jurisdiction being commenced in Scotland, and agrees that the relevant provisions to achieve these ends in the Bill should be considered by the UK Parliament.

It is customary to begin winding-up speeches by saying, "This has been a good debate," or, "This has been an interesting debate." I am not sure that I can say either today. However, the debate has at times been astonishing. For example, I was astonished to hear the SNP spokesperson on justice describing this opportunity to debate justice as fatuous. What was fatuous were the speeches of Tory and nationalist members, who, like their amendments, simply ignored the facts where those facts did not suit their case. The key assertion on both wings of the Opposition alliance is that the number of police officers is falling. That is simply not true. The Executive inherited a police force of 14,872 officers. By last December, the number was 14,948. It is 20 years since I taught maths, and the discipline has moved on since then—I believe that Fermat's last theorem has been solved in the meantime. However, 14,948 is still a bigger number than 14,872. The number of police officers is rising. Members need not take my word for it. On 19 January, the chief constable of Central Scotland police, Andrew Cameron, said: "There are more police officers than ever patrolling the streets." That is the good news, which it would do the Opposition some credit to acknowledge. I noticed that, when Mr Gallie was asked whether he would give credit when record police numbers were reached, he said that he would. I therefore invite him to give credit to the Labour Government at Westminster, which, in December 1997, hit a record number of police officers in Scotland—15,050. That record number was reached under a Labour Administration.

I would certainly not accept that. I repeat the point that Jim Wallace made: it will not take us long now to have police constable No 15,051 on the street, for the first time ever. Here is the better news: more police officers are  on the way. In the next financial year and in the following two years, police grant-aided expenditure will rise by 6 per cent, 11 per cent and 14 per cent respectively. I suppose that we could argue over numbers for ever. I am happy enough to do that, although it is probably tedious for those who are watching. However, I point out that some of the criticisms that have been made of the number of police officers and of police resources have been based on the distribution of those resources. We acknowledge that that needs to be examined. With police forces and police officers, we are reviewing how the global sum available to them should be distributed. I am sometimes asked—Roseanna Cunningham asked it today—why we cannot see the extra officers. The truth is that we can. A month after the chief constable of Central Scotland police said that there were more police officers than ever, I joined him in Stirling to see 28 more recruits, fresh from college. This morning, the First Minister and the Minister for Justice met 200 new policemen, who will be patrolling the streets of Strathclyde. If members keep their eyes open outside this building, they will see police vehicles marked "City Centre Policing Unit".

I am sorry, I am short of time. That unit was formed by Lothian and Borders police from its share of an in-year increase of almost £9 million in police resources. Tulliallan training college is bursting at the seams—recruits are having to double up in their accommodation for everyone to get in.

I will if Richard Lochhead is very quick.

I am happy to accept that point, but one aspect of it is the resourcing of chief constables in order to deploy their officers more effectively. That is exactly what the Lothian and Borders police city centre policing unit is about. This is not about having to take officers from elsewhere in the city to police the Edinburgh festival in the summer, for example. Lothian and Borders police has just held two  recruiting days, which attracted 1,000 people who want to be police officers. That volume of recruitment gives us an opportunity to address issues such as the recruitment of ethnic minority officers, which Michael Matheson quite properly raised. Last month, the First Minister and I visited Strathclyde police. We met an undercover squad, which is one of four—that number has risen from one. We met some of the nine community liaison officers, who are drawn from the 47 Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency officers seconded to Strathclyde police. We saw the results—£600,000-worth of seized drugs, which is a fraction of the value of recent seizures. That is £600,000-worth of crime that would have been committed by users to buy those drugs on the streets of Glasgow. Although police numbers are rising, crime is not; the Scottish crime survey shows that there has been a decline of 13 per cent between 1995 and 1999. We should ask the police. Sir Roy Cameron of Lothian and Borders police said: "We have seen an excellent reduction in crime and rise in detection". Sir John Orr of Strathclyde police said: "Morale is currently high with crime at its lowest level for many years and detection rates at an all time high." However, we are not complacent about that improving picture. Jim Wallace acknowledged that the incidence of violent crime is much too high. That is why we will continue to support initiatives such as the safer Scotland campaign, which took 1,000 weapons out of circulation and led to a significant reduction in violent crime over the period of the campaign. The picture that the Tories and nationalists have painted of falling police numbers and rising crime does not bear examination. What of their proposals, however? The SNP promises that it would recruit 1,000 more police. That appears to show a laudable concern for law and order but, unfortunately, it does not. It appears that the funding for those extra policemen would be £25 million, which would be raised by repatriating from the Treasury the fine income of Scottish courts. The SNP promise is not an expression of concern for law and order but a convoluted point about money, and even that does not add up. The fine income of Scottish district courts in the most recent year for which figures are available was £8 million. Even if £25 million was available, it would pay for the salaries of 1,000 recruits but nothing else. The nationalists cannot get their sums right. I have heard of bare-faced criminals, but those recruits would be the bare naked police officers—they would have no uniforms, equipment, vehicles or police stations. Modern policing is a bit more  complicated than the SNP suggests. That is why we are providing our police forces not only with record resources, but with the Scottish intelligence database, the extended DNA testing facility at Strathclyde, the new Lothian and Borders control room, which will release 90 officers, and the Scottish police national network, which will address the point that Paul Martin made about the access of police officers to e-mail. The Tories, too, have little to offer. We should not forget that they have previous on this. On 15 June 2000, Phil Gallie confessed that "Crime did rise under the Tories."— [ Official Report , 15 June 2000; Vol 7, c 336.]  He is right, and it would happen again under the Tories. Their promised cuts in public expenditure are the one thing that could undermine the certainty of record police numbers. The Tories will never understand that criminal justice and social justice are inextricably linked. They cannot understand that tough talking does not cut crime. The reduction in crime is a result not just of our record investment in police numbers, but of our investment in housing and education and the creation of the highest employment rate in Scotland for 40 years.

Gordon Jackson summed up matters well, drawing on the changes that he sees in his Govan constituency. He is right to talk about an increasing sense of security, as the proportion of people who are afraid of crime has dropped from 50 per cent to 28 per cent. There is more to do, but the drop in the fear of crime is the beginning of the emergence of a safer Scotland, which we should all welcome.

Will Kenny Gibson accept two caveats to the quotes that he has given? First, Sir John Orr was commenting on a particular decision about a particular project in a particular police force, in the context of a 25 per cent increase, year on year, in capital expenditure for Scotland's police forces. Secondly, the funding formula was derived from and agreed by ACPOS, of which William Rae is a member.

Will the member take an intervention?

It is not the Arbuthnott formula that was used in the distribution of treatment resources, but the Arbuthnott substance abuse formula, which is specific to the matter under discussion.

We must distinguish between the resources for treatment, which go to the health board and which are not distributed on the GAE formula, and those for rehabilitation, which are distributed on the GAE formula because they are, quite properly, channelled through local government.

I offer clarification, because I am unsure about the point that is being made. There is a follow-up point to the previous discussion with Tommy Sheridan. There are differences in prevalence within health board areas. How the health boards, in conjunction with the DATs, spend their money in the different parts of their areas is important.

I have two points that I hope the member will acknowledge. First, as I meant to say in my speech but time did not allow, we are undertaking a national prevalence study. In the course of a previous intervention I acknowledged that we can improve the statistics, and we will have to respond to them with regard to the distribution. Secondly, when we consider health treatment money, one factor is that, in the past, Edinburgh and Glasgow received disproportionately more than their share of resources, because there was a time when folk thought that those were the only places where there was a drug problem. It is good to see other parts of Scotland receiving support.

I did not refer to that recommendation. The key problem with accountability for the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency is the broader issue of accountability for common service agencies in the police. The member knows that we are addressing that issue.

I will start by saying how much the Executive welcomes the committee's report. We agree with most of the findings. We fully accept and recognise, above all, that there are strong links between problem drug misuse and social deprivation. More than that, we welcome any contribution to the effort to tackle drug misuse in Scotland. As Karen Whitefield said, the committee expanded its exhaustive and meticulous work beyond its initial aims, and its work is testament to  the priority that its members gave to the matter. In the Executive's detailed response to the committee's recommendations, which was published last month, I hope we showed that vigorous action is being targeted at those communities that are most in need of positive and sustained intervention. That action will ensure that the scourge of drug misuse in those vulnerable, disadvantaged communities is tackled effectively. I confirm that the resources are now in place to back that up. We have taken on board many of the committee's recommendations. For example, we are committed to ensuring that there are better training and employment opportunities for problem drug misusers who want to make something of their lives. We are also committed to building up the links between drug action teams and social inclusion partnerships and to improving the way in which DATs involve communities in developing local solutions to drug problems. It would be foolish of me to pretend that we have all the answers. However, I am sure of two things, both of which are reflected in the report. The first is found in the answer to the question, "Where can we find the strength and the will to tackle drugs?" The answer is clear: it must come from within the communities that suffer the effects of drugs. Secondly, we must support and mobilise that strength through partnerships between parents and families, the voluntary sector, health, housing, social work, education and the police. Those partnerships are reflected in the drug action teams, which are responsible for shaping locally sensitive drug strategies and for building services around the real and changing nature of localised drug misuse patterns. Karen Whitefield was quite right to say that the committee discovered that the problem is complex and multilayered. As such, it needs a complex and multilayered response. Our overall framework strategy document, "Tackling Drugs in Scotland: Action in Partnership," was itself an exercise in partnership. The document was drawn up with the support of a wide range of interests and is based on some fundamental principles: inclusion, partnership, understanding and accountability. Although the strategy was published in May 1999, it needs to evolve to meet new challenges and a fast-developing agenda. We looked carefully at the committee's recommendations and took them into account when allocating the £100 million package of new expenditure on drug misuse that we are making available over the next three years. The Executive funds a wide range of initiatives to fight poverty in Scotland and the extra drugs funding will back that up. For instance, the extra £10 million that has been given for treatment funds  also takes account of local needs—deprivation is a key factor.

I will say a little more later about how the money has been allocated, but the allocations must be based on the statistics that we have on the prevalence of drug misuse. Our prevalence information needs to be improved. I will also say a little about how that can be done. The £5 million that is channelled through social inclusion partnerships will, by definition, go to communities in which there is significant social exclusion. Eighteen million pounds will be made available through the changing children's services fund. The allocations will take account of the numbers of looked-after children, as well as deprivation and rurality factors. The result for Glasgow is that the city's drug action team was able, yesterday, to discuss how it would use some £9.5 million of additional resource. That figure did not take account of the resources that are available for employment initiatives, or the resources that follow ex-prisoners as they leave prison, or the funds that are attached to pilots, such as the drug courts pilot that will take place in Glasgow.

The package must be looked at as a whole. The component of the package to which Tommy Sheridan refers was distributed in the same way as local authority grant-aided expenditure. There is a discussion on how the money should be distributed, but the money is part of the local authority GAE. If one looks at the whole package, the proportion is skewed, because—as I have tried to explain—other components take much greater account of factors such as deprivation. Many local authorities and voluntary agencies find that their work with children, young people and their families can be affected significantly by the actual or potential risk of drug misuse. Many child protection incidents can be linked directly to parents who misuse drugs and whose chaotic  lifestyles, tragically, put their children at risk. That is why £18 million will, over the next three years, be aimed at specialist prevention and treatment services for under-16s; anti-drugs work with persistent young offenders; education to prevent drug misuse among children and young people in the care system; and work with children who are affected by drug misuse in the family. We expect local authorities and other relevant agencies to work together closely on the planning and delivery of services for children and young people. All applications to access the new funding will have to be endorsed by the local drug action team. We need to intervene early—earlier than in the past—and to provide fully integrated services if we are to tackle successfully the multiple factors that lead young people into involvement with drugs.

One of the ways in which the money will help is that the children in those circumstances often become the key carers in the family—often without any recognition or support. Fundamentally, those resources should allow much greater access to services that will allow people to stabilise their lives and therefore be better parents. I have met some of the people whom we are talking about—I will say something about that later—and that is what they want us to do. One of the key recommendations in the committee's report is that we need to assist drug users to move on from treatment. In the past, there has been an assumption that, once a drug user is receiving some form of treatment, that person will be ready to tackle life afresh. The reality is different. We must provide the necessary help for recovering addicts to develop the self-confidence, motivation and skills that are needed to progress to training or employment. We will consider what support we can give to employers so that those who are motivated to give up drugs have the opportunity to get practical experience. Nothing could better reflect the pleas that I hear from those people in treatment and rehabilitation whom I meet on my visits to projects. Over the next three years, £6.5 million will be dedicated to help 3,000 drug misusers prepare for training and employment. However, money is not the only issue. Users and ex-users find it notoriously difficult to move into work. Many have few or no qualifications, many have missed out on  years of school, and many have criminal records. Their lives have been chaotic for many years. Above all, potential employers too often treat them as pariahs. For those reasons, overcoming barriers to employment is one of the key priorities in the work programme of the Executive's effective interventions unit. The unit will consider the views and experiences of employers, training providers and clients. Its findings will provide a secure foundation for practical work on this topic. Two nights ago, I addressed the new deal advisory task force on exactly those issues and, at ministerial level, the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and Gaelic has joined the ministerial committee on tackling drug misuse to ensure that employment and opportunity are at the centre of our thinking.

That is not a responsibility that can fall on one sector. We must involve the Employment Service—especially locally—with drug action teams, so that no one is operating in isolation but instead as part of the whole panoply of services available. We are investing in a new training programme, which will be based in Glasgow. I hope that employment service personnel will be among the groups of people who undertake training. In communities throughout Scotland, we can begin to see the effects of our approach. On Tuesday, I had the pleasure of visiting the Hope self-help project in Bo'ness, which is a fine example of community involvement and commitment that was drawn to my attention by Cathy Peattie, the local MSP. The project was conceived and created by local people. It helps drug users to recover in the community and provides support for families. It provides all-round support for people—from helping them to seek rehousing to getting them on harm reduction or detoxification programmes. Everyone is treated as an individual and given the support that they need. Contact with other agencies is local and direct, so it works. The chair and leader, Jackie Johnston, said: "Every door we knock on opens for us." That is a real definition of local partnership in action. Those who have succeeded through the project are ploughing their success back into it, as volunteers and as examples for new clients. Such local initiatives have a crucial—no, an essential—part to play if we are to impact seriously on the  drugs problem. I wish that I could convey to the chamber the sense of healing that is evoked by the Hope project—lives healed, families healed, a community healed. We have to enable communities to mobilise in that way everywhere in Scotland. The large urban areas have acute social problems that can only be exacerbated when drug misuse is rife. However, we must not forget the rural areas of Scotland, which also suffer from the drug menace. The total funding for each local area represents a comprehensive package that takes account of real needs. Every area is receiving additional resources. Central to the most effective use of those resources are the drug action teams. We acknowledge that they have a difficult job to do. We have increased funding support to DATs and the DAT Association to £1.6 million per annum. We are consulting them on what improvements in information we can provide that will help them. In the past few days, we have announced new provision of training for the next three years for professionals who work with people who misuse drugs and alcohol. That will be based in Glasgow and will be a key element of the national policies for tackling both drug and alcohol misuse. We have set specific national targets and standards, which span enforcement, education, treatment and rehabilitation. For the first time, Scotland has clear and measurable targets to work towards in our efforts to curb the supply of, and the demand for, drugs. My key task in the next two years, if I am spared, is to turn—

I mean spared in the ministerial sense. My key task is to turn the resources into real service improvements and to follow them through and ensure that they are effective. The last of the four themes that I referred to earlier was understanding. Ministers are often accused of not listening to communities and of not giving our communities a voice in how things should be taken forward. However, members can be assured that the Executive is determined to ensure that community views will inform the work of DATs and the local constituent agencies. I think that the majority of DATs would acknowledge that their links with local communities could be better. We are issuing guidance on partnership working, and our planning framework for services and the monitoring of DAT activity will consider their engagement with communities—particularly deprived communities.  Every arm of government must galvanise itself if success is to be achieved. There are encouraging signs. Only a fortnight ago, I was able to welcome the new lottery money that was made available under the new opportunities fund for drug rehabilitation programmes. That amounts to £10 million over and above the £100 million package. When it comes to listening to the grass roots, we have to show the way. Last year, we held a major drugs conference in the autumn. At the centre of it was my predecessor's announcement of additional resources. Unfortunately, we cannot do that every year—although we are sometimes accused of announcing funding more than once. We will hold the conference again this autumn and this time it will be about community involvement—about learning from the grass roots. The aim of the conference will be to encourage dialogue and the exchange of information and good practice between the professionals and community interests. I intend that as many grass-roots community groupings as possible will take part. We all know that the problems that are associated with drug misuse for drug users, families and the wider community are extremely serious. They have to be high on everyone's agenda. We must strive towards concerted action to deal with the drug problem. We are giving the political lead. We are providing unprecedented resources. We are listening to the professionals, to the Social Justice Committee and to the grass roots. Together, locally and nationally, we are acting. We have a real opportunity to lift our communities and to make the biggest ever co-ordinated effort against drug misuse in Scotland. The committee report is a contribution to that. I believe that we can succeed.

I reiterate the Deputy First Minister's thanks to the Justice 1 Committee for its careful and constructive consideration of the bill. I am sure that the members of that committee will join me in thanking the various organisations that took time to give evidence and contribute in a valuable way. A number of points were made in that committee's report, and by members this afternoon. I shall mention a few of them, but I am afraid that I will not be able to mention them all. Kate MacLean made a general point, which arose from the Equal Opportunities Committee's recommendation that we should insert an overarching equality statement in the bill. We are unsure where such a statement could be inserted, given that the bill's scope and long title have already been agreed with the Presiding Officer. Although we have no objection in principle to considering the idea, we simply do not know where we could insert such a statement. The greatest discussion this afternoon has been generated by part 6, on the power to make remedial orders. Some members are concerned about the scope of the proposed powers, which they believe goes further than is necessary. However, as members heard today, the Executive has agreed to lodge an amendment at stage 2 to address those concerns. Ministers will have to have compelling reasons for using the remedial order route to remedy actual or perceived ECHR incompatibilities. They will not be able to use the remedial power to remedy an incompatibility when the reasons for taking that route are not compelling. Some questions have been asked about how necessary it is for that power to be available. Roseanna Cunningham, for example, asked why it would not be possible to use emergency legislation to ensure compatibility and gave a couple of examples of where that route had previously been followed. Of course, the example  of the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 had nothing to do with the ECHR but, nonetheless, the act was remedied by emergency legislation. I recall that some concern was expressed—not least by Roseanna Cunningham when she was the convener of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee—about the pressure that that route put on the institutions of the Parliament. There are other reasons why the power is important, of course. The current position is that, under the Human Rights Act 1998, UK ministers have greater powers than Scottish ministers to make amendments by subordinate legislation to remedy legislative provisions that are or that might be incompatible with the ECHR. The Scotland Act 1998 gives ministers the power to do so in relation to any legislation that is passed by the Scottish Parliament or by an act of a Scottish minister that is or might be compatible with the ECHR. The power is required in order to ensure that Scottish ministers have the same powers as UK ministers already have under the Scotland Act 1998 so that Scottish ministers are able to take urgent action when that is required. That will ensure that the scrutiny role in such a situation lies with the Scottish Parliament rather than with Westminster. Phil Gallie spent some time complaining about the thinness of the bill and saying that it does not address enough of the issues that he believes it should. In support of his view, he listed a series of current ECHR challenges. The examples he used, however, such as the case of County Properties v the Scottish ministers, are mostly under appeal. In other words, the Scottish Executive disagrees with the finding of the court. That seems to be a typically perverse Tory argument. First, the Tories criticise the Executive for seeking to make our laws compatible with the ECHR, then they criticise us for not amending legislation that we think does not require to be amended because we believe that it is already compatible. First they ask us whether a law should be struck down on the "say-so of one judge"—David McLetchie used that phrase—then they criticise us for not caving in to such a judgment when we disagree with it, but instead appeal against it. The phrase "wanting it all ways" springs to mind.

I assumed that the babbling was because of the excitement that surrounds the  Convention Rights (Compliance) (Scotland) Bill. We will respond to the outcome of the appeal when we hear what it is. However, we believe that our position is correct. I am generally pleased with the response to part 1 of the bill, which deals with changes in arrangements regarding the release of adult mandatory lifers. A lot of support for part 1 was expressed throughout the chamber. Even Phil Gallie admitted that allowing the judge to include a part of the sentence that takes account of the need to punish the criminal amounts, basically, to his mantra of having sentences that mean what they say. If a punishment part is included in the sentence, that time must be served. Given Mr Gallie's expression of agreement with our intention—I see that he is nodding his head—I hope that his comments outside the chamber will not paint lurid pictures of murderers being released early. I think he knows that such pictures would not represent the truth of the situation because, as Margo MacDonald said, the bill is intended to ensure consistent and clear sentencing, not softer sentencing. Judges will be able to set a punishment part of a sentence that will continue beyond a prisoner's natural life if they believe that that is the correct punishment. Indeed, the current position is that, when a life sentence is handed down, the convicted prisoner can appeal on the ground that the sentence is too long but, because its period is indeterminate, the Scottish Executive cannot appeal on the ground that it is too lenient. Under the legislation, we might be able to appeal against a punishment part of a sentence if we believe that it is not as lengthy as the crime warrants. In fairness, that is an advance that helps to balance the two sides of that equation. Life will mean life—exactly as it does now—in the sense that a prisoner, even if released, remains on licence for the rest of his or her life, and is liable to be recalled to custody for a breach of licence conditions. Related concerns were raised. Roseanna Cunningham asked about the pressure on the courts in dealing with existing convicted prisoners. There are a couple of points to make in relation to that matter. First, we have more judges than we have had in history. Secondly, the return of the judges that were involved in the Lockerbie trial will help with the work load. We believe that we can deal with existing prisoners in the court system. A question was asked about whether legal aid would be available for existing life prisoners who require hearings to have the punishment parts of their sentences set. There is no specific provision for that in the bill, but it is clearly stated in the financial memorandum that assistance by way of representation will be available for existing life  prisoners. That is something of which the Scottish Legal Aid Board is aware. Margo MacDonald raised a question about the upper age limit for members of the Parole Board for Scotland, which is 75. That limit was set to allow retired members of the judiciary to serve on the board for a period, but that was not a matter that the Justice 1 Committee considered commenting on in its report. It is only fair to mark one important point that was mentioned by Phil Gallie on transferred prisoners. Euan Robson called that point interesting. It is, indeed, an interesting and complex issue, which we are still considering. We will have to consider whether to lodge amendments on it at stage 2. Comments have been made on the question to which tribunals legal aid will be made available. In his opening speech, Jim Wallace undertook that the list of those tribunals would be made available by stage 3—the point was made that it should be available by stage 2. I point out that to produce that list by stage 2 would not allow us to consult the bodies that might be affected by it. In any case, the list will not be definitive. Other tribunals or bodies will emerge at a later stage, and we will not draw a line under the matter—it is an initial exercise. In that regard, there have been a number of references to the criticism that was voiced in the committee's report that the Scottish Legal Aid Board was not fully consulted. SLAB officials were consulted extensively, although we acknowledge the point that has been made about its members. The interesting thing about the debate is the way in which the Tories' Europhobia has, ironically, ended up highlighting—Richard Simpson was the last member to point this out—the legislative importance of the incorporation of the ECHR into our law. It is to ensure that Scottish people have their human rights judged in Scottish courts by Scottish judges that the bill should be passed. To be frank, that seems to me to be a good day's work for a Scottish Parliament. The Tories have also inadvertently highlighted the historical role of the ECHR as part of the framework of guarantees against fascism and war in western Europe. Last week, there was some talk of strange alliances in the chamber which, I think, upset certain colleagues. I would be happy to accept Winston Churchill into today's coalition. It seems unfortunate that the Tory members of the Parliament say that they will not follow his support of human rights. The bill is another mark of the Executive's commitment—and that of three quarters of the Parliament—to the protection of the human rights of every Scottish citizen. The Justice 1  Committee's report recommends agreement to the bill. I am happy to commend the bill to the Parliament.

That was a string of poor examples—many of those cases were overturned on appeal. We can  agree or disagree over whether the Ruddle case was a debacle, but we should agree that it was not a result of an ECHR challenge. It was the application of existing legislation—passed under the previous Conservative Government—that led to the necessity for amendment.

I am pleased that the Parliament has had this early opportunity to debate freedom of information. The publication of the Executive's draft freedom of information bill is an important step in Scotland's development following devolution, as today's debate has demonstrated. The adoption of an effective freedom of information regime will send out an important signal about how we want the Scottish public sector to operate. Openness is essential. It is no exaggeration to claim that openness is the bedrock of good democracy and good government. Indeed, the consultative steering group on the Scottish Parliament was absolutely clear that openness should characterise Scotland in devolution. Our proposals are designed to deliver that. Openness should not be only on our terms. If openness is to bring real accountability, it is vital that the availability of information is not reliant on various non-statutory regimes or limited statutory ones. A number of the contributions this morning have focused on the need for legislation and have illustrated instances of information being released through codes without statutory force. It is an extremely weak argument to say, however, that because of that a statutory regime, which will ensure that that and other information in future will be disclosed, has no purpose. I will return to that point later, time permitting. If public confidence in the effective and responsible operation of public authorities, including the Executive, and indeed the Parliament, is to be guaranteed, it is essential that we introduce a robust statutory freedom of information regime that cannot be undermined or sidestepped. I say public authorities including the Executive and the Parliament. That leads me to part of Phil Gallie's contribution, in which he claimed—I do not know whether this is the case, because I have not checked, but I would be surprised if it were—that the Conservative group, more than any other group, has asked for limitations on the amount of work that committees undertake in private. A great deal of today's debate has focused on how the legislation will affect the Executive and on which of its deliberations should be subject to the freedom of information legislation. However, there are interesting questions about how the Parliament and its committees will be affected by the regime that we seek to introduce.

I thank Mr Kerr for that information. He will understand that I have not been a member of a committee, so I have not found myself in the situation. His knowledge of the procedures is much more profound than mine. I am grateful for his reassurance. Nonetheless, once the legislation is, as we hope, in place, conveners and members of committees, in taking decisions about whether to hold particular proceedings in private, will have to give consideration to the fact that such decisions could be challenged under the legislation. The freedom of information regime cannot be undermined or sidestepped. On that basis, I am afraid to say that almost all of David McLetchie's contribution seemed rather irrelevant. He asked at considerable length for clarification of our position on disclosure of information. It is hard to imagine what greater or more detailed clarification he could have than a draft bill of 72 sections and all the explanatory notes that go along with it. The bill is the Executive's view of how a freedom of information act should look. It is therefore a pity that David McLetchie largely ignored the draft freedom of information bill and instead took the time to dig over some sad old political point scoring, some of which went back a matter of years, even in a Parliament so young. What the Conservatives were displaying was cauld kail het again, as we have often had thrown at us from the Opposition benches. David McLetchie raised the particular example of the decision on siting paediatric cardiac services in Edinburgh or Glasgow. As the former Minister for Health and Community Care, I have some insight into the process that took place, which was very different from the one that David McLetchie attempted to construct. I am clear why the quality of the advice regarding the siting of paediatric cardiac surgery in Scotland that was offered to health ministers at the time might have been compromised had it been made in the expectation of disclosure. It is extremely important, when taking a decision like that, that ministers receive advice that is clear and frank.

Margo MacDonald has referred to one piece of work, one piece of evidence and one piece of advice that was available at the time. The minister, when taking a decision, must examine and assess all the advice, opinions and judgments that are available. I assure Ms MacDonald that much of the advice that was available to the health ministers had been prepared and given in the expectation that it would be treated confidentially. Much of that advice was based on facts and statistical information that was made available at the time and would have to be disclosed under the draft legislation that we are discussing. Mr McLetchie posed the question, what would the difference be? The difference would be that, if the freedom of information bill was enacted, under the proposed regime disclosure could have been appealed to an independent judgment of public interest: the Scottish information commissioner.

Of course that is the case. I will return to the ministerial veto soon. Mr McLetchie would also have to acknowledge that that veto would be subject to judicial review, were it felt that it was outside the powers that the freedom of information act gave for the ministerial veto, so it would not be the absolute final decision.

Mr McLetchie will also be aware—and Mr Wallace has made the point already—that the ministerial veto would seldom be used and only in unusual circumstances.

That is a fair point. The Scottish information commissioner sits at the heart of our proposals. Everything that has been said today has underlined the importance of  the commissioner's role as a powerful, independent arbiter to protect the public's right of access to information. Mr Gallie raised questions early in the debate about the independence of the commissioner, given that the appointment is considered by the Parliament. I repeat the point that Mr Wallace made, which is that it is a decision of the whole Parliament, not the Executive. The Parliament will nominate the commissioner; the appointment is by the Queen. That is a protection of the independence of the commissioner, which applies to similar public bodies.

That is the likeliest outcome. I certainly hope that it would be. In this country, that is what we call democracy. In the course of the debate, the bill has been accused of making no change. The creation of the post of commissioner makes that a ridiculous assertion. The commissioner will be a vital watchdog protecting the interests of the public. If someone wants to find out why their local authority has taken a particular decision, for example, in allocating council houses, the bill will help. If a parent wants to know how money is being spent in their child's school, the bill will help. I choose those examples advisedly, because Gordon Jackson and Pauline McNeill are right. The bill is about more than the hunger of Opposition parties for their next press release or their next witch hunt. It is, above all, about the right of individual citizens to know information that affects their lives. If a public body will not release the information being requested, the commissioner will consider an appeal. No longer will people find themselves involved in long-drawn-out exchanges of correspondence, a war of attrition that has in the past invariably been won by the authority. Clearly, the effective operation of freedom of information will be driven by the commissioner. It is because of that that I am amazed at the attempts that we have seen today to identify, in great detail, what would and would not be disclosed under this legislation; it has almost been an attempt to develop a list of what might be made available.

I will take that point away for consideration and perhaps respond to Mr Quinan—it is a new one to me. We can have no list of what will be disclosed, because that will be decided and adjudicated on by the commissioner. The ministerial veto has been discussed. I repeat Jim Wallace's reassurance that there is no watering down in this section of the bill. The veto is to be exercised collectively because that is the way the Scotland Act 1998 works. I make the point to Roseanna Cunningham that there is no comparison between the use of the veto and the frequency of the use of Sewel motions. Sewel motions are a device unique to our Parliament and our constitution, whereas there are examples from similar freedom of information regimes where the ministerial veto is seldom used. Much has been made today of the exemptions. Let me repeat Jim Wallace's assurance that those are not loopholes. Exemptions are found in every freedom of information regime around the world; access to information is not, and never has been, an unconditional and open-ended right. There will always be information that must be protected against disclosure, and our draft bill provides for that. The exemptions are about ensuring that freedom of information operates to the benefit of the people of Scotland. That is why we have maintained our harm test of "substantial prejudice". I will deal with the case of the Lord Advocate and the Crown Office that has been raised by Ms Cunningham and others. The reason that the Lord Advocate is exempted is because, under the terms of the Scotland Act 1998, any decision taken by him or her as head of the systems of criminal prosecution and investigations of deaths must be taken independently of any other person, so under the terms of that act he or she could not be overruled by the commissioner. The Crown Office is subject to freedom of information and it is the duty of the prosecution service to act in the public interest, but in many cases there are competing interests, not only those of the victim and the accused, but between victims and between victims and witnesses. We will review the nature and type of information that can be made available privately to victims. The great exemption of Cabinet minutes, which so exercises David McLetchie, begs the obvious question: does William Hague intend to publish his Cabinet minutes if, God forbid, he becomes Prime Minister? Will he signal his intent to do so by publishing shadow Cabinet minutes now? If so, I will be first in line for the shadow Cabinet minutes  for the first meeting after Ann Widdecombe's famous foray into drugs crime policy. I would like to see the minutes of that meeting. The truth is that Mr McLetchie is the one who is hiding. He is hiding behind the certain knowledge that he will never appear in the Scottish Cabinet minutes.

I apologise to Mr McLetchie, but I must wind up now. We will have to consider and discuss the issue of the charging regime during the consultation. Members have raised some fair points in that respect. So where do we go from here?

The consultation on the draft bill is important; it will run for 12 weeks and closes on 25 May. We will remain true to our commitment to introduce an effective freedom of information regime. I commend the motion to the Parliament. This is the right bill at the right time.

Four words resonate in today's motion: death, devastation, sacrifice and resilience. They bring home to us the human dimension of an event in our history that we are commemorating today. It is particularly fitting that we should recognise the wartime sufferings and sacrifices of the people of Clydebank, as in many ways they epitomise those of the people of Scotland and the wider world during the second world war. Sixty years on, it can be hard to comprehend the effects that the blitz had on Clydebank's tight-knit community. Although the main facts are widely known and have been rehearsed this evening, some of them bear repeating. Between 13 March and 8 May 1941, almost 1,500 people died in Clydebank and around 2,000 were seriously injured as a result of the air raids. On the first night alone, under a clear bomber's moon, 272 tonnes of explosives and 1,650 incendiary bombs were dropped. On the next night, guided by the fires, the German bombers returned to deliver another 231 tonnes. All but seven or eight of the town's 12,000 houses were damaged or destroyed and more than 30,000 people were left without shelter. My parents recall what happened 60 years ago last night. They did not live in Clydebank, but in Leith on the east coast. They remember to this day sitting in their air-raid shelters and hearing the drone of bombers passing over on their way to Clydebank. Those bombers seared their way across Scotland and into our psyche. In those first two nights, they dropped the same tonnage of bombs on Clydebank as had been dropped on Coventry throughout the previous November. However, statistics on their own cannot convey the personal sufferings, which are documented in the harrowing tales of survivors, or—as Colin Campbell pointed out—the random horrors of particular incidents, such as the six young cub scouts killed on their way to their Thursday evening meeting. It is right that we should pause to reflect on the  terrible destruction and loss of life and that we should commemorate the sacrifices of the brave volunteers who fought the blazes and risked or gave their lives to save others. We should pay particular tribute to the courage of the Home Guard, the Royal Observer Corps, the air-raid precaution services, the first aid and ambulance crews and the voluntary firefighters. Furthermore, it is fitting that we recall the courageous role played by the Polish destroyer that Robert Brown mentioned, whose crew helped to defend the town and saved the HMS Duke of York, which lay at berth. The extraordinary courage shown by ordinary people during the Clydebank blitz was well summed up in a civil defence publication of the day. It said that "countless deeds were done which belong to the fighting traditions of Scotland, though they were done not by picturesque kilted figures at the charge but by drab dungareed men and women in 'tin hats'". I will return to that word "drab". The strategic raids on Clydebank's industrial heart were designed to destroy the contribution to the war effort made by the shipyards there. However, once the initial trauma of the raids had passed, the resilient character of the people became evident. Survivors returned immediately to work in the shipyards and factories. The Singer Sewing factory, which had been turned over to munitions work, was back in partial production only two days after the bombing and in full production six weeks later. Clydebank's productivity continued to play a major role in the war effort. John Brown's shipyards turned out warships of all kinds and converted the famous luxury liners that had been built in the 1930s—the Queen Mary and the Queen Elizabeth—into troopships. Some say that Clydebank's finest engineering achievement was the collection of floating piers known as Mulberry harbours, which were used in the Normandy landings. Meanwhile, on the home front, the people of Clydebank began to rebuild their community. Within only seven months, 95 per cent of the immediate repair work to housing had been carried out. The Clydebank people have never forgotten what it is like to suffer and they want to ensure that those sufferings were not endured in vain. The programme of events to commemorate the Clydebank blitz will ensure that the events of 60 years ago and their causes are recalled and that younger generations are made aware of them. Our First Minister and senior colleagues from other parties will join in those events to represent the Executive and the Parliament. Churchill commented on Clydebank's war effort:  "The world owes a debt that will not be easy to measure". In many ways, the Parliament is the measure of that debt as the newest manifestation of a democracy that, as Duncan McNeil said, would have been snuffed out 60 years ago had it not been for the sacrifice of those who stood up to fascism then. The dungarees and tin hats of Clydebank's men and women may have been drab, but Clydebank's spirit shines down the years to us. We are proud to welcome their memory in our Parliament and our pledge is that we will not forget.

The Executive has always supported the Leasehold Casualties (Scotland) Bill. There was unlikely ever to have been time to legislate on the matter at Westminster, and the Scottish Parliament is the ideal forum in which to do so. The Parliament can focus on specific aspects of Scots law and delve into its obscure corners. Adam Ingram has reminded us of the issues that led to the need for the bill, and I do not propose to go into them again. Suffice it to say that the bill will stop any further use of leasehold casualties to oppressive effect. As the bill's sponsor, Adam Ingram has worked with the Executive at each stage. At stage 2 in particular, he was most helpful in supporting certain amendments that we lodged following further scrutiny of the bill. He is to be congratulated on what I am sure will shortly be his success in seeing the bill through to fruition. Like Adam Ingram, I express my appreciation of the scrutiny that the bill received at stages 1 and 2 from the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and, later, the Justice 1 Committee. Members with a legal background took a particular interest in the bill, but all members have taken seriously their responsibility for scrutinising the bill. They have been particularly concerned to ensure that no door is inadvertently left open to allow further exploitation of leasehold casualties. I am confident that, if the bill passes this stage, that will be assured. Also like Adam Ingram, I acknowledge the work of my officials in the justice department. I hope that the Leasehold Casualties (Scotland) Bill will enjoy a smooth final passage through stage 3 this afternoon and will reach royal assent after the requisite four weeks' waiting period has elapsed. I am delighted to support the motion.

We are monitoring the development of residential sprinkler systems and research is being done. In addition, the Executive has funded fire safety publicity to promote the use of sprinklers in homes. Fire brigades have been encouraged to discuss with housing authorities and others opportunities for the installation of sprinklers in new and refurbished homes.

We are indeed aware of the work that Strathclyde Fire Brigade has done. Many of those issues were discussed at the conference that it held last year. Much of the evidence on sprinklers comes from the United States. Our experience is much more limited because sprinklers are a recent development here. First, we have to develop minimum standards of reliability and durability, and the matter of standards is under consideration and discussion. I accept that a new legislative framework for fire safety is needed. Although time is not yet available for that in our parliamentary  timetable, we will certainly look to introduce such a legislative measure in the future.

As is always the case, we will consider that bill when we see the details. We will certainly examine it with interest when it is introduced. We should not lose sight of the fact that there is much work still to be done using the fire technology that we have. For example, too many houses do not have smoke detectors or have smoke detectors that do not have batteries. A great deal of work has still to be done. As I said, as we develop minimum standards for sprinklers, that area will develop in our country.

An announcement will be made later this month on the action plan for Scotland Against Drugs for the next three years. That follows the Executive's announcement on 19 February that SAD will continue until 31 March 2004, with funding of £1.5 million a year. SAD will continue to work within the Executive's overall drugs strategy and will extend its successful activities, which are aimed at preventing drug misuse, addressing the consequences of drug misuse in local communities and harnessing support from business.

It seems to me that, as on other occasions, Mr Raffan's question is slightly confused. Considerable consultation took place, through the Scottish advisory committee on drugs misuse and the drug action teams, on how additional resources for the next three years should be used and allocated. In the past three years, SAD has had the specific role of training primary school teachers to deliver drugs education. The drug education programme and the movement towards our target of drug education in 100 per cent of our schools are being taken forward through local authorities and education departments, with support from their drug action teams and a range of agencies. It is not a particular responsibility of Scotland Against Drugs.

With the drug action teams, we have developed a detailed planning template under which they will be required to report back annually on how their resources are being used. The drug  action teams are our central mechanism for ensuring that resources are used where they are required and where they can be most effective. On top of that, we are making a significant investment in research into what is effective and what works. We are sharing that research with the drug action teams to ensure that we get the most from every single pound that we invest in fighting drugs misuse.

Not for the first time, of course, Phil Gallie absolutely misrepresents the position. First—as the convener of the Justice 1 Committee, Alasdair Morgan, has pointed out—any application for civil legal aid requires a test of reasonableness and, further, a test of probable cause and, indeed, financial eligibility. Anyone who had alternative resources would not qualify for civil legal aid. Secondly, it is important to recognise that the purpose of the instrument is to ensure that there is a proscription regime that is consistent throughout the UK. Its application in Scotland would be in the case of a group that was based in Scotland that was proscribed—of which there are none, and of which we expect there to be none. However, it seems prudent to ensure that the position is consistent. Thirdly—and most important—the purpose of  the instrument is to ensure that no terrorist organisation benefits from a legal technicality. That is its purpose. That is its priority. It is an entirely proper purpose and priority for us to support this evening.

Michael Matheson made the point that the SNP has consistently opposed Sewel motions in this Parliament. That is true. It is manifest in this half-hour debate, which we are having because the SNP consistently opposes Sewel motions.

My memory is that he said, "consistently opposed", but I am happy to concede the point. My point is that the Sewel motion is the crux of the debate for the SNP. Michael Matheson owned up to the fact that the SNP has, for the moment, no interest in the substance of the legislation to which this Sewel motion refers.

I think that if Mrs Grahame looks at the Official Report  tomorrow she will find that Mr Matheson says that the SNP's concern is not with the content of this legislation but with the use of the Sewel debate. He was open in acknowledging that the SNP's interest is simply in making that  single constitutional point yet again. When Mr Matheson wished to illustrate the importance of the scrutiny that has been denied to this Parliament, he picked the extension of the power of seizure for police officers. That will be excluded from the Sewel motion, as was explained later by other speakers in the debate.

The reason is simple and answers in part the SNP's criticisms. The police in Scotland have not brought any practical problem with that provision to our notice, so there is no need to make the change here that is required in England. If there is a problem in future we will address it, but there is no reason to do so now. The bigger point that Mr Matheson missed is that, while we might be denying ourselves the opportunity to scrutinise the bill for good reasons, we are not denying the opportunity for scrutiny on behalf of the Scottish people. Phil Gallie was right—that will be the responsibility of Scottish MPs, including the SNP MPs, in Westminster. Gordon Jackson made the key point—that we are being selective in the application of the legislation. It will be applied where we believe it will be the most effective way of ensuring a consistent regulatory regime or convention throughout the UK. If we create anomalies for the sake of a constitutional point, as Gordon Jackson said, the only beneficiaries will be the criminal fraternity. Much criticism has been made of the fact that the debate has been short—only half an hour. That criticism came from SNP members, but the criticism is not relevant because, in the end, for the SNP all debates are one and the constitutional question runs through each debate. Half an hour, three hours or every day—for them, it is the same single debate.

Will the member give way?

The Criminal Justice and Police Bill, currently being considered by the Westminster Parliament, introduces a range of measures to tackle crime and disorder. Its provisions would apply primarily to England and Wales but some would also apply to Scotland. Some measures relate to reserved matters, for example, travel restriction orders for drug trafficking offenders and the organisation and personnel of the National Criminal Intelligence Service. There are three measures that are within the legislative competence of this Parliament but which we believe are best dealt with in the bill. Those concern: the disclosure of information for the purposes of criminal investigation and proceedings; the extension of seizure powers of certain bodies, such as Her Majesty's Customs and Excise, to allow material to be removed for sifting; and the execution in Scotland of warrants issued in England and Wales for certain materials. We are asking this Parliament today for its consent that those provisions are included in the bill to be considered at Westminster. The proposals on information disclosure extend and rationalise the rules governing the disclosure of information that is needed for criminal investigations. They also create new disclosure provisions for the Inland Revenue and HM Customs and Excise, which currently cannot share information, even in criminal investigations. At present, the Inland Revenue may, for example, obtain information about drug trafficking but be unable to disclose it to the police. Some disclosure provisions currently prevent information from being shared before the start of any criminal proceedings and therefore hamper the police investigation. The bill would amend existing disclosure provisions, which are contained in a large number of existing statutes, some of which relate to devolved matters. The Parliament would have competence to legislate separately on the disclosure of information to detect and prevent crime for matters that are not reserved. However, the bill's aim is to standardise those disclosure provisions. That is best done across the UK to ensure the necessary consistency. The Executive  therefore proposes that both reserved and devolved disclosure matters should be dealt with as a whole in the Westminster bill. The proposals on powers of seizure would allow investigating officers to remove material from premises and individuals for sifting if that is not possible at the time of the search. For example, investigators could remove a large number of documents that they suspected included some for which they had a search warrant, and then go through the documents at their own premises to establish which ones they could seize. Although the Scottish police do not have those powers now, we do not propose that the provisions be extended to them. The current practice of sifting on the owner's premises or removing material with the owner's consent does not cause practical difficulties in Scotland. However, the provisions in the bill also cover the powers of a number of bodies that operate UK-wide, such as HM Customs and Excise and the Inland Revenue. There are also provisions affecting the powers of local authority officials, such as trading standards officers. The Executive accepts that those bodies and officials should have the same powers to do their job in Scotland as they would in the rest of the UK. There are also certain UK bodies, notably the Financial Services Authority, whose seizure powers are exercised through police constables. To preserve the UK-wide regime for those powers, the Executive proposes that they be exceptions to the general exclusion in the bill of Scottish police officers from the provisions. The final provision allows the execution in Scotland of warrants issued in England and Wales for excluded and special procedure material—that is, material of a confidential nature, such as personal records, journalistic or commercial material. Those warrants can be obtained only from a circuit judge in England and Wales, and a loophole in the current law means that warrants from those judges cannot be enforced in Scotland. We do not have the same problem enforcing Scottish warrants in England and Wales. The bill would therefore amend the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 to allow such warrants to be executed in Scotland. Although, once again, it would have been possible for this Parliament to legislate, the Westminster bill is the simplest and most effective way of closing that loophole. The Criminal Justice and Police Bill includes, of course, other substantive provisions that will not apply to Scotland. This motion simply ensures the closure of a loophole and avoids any risk of creating new ones in areas such as information disclosure. It is no more than commonsense co-operation between Parliaments in our common purpose of the fight against crime.  I move, That the Parliament notes the provisions on information disclosure for criminal proceedings and powers of seizure contained in Parts II and III of the Criminal Justice and Police Bill currently before the UK Parliament; recognises the practical value of consistency across the United Kingdom for information disclosure for criminal investigation, and for powers of seizure as they relate to certain United Kingdom bodies and local authority officials, and agrees that the relevant provisions to achieve this end in this Bill should be considered by the UK Parliament; further notes that the Bill allows certain warrants issued in England and Wales to be executed in Scotland, recognises the importance of mutual execution of warrants for law enforcement, and agrees that the relevant provision to achieve this end in this Bill should be considered by the UK Parliament.

Decisions on the funding of drugs work at local level rest with local authorities and other key bodies such as health boards and social inclusion partnerships. In general, the Scottish Executive is committed to three-year funding for voluntary organisations, and we are keen to work with other funders to provide a stable funding environment for the sector. Those principles were set out in the Scottish compact good practice guides, which were published last June.

Three-year funding for voluntary organisations, such as the Levenmouth project that Keith Raffan referred to, is desirable; I repeat that it is our wish to provide such funding. That is precisely why over next year and the following two years we not only have provided unprecedented resources for that kind of work in drugs treatment, prevention and rehabilitation, but have done so over the three years so that drugs action teams can take the kinds of decisions that will allow organisations such as DAPL to know what their future is. I hope that that will happen in the three years to come.

It is the responsibility of the drugs action team in Aberdeenshire to take decisions on how it invests in the voluntary sector to deliver our drugs strategy and we expect the DAT to explain to us how it plans to do that. However, the decisions that are taken on where funding goes are properly taken locally and on the ground, where people know and understand the organisations and the problems that they face.

It is only a week since my colleague Nicol Stephen launched the schools drug safety team report, which will play a significant role in improving the quality of educational and preventive drug strategies in schools. I am confident, as is the First Minister—a point that he  made in the debate this morning—that we will soon achieve, certainly by 2002, proper and appropriate drugs education for every one of our children, who are the future of this country. Indeed, in the next few days, when we announce the allocations from the £100 million over the next three years for this kind of work, members can be assured that there will be resources to make sure that that happens.

The recommendations of the report are primarily directed towards chief constables. The report provides an important new contribution to the work of the Stephen Lawrence inquiry steering group, which is chaired by the Deputy First Minister.

It is clear that policies must be turned into real and practical improvements. The Stephen Lawrence inquiry steering group is already working on many of the report's recommendations, including the development of comprehensive performance indicators for the police in relation to racist incidents. The key judgment on progress will come in 2002, when the inspectorate will formally follow up the report with a further inspection to ensure that progress has been real.

I agree that the report expresses concerns about the lack of progress on national training. The Lawrence steering group has in the past expressed similar concerns. However, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland has now prepared its national equal opportunities training strategy and the next stage is for ACPOS to produce an action plan detailing how to turn that strategy into a reality. We look forward to examining those proposals.

I am delighted to be able to give the Executive's support to this important proposal from the Justice 1 Committee for a protection from abuse bill. This debate is a testament to the flexibility and power of our new Parliament and its procedures. Standing orders enable committees to use their expertise to propose bills to the Parliament, as the Justice 1 Committee is doing today, and to develop legislation. I will digress for a moment. The committee's proposal may not be as modern an idea as we think. Hundreds of years ago, in the previous Scottish Parliament, the Committee of the Articles had the power to frame legislation. However, that ended in tears. As the Crown controlled that committee, it also controlled the legislative programme and, as a result, it was abolished by the revolution settlement in 1690. Indeed, in the face of opposition from William and Mary, its abolition was the first act of the 1690 session of the Parliament. History will not repeat itself in relation to committee bills. It is worth noting that, in our Parliament, the Justice 1 Committee is the first to start down the legislative road. The subject that it has chosen is important for the welfare of Scottish people, particularly women. The Justice and Home Affairs Committee spent considerable time gathering evidence, which it considered with care. Maureen Macmillan made a particular contribution to that process as reporter to the committee. Constructive chairmanship was provided by Alasdair Morgan and, as the convener said, by his predecessor, Roseanna Cunningham. In preparation for today, the committee also liaised with the Executive and its officials, which is appreciated. At the heart of the proposal for the bill lies the concern to help victims of recurring abuse. Alasdair Morgan is right to say that domestic abuse is an intolerable blot—a stain—on our society. This chamber and the Executive have demonstrated before that we will not tolerate it or its apologists. In November last year, the First Minister and Jackie Baillie announced an £18 million package to provide 300 more refuge places, fund a prevention strategy and support local services. That must be matched by changes in the law. Over the years, protective measures have been developed, from Lawburrows in 1429 through to the Protection from Harassment Act in 1997. The Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981, to which Alasdair Morgan referred, was quite forward looking in its day.  Each of those pieces of legislation addressed particular parts of the problem, but the gaps in provision have become clearer as society has changed and as our understanding of the problem of domestic abuse has become clearer. In 1992, the Scottish Law Commission proposed amendments to the 1981 act. The Justice and Home Affairs Committee's report said, quite rightly, that no one disputes the need to amend that legislation. As the convener said, the Executive consulted on those proposals in "Improving Scottish Family Law". Last September, in "Parents and Children", our white paper on family law, we reaffirmed what needed to be done. Interdicts with a power of arrest should be available to divorced partners and present and former cohabitants; they should therefore be renamed as domestic interdicts. The scope of matrimonial interdicts should be extended to cover the applicant's home and place of work, and the school attended by any child. Those are important improvements. However, the committee concluded—I think quite rightly—that there are some people whom the 1981 act cannot reach, even with those amendments. The committee has taken an innovative approach, and one that we applaud. It is right not to suggest trying tortuously to fit its proposals for interdict into the 1981 act. Its proposals will achieve more than reform of the 1981 act alone would ever have been able to do. That does not mean, however, that reform of the act is unnecessary. Our proposals to amend the act are complementary to the committee's proposed bill; they are not in competition with it. The committee's report recognised that. The Executive's proposals will provide an important protection in line with the needs of families in Scotland today. We published our white paper while the committee was working up its report, but we were not able to indicate the timing of our legislation. That is still the case. Indeed, it is more than likely that, if the Parliament approves the committee's proposal, the committee's bill will reach the statute book earlier than any other way of amending the 1981 act. I think that all members would agree that it is crucial that we act with maximum speed to keep our laws against domestic abuse up to date. The proposed amendments to the 1981 act and the proposed committee bill are further complemented by our proposals to strengthen the law on harassment, as announced in this chamber last week. That too requires a legislative vehicle to allow the attachment of a statutory power of arrest to a non-harassment order. In the debate on stalking and harassment, Jim Wallace suggested that, if the committee agreed, the protection from abuse bill might provide the most immediate  legislative vehicle. For the same reason, we have, in correspondence, suggested to the committee that its bill might also be extended to amend the 1981 act along the lines that we suggested in "Parents and Children". I recognise that there may be procedural difficulties in that. The scope of the bill would have to be wide enough to accommodate the extra provisions. There might well have to be a supplementary or amended report from the committee, and the committee might feel the need to take further evidence—although I would hope that that might be minimised by the extent of its previous consultation, the Scottish Law Commission's consultation and the consultation on "Improving Scottish Family Law", which led, of course, to our white paper. We appreciate that the extra provisions would mean extra work for the committee and its officials. However, the work would be to an important end, and could be based on much work that has already been done by the Executive and the Scottish Law Commission, whose report contained draft sections that should give a foundation to build on. We would, of course, be happy to provide whatever assistance we could to the Parliament and the committee, if they were willing to take that course. It would have been more straightforward if we had been able to make this proposal while the committee was taking evidence. However, only recently has it become apparent that the quickest way forward on this is likely to be with the committee's bill rather than Executive legislation. I hope that the committee will be prepared to widen its proposals to accommodate modernisation of the 1981 act, not as an alternative to but as an addition to the measures in the report. I look forward to further discussions with the committee on this issue, either in today's debate or on a later occasion. In any event, I am very pleased to confirm the Executive's support for the report and to commend the excellent legislative proposals that it contains.

We have had an interesting and wide-ranging debate. It has progressed discussions that, as Michael Matheson pointed out, have been under way in several forums over a number of years. It is clear that members from all parties feel deeply about this subject, and rightly so. I am sure that most members have had constituency cases in which people were scared, upset and angry about behaviour that they felt was causing them harassment, and in many cases much worse than that, as we have heard. It is therefore understandable that arguments have been made for a new statutory offence. Most people would agree that clarity and simplicity make for effective law, but evidence-based law making is the right way forward and evidence is still lacking. Research is the key to understanding the motivations behind stalking and the forms that it takes and is, therefore, the most appropriate solution. That is in line with the views that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and Victim Support Scotland, among others, expressed in their responses to the consultation paper. Both those bodies pointed to the need for greater understanding of the issues. That position also reflects the mix of support, reluctant support and doubt about the idea of a new statutory offence that has been expressed in this debate. Until we have substantially improved our understanding of stalking, we cannot be in a position to create good law. Good law is important in this matter. Several members have pointed out the failure to implement the current laws and the danger of bringing in new laws that we fail to use effectively. We cannot hope to find a definition that offers more than the current law until we have a greater knowledge of the types of behaviour that might comprise stalking.

We are in a position to act more positively because of this Parliament and because of committees such as the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, which will not allow us to do nothing for a further four years. Doing nothing seems impossible, given the level of interest in this issue. I will talk about the timetable later, but I believe—I think that the Executive believes—that we are unable not to make progress. We will have to demonstrate progress because of the level of scrutiny that we face. I want to repeat Jim Wallace's assurance that we have not ruled out the introduction of a new offence. Pauline McNeill made a fair point about time scales. We will commission research imminently and we envisage a report being available by summer next year. That will give us time to get the information that we need. We will revisit the issue then, when we will consider whether, in the meantime, there has been any improvement in the application and effectiveness of existing law. That gives members a kind of timetable for bringing the issue back to the Parliament. I must emphasise that we are not looking to fill a vacuum in the law. There would be no question of awaiting the outcome of research if people were left unprotected now. However, that is in no way to deny that some people have been failed by existing law. There have been tragic cases in which harassment has gone unchecked and has led to serious assault and even murder, as we have heard. However, there is law in place which, if it operates effectively, should protect people who are suffering at the hands of those who harass them. The use of the law on breach of the peace might not be universally popular, because that might be perceived as too vague or too trivial. However, it has strengths: it is flexible; it is widely understood; it is used; and it results in custodial sentences. Indeed, as we have heard, one of the strengths of the charge of breach of the peace is that, as a common law offence, it can attract the heaviest of penalties. Roseanna Cunningham is quite right—in theory at least, the penalty could extend to life imprisonment. That brings out the weakness in Phil Gallie's point that a new offence would provide adequate sentencing. A new offence could not carry a heavier theoretical penalty than does breach of the peace. Even with a new offence, the key would lie in the way that it was applied and  used. Several members have referred to the new crime of cyberstalking. Roseanna Cunningham pointed out that an earlier solution to the general issue of stalking might have left us with cyberstalking falling outside the law. The flexibility of the breach of the peace law helps us in such circumstances. It was used last year when a man in Ayr was sentenced to a term of imprisonment for harassing a young woman using e-mail. In that case, breach of the peace involved the sending of abusive e-mails and it resulted in a nine-month jail sentence. The sheriff commented on the ability of the common law to deal with electronic harassment. However, we can increase the effective use and application of the law. The exchange between the Deputy First Minister and Roseanna Cunningham on breach of the peace and harassment demonstrated that the measures that we have are not being implemented fully. Paul Martin made an important point that responding for victims of harassment is an obligation for many agencies, not only the police and the judiciary. We take that point and we will consider it. Existing law can be improved. We will act to strengthen the existing legal provisions. In particular, we will add statutory powers of arrest to non-harassment orders at the earliest opportunity. No one should be in any doubt that breach of an order is serious and will be treated as such by the justice system. Breach of a non-harassment order can result in a prison sentence of up to five years. Several speakers made points about interim non-harassment orders. Our initial reaction is concern that it would be difficult to grant such an order, breach of which could be a serious criminal offence, without the defendant being heard. However, we would like to take time to reflect on the suggestions and we will respond in writing to Roseanna Cunningham, who raised the issue first this afternoon. In conclusion, we believe that the package of measures that has been outlined today is sensible and sound and moves us forward. It will improve the application and awareness of existing laws at the earliest opportunity. Furthermore, the research will improve our understanding of how a new offence might be defined and how it might work. Above all, the package must offer better reassurance to anybody who fears that they are the victim of a stalker or harasser that protection and redress are available and that their concerns will be understood and addressed by the justice system. We all share that concern. We will move toward that aim this afternoon and will continue to do so in future.

I cannot promise to take nine minutes, but I shall endeavour to do my best—and I promise not to tell any jokes as bad as Mr Gorrie's. I have listened to the debate with great interest; members from all parts of the chamber have made interesting contributions. A feature of this Parliament that is always a source of great wonder to me is that members can rapidly become conversant with relatively obscure aspects of our law. That skill seems to have been particularly prevalent on the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, and it can be extremely frightening for ministers, particularly when they are relatively new to a topic, to have to face members with such expertise.

Indeed not, but the nine-minute time limit has certainly done so. It is pleasing that the motivation for becoming so conversant with our law has been clearly demonstrated this afternoon. Members want to  end the possibility of more Scots facing unexpected and oppressive demands for what can sometimes be significant sums of money. That is why so many members have taken an interest in the subject and have contributed to today's debate and to committee examinations of the proposed legislation. When Phil Gallie intervened during my earlier speech, I replied that we do not know how many properties are likely to benefit from the bill and that to find that out would involve a long and time-consuming examination of leasehold titles in areas of Scotland where they are prevalent. However, we had the benefit of a five-minute suspension during this afternoon's business, and I took that opportunity to nip out and count them as far as I was able. The Scottish Law Commission carried out a sample survey of titles and discovered that about a quarter of them contained provision for leasehold casualties. On that basis, we could estimate that 1,000 to 1,500 properties in Scotland could be affected by the bill. That is not an insignificant number of families and households where, were we not to pass the legislation, selling the property might invoke the situation that members have described. Several members raised the issue of compensation for the abolition of rental value casualties. As a matter of policy, we do not believe that rental value casualties have any place in modern property law. Indeed, the Scottish Law Commission has described rental value casualties as "unreasonably onerous and unjustifiable in current conditions". Rental value is based on the value of buildings as well as the land, as many members pointed out. As in the case of ground leases, under which buildings were invariably erected and paid for by the tenant, rental value casualties amount to a levy by the landlord on the value of developments on the ground carried out by successive tenants. That cannot be justified in a modern society. It may be legal under the law as it currently stands, but it seems quite improper.

I would be being dishonest if I said that I completely understood the question. Perhaps Mr Gallie would like to intervene again to clarify it for me.

The difference is that we are talking about the owner of the land benefiting from an improvement in the building that is placed on the land, not from an improvement to the property itself. As a number of members have said, tenants with long leases—perhaps 999 years—rightly regard themselves as owner-occupiers, or did. They are then confronted with demands for large sums simply because the title to their property was originally granted under one form of tenure rather than another. The commission described the current landlord as "claiming a return on tenants' capital because of a conveyancing device used by a distant predecessor".

Indeed, I can. As Mr Morgan knows, the general thrust of property law reforms in recent years has been to remove any continuing interest in the property on the part of the seller once the buyer has title to the property. That is the direction in which we expect this type of tenure to move as well. Because of the anomaly of the landlord getting something for nothing from a rental value casualty, the bill offers only nominal compensation based on ground rent. As a number of members guessed, we believe that some compensation should be provided under the bill to ensure that any challenge under the European convention on human rights can be successfully resisted. Article 1 of protocol 1 of the convention requires that a balance be struck between the greater public interest and the disproportionate impact that the legislation might have on an individual who is prejudiced. Compensation must be proportional to the loss, but it is clear from case law that it does not have to reflect the actual loss. A number of factors must be considered, for example, the price paid for the landlord's interest in an estate, his expectations and his input in return for payments,  as well as the interests of the tenants. The landlord gets something for nothing from rental value casualties as he benefits from investments made by tenants over the years, although he provides only the ground on which the buildings are erected. As Pauline McNeill and Gordon Jackson reminded us, Brian Hamilton admitted in evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee that he acquired estates including leasehold interests in ignorance of the potential value of leasehold casualties. Such income as he has enjoyed from rental value casualties might well be considered to be a windfall. In addition, although someone might derive an income from rental value casualties, the income stream would not be sufficiently reliable to give it a large market value. The prospect of abolition could act to drive down the value of casualties generally. Even so, the nominal compensation offered in the bill clearly does not reflect actual loss, but we believe that that is defensible under the convention in view of the public interest argument. A point has been made on several occasions about the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000. I return to the fact that there is a package of land reform. It was clear when that legislation was passed that it would not be enacted until the title conditions bill was also enacted. I hear the criticism about the time that the process has taken, but this will add up to a comprehensive reform within the first session of this Parliament. We can be pleased about that. Christine Grahame raised a couple of specific points. One was on the clarification of final decree in section 7. We should consider whether clarification is needed. We agree with the principle of that point. Christine Grahame also asked about the royal prerogative. I will again end on that charming note. The meaning of the paragraph that I read out is that Her Majesty and the Prince of Wales own property in Scotland as individuals. We do not know whether they own any landlord interests, but they have indicated that they are content to be subject to the provisions of the bill. That seems to be as good a note as any on which to end my speech. Credit and blame for the bill have been spread across parties and professions. We should now give the floor to Adam Ingram, who gets most credit for this excellent legislation.

I am happy to welcome Adam Ingram's bill on behalf of the Executive and to express our strong support for the policy that the liability to pay leasehold casualties and arrears of leasehold casualties should be abolished. The bill complements the Executive's programme of property law reform, based on recent reports by the Scottish Law Commission. We are pleased that it has found sponsors in Adam Ingram and Pauline McNeill. Like Adam Ingram, I acknowledge the work carried out on leasehold casualties by the Scottish Law Commission. It is worth noting that the commission described leasehold casualties as "an archaic, anachronistic and undesirable feature of Scottish property law" a fairly clear-cut judgment. As was so often the case, no time could be found at Westminster for a small piece of Scots law reform. However, this is precisely the kind of detailed, Scotland-only legislation that this Parliament is ideally placed to expedite, as we are doing today.  Many leasehold casualties involve small sums of money payable at fixed periods. In many cases, the sums are so small that it is not commercially viable to collect them. Although they are not onerous, they are outdated obligations that clutter up the titles of properties and they deserve to be swept away. As Mr Ingram has pointed out, however, we are doing more than simply tidying up an untidy and archaic piece of law. The problem that has given rise to most concern and caused most distress to householders who own houses held under very long leases is rental value casualties. The tenants, as they technically are, have suddenly and unexpectedly been faced with demands for large sums of money by landlords claiming payment of outstanding and long-neglected rental value casualties. Those landlords have taken a lawful opportunity to extract money from others, but the effect has been oppressive.

I am less interested in how many people have fallen foul of the current law than in the potential for others to fall foul of it in the future. It is difficult to make an estimate. As Mr Ingram said, there are four counties in Scotland where that type of property tenancy is quite common, so there is the potential for more people to suffer in the future. The key issue is the oppressive nature of the landlords' actions, and the legislation that we are considering today will ensure that no one faces such consequences and demands again. It is a frightening thing suddenly to be faced with a demand for up to £20,000. Tenants do not know whether the demand is valid and have to seek legal advice, usually from the solicitor who acted for them when they bought the house. Not all solicitors in the areas where leasehold casualties are prevalent have been negligent. Some will have advised their clients as to their potential liability. Some, on discovering that they have overlooked a valid and enforceable casualty, may have accepted responsibility and taken action at their own expense. In some cases, however, a tenant may be being threatened with legal action by a landlord while his solicitor denies or is reluctant to admit professional negligence. During such a period of uncertainty, the owner may face the threat of eviction if he or she does not pay up. That is an oppressive and difficult situation and it is right that we should take action to ensure that no one faces it in future. The Scottish Law Commission's report on leasehold casualties is one of a number of reports on property law that the Executive intends will be implemented by legislation. The commission's report on the abolition of the feudal system has already been put into law by the Abolition of  Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000. We are now preparing to consult on the commission's report on real burdens and title conditions. The final item in the Executive's current programme of property law reform concerns the law of the tenement. Although the commission published its report on the law of the tenement in 1998, it subsequently advised ministers that the logical sequence in which to reform the law would be to deal with abolition of the feudal system first, followed by reform of real burdens and title conditions and, finally, the law of the tenement. We intend to follow that sequence. The Scottish Law Commission is also undertaking a review of the existing law relating to residential long leases as part of its sixth programme of law reform. It is hoped that that area will be the subject of further legislation. Taken together, the reforms amount to a comprehensive restructuring of Scottish property law, which we hope the Scottish Parliament will pass within the next few years. Today's debate is a contribution to the package. In the course of the review of residential long leases, the Scottish Law Commission has obtained data on more than 2,500 such leases. The research has led the commission to suggest a number of amendments to the bill that is currently before Parliament. Those suggestions are intended to improve the coverage of the bill. The Executive will lodge appropriate amendments at stage 2 to give effect to them. I will summarise briefly the intended changes. First, the bill as introduced will affect only leases granted for periods of not less than 300 years so as to avoid inadvertently catching other provisions in modern commercial leases. The survey of long leases has revealed very few commercial leases of longer than 125 years, but has found a small number of leases of less than 300 years that contain leasehold casualties. We will therefore propose at stage 2 that the bill should apply to leases of more than 175 years, which reflects the longest period of lease permitted under the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000. Secondly, section 5 of the bill removes the landlord's right to irritate an ultra-long lease for non-payment of a trivial amount of rent. At present, section 5 is confined to leases granted for a period of 300 years or more with a ground rent of not more than £100. The Scottish Law Commission has discovered some leases with a rent of just over £100. We will therefore propose at stage 2 that the rent limit in section 5 should be raised to £150. Thirdly, we will propose that section 5 be amended to provide that all rights of irritancy  which allow the landlord to terminate for breach of the lease by the tenant will be void. That will put beyond doubt the fact that the provision covers the landlord's common-law right to irritate a lease for non-payment of two years' rent as well as conventional irritancy clauses. Last, in order to put beyond doubt whether certain leases with renewal or break-option terms fall within the scope of the bill, the commission has suggested that the provisions that define the length of relevant leases for the purposes of the bill should be amended appropriately. We will propose at stage 2 that renewal periods should be included when calculating the length of leases. In the case of leases with break options, the length of the lease will be treated as the full term and not the period to the next possible break option. The changes are intended to improve the coverage of the bill and I hope that, when the time comes, the committee will give the proposed Executive amendments a smooth passage. For the purposes of rule 9.11 of the standing orders, I advise the Parliament that Her Majesty and His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales as Prince and Steward of Scotland, having been informed of the purport of the Leasehold Casualties (Scotland) Bill, have consented to place their prerogatives and interests, so far as they are affected by the bill, at the disposal of the Parliament for the purposes of the bill. [MEMBERS : "Oh."] The Executive believes that this bill is a necessary and desirable reform—as the previous paragraph was a necessary and desirable paragraph, whatever it might mean. I commend the bill to members.

At a local level, drug action teams bring together all the relevant agencies that are tackling drug misuse, including health boards, local authorities, the police, the Prison Service and the voluntary sector. Reducing drug-related deaths will depend on the work of all those agencies. The Executive monitors the work of drug action teams. Reducing the number of drug-related deaths is one of a number of national targets that I announced recently.

I can only agree with Trish Godman that one drug-related death is one too many. However, the hard fact is that drug-related deaths increased to 340 in 1999, which is the last year for which we have figures. The target that we have set to reverse that trend is challenging, but we are determined to achieve it. The detail of how we will do that and of the areas in which we will invest to ensure that we do will come when we reveal the detail of the £100 million investment over three years that has already been announced. That will lead to increased treatment options including more shared care, more needle exchanges and, importantly, better through care for those leaving prisons' treatment programmes.

I think that I answered Mr Raffan's question in my previous answer. I agree that, in dealing with drug-related deaths, there is an important moment when people leave prison and return to the community. The details of our investment in through care will come in time. The key point is that the Scottish Prison Service must play a part in the local drug action teams to ensure that there is a linkage between the local services and the treatment that prisoners receive. The Scottish Prison Service deserves credit for the progress that has been made with drug treatment programmes. It is widely recognised that the linkages between those programmes and the community have to be strengthened.

As Bill Aitken suggests, this has not been a partisan debate, and I make no partisan point when I remind members that this is the 100 th anniversary of the Labour Party. In that vein, the Secretary of State for Scotland is fond of pointing out that our founder, Keir Hardie, stood on a four-point platform 100 years ago. The first three points were a Scottish Parliament, reform of the House of Lords and a guaranteed wage, all of which the current Labour Government has delivered. The punch line is that Keir Hardie's fourth election pledge was temperance. We will not deliver on that, as Neddy Scrymgeour did not deliver on it in Dundee. I make that point lightly, but with the serious intent of underlining the fact that alcohol—its effects, its control and its production—is a strand that has always run through reformist Scottish politics. Indeed, it runs through the history of civic Scotland. My father, when a boy, was a member of the Band of Hope, which was an abstinence movement then active in Leith. That is in the constituency of my colleague Mr Chisholm, although I am referring to a time a little before Mr Chisholm's, of course. Alcohol is a theme that also runs through Scottish culture, as in Burns, who says: "Wi' usquabae, we'll face the devil!" The trouble is that, too often, usquabae is the devil. As many members have made clear, it takes a toll in undermining our people's health and happiness and in fuelling disorder. Members' speeches have also served to demonstrate the complexities of the issues and to reinforce the need for our strategy to be sufficiently wide-ranging and flexible.

One of the reasons for our taking some time to develop a strategy—for which we have suffered some criticism—is that we have to place it in the context of international thinking on alcohol misuse. That international thinking ought to be considered as we develop our strategy over the next year or so. The strategy must be realistic and practical. As many members have pointed out, it must recognise that the majority of people who drink do so responsibly, with little harm to themselves or others. As Shona Robison said, the strategy must deal with the messages on alcohol, which are sometimes mixed. Mary Mulligan illustrated that point from today's press. The strategy must also address the binge culture, which is often encouraged in young people—as Elaine Murray pointed out—not only by the media, but by the way in which some drinks are promoted. The strategy must also address the issue of adequate resourcing. However, we should examine what is already being spent. Malcolm Chisholm was honest in pointing out how difficult it is to garner information on how much is spent on dealing with the effects of alcohol. For example, Des McNulty spoke of alcohol-related brain damage in Glasgow. Greater Glasgow Health Board estimates that it spends £3.3 million directly on that problem. Clearly, that sum is not included in the figure of £2.5 million that was mentioned. An exercise needs to be done to ascertain how resources are being spent. Both my department, with its responsibilities for criminal justice and licensing matters, and the health department have a significant role to play in reducing alcohol-related harm. Mr Chisholm, who chairs SACAM, has undertaken to note Christine Grahame's point and to consider the lack of criminal justice input into the advisory committee. I also have specific responsibility for drugs strategy. A number of members have commented on the priority that is given to drugs. The misuse of alcohol and the misuse of drugs are major health and social problems. However, we must recognise that they are different. On one hand, we are dealing with a legal and socially acceptable activity controlled by regulation, where the pattern of consumption is probably the central and most harmful issue. On the other hand, we have an illegal activity that causes widespread misery to individuals and communities through consumption  itself and the crime that funds that consumption. I make no apologies for the priority attached to tackling drug misuse. However, that does not—and must not—diminish our desire to address alcohol misuse. The Executive believes that it is right to keep the national strategies separate. However, we need to ensure that there are links—particularly at local level, where drugs and alcohol overlap—in the planning and delivery of some services. Mary Mulligan gave the example of such work in West Lothian and there are other examples to be found throughout Scotland.

It is not a hotch-potch, but an example of just the kind of local decision making in the planning and delivery of services that we intend to encourage. Some of the services benefit from joint delivery on alcohol and drug misuse, but that is not the case for all services. I am pleased at the support expressed for a review of licensing. There is no doubt that the time is ripe for us to take another good look at the regulatory framework. It is 30 years since that was done and our world has changed, as Keith Harding said. I came across a quote recently, which might be of interest to members: "I am continually brought up against the damage that is done to Scotland as a nation by misuse of alcohol and alcohol-related crime. I pore over cases relating to the release of life-sentence prisoners and am amazed at the number of times that the original crime was related to alcohol." —[Official Report, Written House of Commons, Scottish Grand Committee, 15 April 1975; c 6.] Those words are from Willie Ross's opening address, as Secretary of State for Scotland, to the Scottish Grand Committee on the consideration of the Clayson report in the early 1970s. It is clear that we have not come far enough, particularly when we pore over the unacceptably high levels of violent death in 1999, as shown in the figures published yesterday. The review needs to be thorough and I say quite clearly that it will take some time. We need to consider its remit carefully, but it will certainly have to consider issues both of public health and of public order. As Malcolm Chisholm indicated, that is why we feel unable to accept the Conservative amendment, because it pre-empts the scope of the review, although I am happy to acknowledge that there is no disagreement with its intent.

I am out of time. Several members have indicated the importance of tackling under-age drinking; I can only agree with them. The local community newspaper in my constituency features that problem and I expect that every member could produce similar evidence from their own constituencies. The strategy and the licensing review must both address that difficult issue. Today's debate has been short but important, first, because it has finally allowed me to make good the promise that I made to Christine Grahame and, secondly, because it has to be the tip of the iceberg. From today flows the development of the action plan, the review of the licensing laws and the further engagement of the Parliament and its committees with this issue, which has been at the centre of reform in Scotland for so many years.

rose—

Tommy Sheridan can be rightly proud of proposing the second member's bill to complete its passage through the new Scottish Parliament. I will not use what little time I have in going over old ground about the right time for commencement—we will abolish something that is simply no longer acceptable in this day and age. Parliament can take pride in the fact that it has agreed that poindings and warrant sales should be abolished. However, we all know that we cannot simply leave things there. Taking pride in a job well done means finishing the job—today's business does not do that. We cannot just leave a gap. Parliament is not in the business of creating loopholes in the law, which would—make no mistake—be exploited. Some members might be willing to turn a blind eye to the situation. They might be content to make it easy for some people who can pay their debts to get away with not paying, but the vast majority of members are not content to do that. We cannot create an opportunity for some people—whether that means a business that does not pay its VAT or an individual who does not pay their council tax—to evade their responsibilities while the majority of people fulfil theirs. That is simply not just. Let us therefore put in place a proper replacement—a humane and effective replacement—and do the whole job. The Justice and Home Affairs Committee said rightly that there must be a replacement in place  when we abolish poindings and warrant sales. Jim Wallace has told Parliament—I remind members again today—that the Executive has taken up the Justice and Home Affairs Committee's challenge to find a workable and humane alternative. Devising such an alternative is a difficult task. It does not lend itself to Tommy Sheridan's approach, which is high on rhetorical flourish, but low on factual accuracy. Indeed, so far he has shown himself to be unwilling to work with us to find solutions. The working group that was set up to find a solution has been working hard to achieve its goal within a tight time scale. It is of great regret that Mr Sheridan and Christine Grahame, having accepted the invitation to join us on the basis of the remit for the working group, walked out for their own political reasons. As stunts go—

I understood that the invitation to join was issued on the basis of the remit. If Christine Grahame and Tommy Sheridan chose to walk out for their own reasons, that is their business. As stunts go, it hardly made headlines at the time and it will not affect the working group's progress. If Mr Sheridan and Mrs Grahame will not play and do not want to find solutions, that is their business, but those who are prepared to do the hard work and find the workable and humane alternative that is sought by the Justice and Home Affairs Committee include the Scottish Consumer Council, Money Advice Scotland and Citizens Advice Scotland. Those organisations have no interest in melodrama, but they have a serious interest in the daily drama of debt because they know and represent the people who are struggling with debt day in, day out.

I will respond to Mr Sheridan, even though he has chosen to make an intervention from a sedentary position. I will not contest what he says—my point is that those organisations are willing to work with us to find a humane and  acceptable workable replacement. That is the difference between those organisations and Mr Sheridan.

The working group now meets every second week and is working hard to bring together diverse interests. It is co-operating to find a solution that will work for everybody. The people on the group are giving up their time because they are committed to finding an alternative that will work, that will not leave a loophole and that will be humane. The working group has been willing and waiting to hear what the group that Tommy Sheridan talks about has to say on its much-vaunted alternative solution. Members can see that from Angus McKay's letter, which Mr Sheridan has copied to them. Mr MacKay has repeated today the statements in that letter but, until today, we had yet to hear anything at all from Tommy Sheridan's group—apparently because the members of the group are not able to agree among themselves. The paper—launched as the group's position—carries a disclaimer to the effect that it does not represent the group's position. I do not know what that makes it, but in Mr Sheridan's mind, its defining characteristic seems to be that it is 47 pages long.

The paper is neither a complete solution nor a competent legislative proposal for Parliament to consider. No sudden flurry of activity in the last two days—two months after he flounced out of the working group—can hide Mr Sheridan's failure to progress a solution. The bill is a good start, but it is half of a reform—the easy half. I urge members to support the motion. Then let us finish the job properly.

There is, in rural communities throughout Scotland, a wide range of initiatives that are designed to raise awareness of drug misuse. Drug action teams and their constituent agencies plan and co-ordinate drug awareness work in each area in line with the national drug misuse strategy and taking account of local circumstances. The additional £100 million that was announced recently to tackle drug misuse includes funding for drug education and prevention, including national awareness work, which will benefit all areas of Scotland, including rural communities.

I am happy to join Maureen Macmillan in drawing attention to that media project, which is an excellent example of how the business sector—in this case, Moray Firth Radio, I think—and the contributors to the Scottish challenge fund can engage in action against drug misuse. We need more of that throughout Scotland. A couple of weeks ago, I attended a Scotland Against Drugs business breakfast in Elgin, which pulled together 60 businesses from Moray to get them engaged in such activity. We must mobilise all sectors throughout Scotland to defeat drugs.

We recognise, as was made clear in previous debates on our drug misuse strategy, the significant problem of alcohol abuse, which must be addressed. For that reason, we have taken steps towards an alcohol strategy. My colleague, Malcolm Chisholm, is chairing the Scottish advisory committee on alcohol misuse. Parliament will, I think next week, debate our approach to alcohol. Although we believe that we must take a separate national strategic approach, many local drug action teams are actually drug and alcohol action teams. That helps to ensure that services are delivered as efficiently and effectively as possible.

In the debate that we had on drugs courts recently, I made it clear that the next stage of introducing this measure as effectively as possible is the development—with the Scottish Court Service and the Crown Office—of a Scottish model of drugs courts. Work has begun on that. In that debate, Richard Lochhead made clear his belief that there is a particular interest in developing that initiative in the north-east. I am happy to note that point again.

The Scottish Charity Law Review Commission took formal evidence from Scottish Executive officials on 13 July and from the director of the Scottish charities office on 14 September.

I have worked in the charity sector and I understand the concerns that Mr Quinan has described. The Scottish Charity Law Review Commission is working to a time scale. Its membership was announced in March 2000 and April 2001 is its deadline for reporting to ministers. It is on schedule. Considerable progress has been made. Two hundred consultation papers have been sent out and 1,000 responses have been received. There have been six road shows. We expect to receive the report on time in April 2001.

The commission will be well aware of that point. It has been asked to look into the whole charity sector in Scotland, which—as Mr Gorrie suggests—is extremely diverse. I am sure that, in its recommendations, the commission will take account of the great differences between small local charities and the much larger organisations. We look forward to hearing those recommendations.

That seems a curious point to make, given that this is a Tory debate and that the length of the debate was entirely that party's choice.

The debate has been interesting and has raised many points, a frightening proportion of which were mentioned in Christine Grahame's three minutes. I will attempt to address those points at a later date. I said that I hoped that the debate would provide some clarity. Our view is indeed clear. Where responsibilities are shared, we cannot simply talk and act as though they were not. It is for the local authorities and Unison to resolve the dispute. We have created conditions which make that possible; the budgetary plans that we announced in September are generous. We are clear that district courts are a shared responsibility of local government to provide a local, lay component to our justice system. If that is to be changed, we will change it for sound reasons of improved justice. We await clarity on the Tories' position. Do they advance arguments of justice for their proposed changes, or is this simply one more manifestation of their unrelenting and vindictive antipathy to local government and trade unionism? The Tories propose new restrictions to prevent court staff  from taking industrial action, but they must know that that is a reserved matter. Are they proposing such a move at Westminster, where it matters? Are sweeping constraints on the right to industrial action to be a manifesto commitment for the general election? Have they forgotten that similar plans in the previous Government's green paper were roundly condemned by employers' organisations as unnecessary?

I confess that I fail to understand John Scott's point. The Conservatives' motion suggests that there should be a restriction on the right of court workers to take industrial action. We do not intend to introduce such a measure. My question to the Tories is whether they seriously propose that; or whether the proposal is an ill-thought-out, knee-jerk reaction to the issue du jour? I do not belittle the cases that may be abandoned. Although I cannot give an immediate breakdown of the 4,000 cases that have been lost, I can say that in the past year, where figures are available, 44 per cent of district court cases were motoring offences; 33 per cent were miscellaneous offences; 12 per cent were crimes of dishonesty; 5 per cent were criminal damage offences; and 3 per cent were minor drugs offences. Those 4,000 cases are likely to show a similar breakdown. To Bill Aitken, I say that although I am new to my portfolio, I know the difference between Glasgow district court and the other district courts. The available facts from past years show that, none the less, the results of proceedings in Glasgow district court—including stipendiary magistrates courts—are comparable with the old Scotland figures, with the exception that one is rather more likely to be admonished in Glasgow district court than elsewhere.

I turn now to the consequences of the dispute for victims—the victims of crime, that is, not the victims of Bill Aitken's version of justice. I deplore the consequences of the dispute for victims. It is small comfort that they are victims of less serious crimes. Misinformation prevails. If people have suffered personal injury—and Mr Gallie made reference to this—the criminal injuries compensation scheme is still available to them. It does not depend on prosecutions or convictions: it is a victim-led scheme. Criminal compensation orders are few in the district court.  It is simply fatuous to suggest that the Executive does not care about the victims of crime. One of my first engagements as the Deputy Minister for Justice was to speak at a victim support conference, at which founder members who have been active in the field for 15 years acknowledged that support for victims is now given priority and funding that they could never have dreamed of when they started. When Lyndsay McIntosh winds up, perhaps she can confirm that, as she was at that conference. We will discharge our responsibilities to improve our system of justice through the forthcoming review of the district courts, and we will do that in good time. We will not allow the industrial action to result in ill-considered legislation. I hope that those who are responsible for the industrial action will recognise the trust that is vested in them to deliver effective local justice in Scotland. I also hope that, in closing, Lyndsay McIntosh will demonstrate how the Tories' proposals would genuinely contribute to tomorrow's justice, not just to today's headlines.

Does Mr Matheson accept that he has just illustrated perfectly the point that I made: that this is a shared responsibility?

I welcome the chance to clear up some of the misleading comments about the situation in Glasgow district court that have been flying around in the press and, I regret to say, in Phil Gallie's speech this morning. We need some clarity. I want to say something about the current industrial action, about how the courts are meant to work and about our review of the district courts. I will begin with the Unison strike. Unison has deliberately targeted the busiest of our district courts. That is unfortunate and disruptive and is a matter for profound regret. We do not condone it. However, it is a dispute about pay between Unison members and their local authority employers. The Executive has provided local authorities with significant resources, providing a real increase in grant support this year and an additional £1.2 billion over the next three years. That amounts to a 10.5 per cent increase over those three years. It is for local authorities to decide how much to offer their employees and it is for the unions to negotiate on their members' behalf. It is not for the Executive to interfere or intervene. However, I note that two trade unions, the Transport and General Workers Union and the GMB, which have a long and proud history of successful representation of local government workers, have accepted the deal offered by local authorities.

I recognise that that has happened, but I would not care to comment on it for the reason that I have just given. I note that negotiations continued yesterday and I sincerely hope that progress is being made. I want to make four points about the strike. First, it is localised. The focus has been on Glasgow, and it is in Glasgow that business is being disrupted seriously. I agree with Mr Gallie's estimate that around 4,500 cases have been affected so far. Secondly, most of the crimes of the greatest concern to the public and to victims of crime, such as assault and theft, are common law crimes. They are not time barred and will not automatically fall. Thirdly, if business is lost as a result of time bars, it will mostly relate to statutory offences, such as non-payment of television licences, carrying on activities without an appropriate permit, or vehicle excise duty offences. Those are usually regulatory matters and those offences have no victim, in the sense of a person who has been physically hurt or has suffered loss to property. Fourthly, it is, by definition, the less serious cases that are being disrupted. More serious business goes to the sheriff courts or the High Court. I am not saying for a moment that the cases that are being disrupted are not serious. The disruption of justice is always a serious matter, but we must place it in context.

If the case is a common law case, it is not time barred and will not fall automatically because the court is closed on the day that has been arranged. I would like to reply to a point that Mr Gallie made in his opening speech. Around 1 per cent of district court convictions lead to custody. For Mr Gallie to talk in the media, as he did some weeks ago, of hundreds of villains walking free or, as he did this morning, of thousands of villains walking free, is disingenuous hyperbole at best. I will now consider the Executive's role. What have we done and what can we do? First, the Crown has done everything in its power to prevent  cases from being abandoned or lost as a result of the industrial action. Although only Glasgow district court has been singled out for indefinite strike action, Unison's days of all-out strike have had an impact elsewhere. In Edinburgh, it has been possible to double up the courts and keep them open. Not one case has been dropped. I am afraid that similar efforts in Glasgow were deliberately frustrated. Secondly, Scottish ministers have a power under the District Courts (Scotland) Act 1975 to intervene in the interests of efficiency by appointing stipendiary magistrates. However, that would be of no help while key supporting staff are still on strike. Thirdly, we could introduce emergency legislation, but to what effect? Such legislation was introduced in 1979, but that was to deal with a national strike involving the High Court and sheriff courts—a more serious matter than this local dispute and one that involved civil business. Such a course of action would be unprecedented and, I would argue, disproportionate when only one local court is affected. In any case, we could not outlaw industrial action in the courts and we could not necessarily prevent cases from falling if a protracted strike were to produce excessive delay and associated ECHR challenges. Any objective and clear-sighted examination of the matter suggests that the likeliest solution lies in the swift resolution of the dispute or, failing that, an agreement that justice be exempted from the impact of the dispute. Looking beyond the current situation, the Conservative motion calls on us to transfer administration of the district courts out of local authority hands. I would like to say something about current arrangements and about our review of the district courts. The District Courts (Scotland) Act 1975 replaced a variety of local courts with the new district courts. The district courts are intentionally distinctive and reflect a careful and deliberate balancing of roles and responsibilities between central and local government. The role of Scottish ministers is essentially to do with judicial appointments. Under the 1975 act, local authorities are responsible for providing "suitable and sufficient premises and facilities for the purposes of the District Court". The 1975 act also established local justice committees. One of their independent statutory duties is to assist or advise local authorities on the administration of the district courts. Local justice, delivered by partnership between central and local government, is no accident, but a deliberately conceived part of our system of justice. It is therefore not something to be  abolished lightly, on a whim or for reasons of political expediency, but it bears full and proper examination rather more extensive than can be given in a one-hour debate. That is why we announced a review of the district courts during debates on the Bail, Judicial Appointments, etc (Scotland) Act 2000. Since then, there have been a number of meetings and we hope to issue a consultation paper in the new year. The review will address a full range of issues: the powers of the court, the handling of business and the efficiency and effectiveness of the system. It will consider afresh the respective responsibilities and roles of central and local government. We have undertaken that the review will be objective, will not take a position and will be a catalyst for discussion of the issues. In short, we will consider all the options, including those that have been raised today. Our eventual proposals will be a serious attempt to secure the long-term interests of local justice rather than a short-term, opportunistic response to an industrial dispute. I move amendment S1M-1404.2, to leave out from "and calls" to end and insert "; recognises that the Crown has worked to protect business in District Courts and that this has proved successful except in the case of Glasgow, and urges the suspension of further action affecting the courts."

As a number of members have said, at a time when we know that as much as 70 per cent of crime has some link to problem drug use, it is heartening that the Parliament chooses to devote its time today to debate the issue, and I acknowledge that the SNP chose the subject. I am also pleased that my first debate as Deputy Minister for Justice has allowed me to signal the Executive's commitment to working up a model of drugs courts for Scotland. I cannot promise that, as minister, I will always agree with the Opposition, but this is a nice start. I will probably always have the record for the quickest accusation of a ministerial U-turn, which happened before I had the chance to stand up in my new role, but I am heartened by the agreement that there has been in the debate, which has risen above the minor party political points that all sides have made. It has become clear that, although on the  surface drugs courts seem like a simple option, they are not. Done properly, however, they represent an intensive intervention by the courts and criminal justice social work services, as well as treatment and rehabilitation services, working together. A number of important points have been made about that. Maureen Macmillan and Euan Robson are right to say that in considering the Scottish context we must consider not only our legal system and traditions, but our geography and population spread. I acknowledge that a drugs court model must be practical in rural as well as urban Scotland. Bill Aitken is correct that a range of disposals is already available. I indicated that we intend to broaden the range, but the distinctive feature of the drugs court concept is the closer relationship between the criminal justice system, the treatment regime and the agencies that are involved. The element of specialism, to which Bill Aitken alluded, makes the drugs court concept different and more effective. On the disposals that are being developed, I say to Roseanna Cunningham that in the spending review there are resources to help spread out arrest referral schemes. To Richard Lochhead, who made a plea for the drug problem in Aberdeen not to be forgotten, I say that that is one of the reasons why drug testing and treatment orders have been extended to Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire. That approach holds out the prospect of reducing the amount of drug-related crime; that will be its test. I have little interest in whose idea it was. That is a pointless argument, which Hugh Henry described rather more graphically. We have the opportunity to create an effective system. To achieve the results that we want, we must ensure that we set up systems that have the best chance of success. I do not apologise for taking the time to get that right. Many members said that ensuring ready access to treatment and rehabilitation services would be critical to our success. The Executive has invested an extra £100 million from the spending review in the services that are required.

We are running late, so I am sorry but I cannot give way. Lyndsay McIntosh rightly gave an example of the gaps in treatment services that we must address to make the drugs courts concept work. The additional resources for treatment are part of our programme for government commitments and give us the opportunity to move on the idea of drugs courts while ensuring that we meet the concerns of Hugh Henry and others, who want non-offending drug misusers to have access to treatment programmes too.  We are taking the right approach and learning lessons from experiences here and abroad. We are devising our own system, which will be rooted in Scottish legal institutions and traditions. As Robert Brown said, that must be part of a wider agenda that joins up services to meet the needs of the whole person for treatment, rehabilitation and reintegration into employment, family networks and the community. That will give individuals the best chance of turning their backs on drug misuse and its effects. The agenda must co-ordinate action to ensure education and prevention with consistent messages for young people, as Maureen Macmillan said. Misusers must have opportunities to move on to employment through education and training, and enforcement measures must be taken to reduce the availability of drugs on our streets. The strength of our approach lies not in a single issue but in the breadth of our response and commitment and in the breadth of the political will shown today in the chamber. That will allow us to deliver on the agenda that we have set for ourselves and for our people all over Scotland.

I welcome the opportunity to reply to motion S1M-1303, although as Roseanna Cunningham said, perhaps it is a little early for me to be doing so. However, I can cope with that, partly because I agree with most of what she said. I am not surprised by that, because Parliament has often demonstrated its determination to get to grips with  the problem—I hope that any repetition will be viewed in that context. We are all agreed that drug-related crime imposes too heavy a cost on society. It accounts for much of the commonest property crime, such as house breaking, vehicle crime and shoplifting. Some of that might be characterised as petty crime, but its impact is not petty. It robs our people not only of their property, but—worse—of their security, their peace of mind and their sense of community. Every member knows that that is the case in the communities that they represent. The truth is that such crime blights the lives of drug-misusing offenders and their families. That is why the Executive and Parliament have made the fight against drugs one of their top priorities and why the Executive is developing a coherent and effective response to the problems that we face from drug-related crime. The key fact is that we cannot promote one initiative in isolation. We need a package of measures that addresses the problem at every stage. That was the message that underpinned my predecessor Angus MacKay's approach to tackling the problem of drugs in Scotland. I, too, intend to pursue that approach. We need a balanced strategy that combines the two main elements. It is important to recognise that the criminal justice system can intervene at critical times in an offender's drug-using career. It is when individuals come into conflict with the law that they are often most motivated to seek help for their addictions. At those times, we must ensure that they have ready access to the help that they need. A strong enforcement policy is key in our fight against drugs, but often enforcement has a greater chance of success when it sets out to tackle the underlying problems, as Roseanna Cunningham suggested.

I agree. There is a range of ways in which to bring enforcement and treatment together. The main attraction of drugs courts is that they would achieve that.

Is this the definition of cruel and inhumane punishment?

Although the microphones are not working, I see that the clock is. I will say something about the drugs courts model later. The key to drugs courts is that they aim to address the underlying problem of drug misuse, when criminality first becomes its consequence. Drugs courts try to prevent people from becoming involved in the life of crime that follows that cycle of offending. In general, drugs courts bring together enforcement and treatment, which is why the Executive is taking action in a number of ways to link offenders more effectively with treatment and rehabilitation. We have provided extra resources—almost £100 million—in the spending review to fund the broadest range of services that has ever been seen in Scotland. Within that, an extra £9.5 million is available over three years to make a comprehensive framework of alternatives to custody available to Scottish courts. Roseanna Cunningham spoke of the drug treatment and testing orders that are being piloted in Glasgow and Fife. Such orders are designed to tackle the problems of offenders who are involved in more serious drug misuse and who have many repeated offences. The orders are important—they incorporate some of the central features of drugs courts, such as access to treatment, routine testing and review in court. I am pleased that we are extending the pilots to Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire, in order to build further on our experience of what works. We must be able to intervene at each stage in the criminal justice process. We have announced the national roll-out of diversion from prosecution schemes, which target those who are at the other end of the spectrum for drug treatment and testing orders. The schemes are an alternative to prosecution for individuals whose offending career is just starting. DTTOs give people the chance to address their drug use before they launch into a full-blown career of offending. We also have plans to target medium-tariff and higher-tariff offenders by developing a new model of enhanced probation, which will build in drug  testing and treatment as a condition of sentence and will include regular reviews by the courts. Roseanna Cunningham made the point that the growth in drug-related crime is not peculiar to Scotland. That is true—the problems are international and it is not surprising that countries are keen to learn from experiences beyond their boundaries. A great deal of attention has centred on the north American experience of drugs courts. In that system, drugs courts are designed specifically to supervise drug dependent offenders who have agreed to accept treatment. Thus, that system's objectives are similar to those that we have set in our policy. It would be too easy to believe that the American system could be picked up and transferred wholesale to Scotland—our legal system, traditions and culture must be respected. However, we are keen to learn from the United States and I believe that we can move forward to introduce a Scottish drugs court model. We have been working with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities on the issue and have commissioned research into the international experience. We will broaden our discussions on how to introduce and test that drugs court model. The judiciary and the prosecution have key roles to play and we must consult our judiciary, the Lord Advocate and the Crown Office on the roles that the judiciary and prosecution can undertake. Drugs courts will be successful only if they form part of an overall framework. We must plan their introduction carefully and it is essential that we put in place the infrastructure to support treatment and rehabilitation services first. However, now that the spending review has provided the resources, we are well placed to develop those services. The drug action teams' role in local responses to drug problems has been strengthened during the past 18 months. Taken together, the plans that I have outlined will provide a wide range of disposals that will be able to deal with the broad spectrum of drug-related crime. They will give Scottish courts all the options—arguably, more options than are available to the US drugs courts. Combined with the new resources that are available, our plans allow us to move forward on the idea of specialised Scottish drugs courts. That approach will be rooted in Scottish institutions and will complement existing practices. It must have the confidence of the courts and the general public alike. For the first time, we have an opportunity to deliver a system that specialises in dealing with the problem of drug offenders, that blends enforcement and treatment and—above all—that has the possibility of being effective. I am sure that that approach will be welcomed throughout the  chamber. I move amendment S1M-1303.2, to leave out from "acknowledges" to end and insert: "and acknowledges the work that the Scottish Executive is doing in tackling this problem."

Is the member aware that dental fees are set by a body that is independent of the Government and that it recommends each year the percentage increase in fees?

In the debate on public health on 5 October, Susan Deacon made it clear that oral and dental health are priorities for the Executive. In that debate, several members suggested that Parliament should have a full debate on dental health. We are happy to make that possible today. Dental health is clearly an important issue for members of the Parliament. That is as it should be. Today's debate is timely, as Susan Deacon and I have received an increasing amount of correspondence and parliamentary questions on a variety of dental issues. That is perhaps not surprising, as it is no secret that Scotland's dental health compares poorly with other areas of the United Kingdom. Levels of tooth decay are strongly related to deprivation: in surveys of dental health among Scottish five-year-olds, 12-year-olds and 16-year-olds, the poorest 10 per cent of children have 50 per cent of the decay. Around 56 per cent of five-year-olds show signs of dental disease. Adult dental health also remains poor—18 per cent of adults have no teeth. There are, however, some positive signs for the future. Between March 1998 and March this year, registrations of nought to two-year-olds increased by more than 30 per cent, and registrations of three to five-year-olds increased by 4.7 per cent. In 1998, the level of complete tooth loss among the Scottish population was 18 per cent—the figure I just quoted—but that showed a considerable, if gradual, improvement on the 1972 figure of 44 per cent and the 1988 figure of 26 per cent. More dentists—2,112—are practising in Scotland this year than were last year, when the figure was 2,003. Those are positive signs, but the record remains poor and action is clearly required. In our programme for government, we committed ourselves to taking steps to improve the nation's dental and oral health. They include a wide-ranging consultation on fluoridation, which I would like to spend a few minutes discussing. In May 1999, the Department of Health commissioned the NHS Centre for Reviews and  Dissemination at the University of York to undertake a systematic review of research on water fluoridation. The report—the most comprehensive ever on the health effects of water fluoridation—was published on 6 October. It looked at more than 200 individual studies of fluoridation and showed that fluoridation reduces tooth decay. Importantly, it also established that there is no evidence that fluoridation affects general health.

That is the case, and the study commented on the methodologies of the studies that it considered. However, if Mrs Ewing will bear with me, I will say something about how we intend to progress from the York study. We recognise that there are strongly held views on both sides of the fluoridation argument—views that are held with real conviction—but I hope that we can all agree that if we allowed our appalling record of dental health to continue we would be failing our children. It is with that in mind that, in the new year, we will issue for public debate a wide-ranging document on children's oral health. It will set out clearly the salient facts about oral health in Scotland, describe what we are doing and seek views on further measures that might be taken. It will set out options for fluoridation of local public water supplies, but it will also explore other options, such as fluoride tablets and fluoridated drinks. The document will be circulated widely and will allow full opportunity for individuals and organisations to express their views as part of what I am sure will be a mature and constructive debate. On 14 August, the Executive launched "An Action Plan for Dental Services in Scotland". The plan recognises the important contribution that dental services make to health improvement and patient care. It also recognises the contribution that dental services make as a service in their own right, as part of the wider NHS and in their links to other Scottish initiatives and confirms the importance of planning now to meet the changing needs of the people of Scotland.

We are aware of the initiative and we will pursue an interest in that. The action plan that  I referred to includes, in the long term, an examination of how we provide services to increase their effectiveness and availability. Of course, that includes emergency services. That is part of the debate about how we approach such services in the NHS more generally, through, for example, NHS Direct. I want to put on record our thanks to the Scottish branch of the British Dental Association for the constructive comments and suggestions that it made when we drew together the action plan. We are putting in place an implementation support group to take forward and prioritise the recommendations in the plan. The first meeting of that group will take place next month. It will continue to include representatives of the profession and will include patient representatives and others with an interest in dental issues. As I have said, the action plan outlines what we intend to do over the next two to three years, but we also intend to consider in the long term other fundamental issues relating to dental health, including the balance between prevention and restoration treatment and an examination of remuneration for general dental services, with rewards for quality rather than quantity. The plan is geared to help the Executive, the NHS, professionals and the public to work together to achieve the target set out in "Towards a Healthier Scotland"—60 per cent of five-year-old children with no experience of dental disease by 2010. A range of factors needs to be taken into account when considering the future shape of primary care dental services: changing patterns of general health service provision; changing demography; differing public expectations; different patterns of supply of services across the country and the development of centres of excellence where specialist staff can offer specialist services. Fundamentally, the Executive is committed to an effective and accessible NHS dental service for all who wish to use it. People should not have to pay for private dental treatment when they wish to make use of NHS dental services. However, we must recognise that dentists are independent contractors to the NHS who are free to choose whether to accept any individual under NHS arrangements. Indeed, in some parts of Scotland, access to NHS dentists is a problem. In part, that has been caused by a reducing commitment to the NHS by some general dental practitioners. In some more remote areas it has proved difficult to attract dentists. Consequently, there has been pressure on the community dental service, which has had to act as a safety net where general dental services are not readily available.  To address the demand for primary care dental services, health boards can apply to the Scottish ministers for approval to appoint salaried dentists in areas where they think services are inadequate. To date, approval has been given for the appointment of more than 40 salaried dentists. Further applications are in prospect.

The funding comes through the health board and the approval to appoint a salaried dentist is given by Scottish ministers, but of course health boards have funds to provide general dental services. We are talking about situations in which they find it impossible to do that, when they can contract with independent contractors who practise in their area. Under the Scottish dental access initiative, we are providing grants to build and equip new surgeries and to expand practices to meet the needs of NHS patients. So far, grants totalling £750,000 have been made. Patients have to be at the centre of the service that we design and deliver. They want to see a readily available, good-quality, effective service, with choice where possible and the correct balance between prevention and treatment. We have to recognise that a greater health gain is likely if resources are targeted to tackle inequalities in dental health and access. With that in mind, we have to consider how to improve the current poor dental health record, particularly of children, in Scotland. Our commitment to that is outlined in the white paper "Towards a Healthier Scotland". This is not just about better dental health; it is about tackling inequality. Only 20 per cent of children from our most deprived communities are free of dental caries, compared with 60 per cent in affluent Scotland. Parliament will recall Susan Deacon's announcement of the additional £26 million tobacco tax resources to target public health. In particular, the health improvement fund will include substantial resources to improve dental and oral health in Scotland through the provision of free toothbrushes and toothpaste to young children.

I want to move on to talk about effects on health, on which there has been some  debate. I think that Dorothy-Grace Elder is thinking in particular about the fuel zones in Glasgow, where an attempt has been made to try to ensure that young people stay in school to have lunch, so that a range of healthier eating options is available to them. In Glasgow, work has been done to ensure that that happens without sponsorship. The point is important. Diet is important in this area, which is why the Scottish diet action plan contains a target to reduce sugar intake by 2005. That encourages schools to take steps to ensure that meals, tuck shops and vending machines provide a range of healthy food and drink choices. I am delighted to hear about the schools that have implemented initiatives such as breakfast clubs, healthy eating vending machines, smart card systems for school meals and school nutrition action groups to encourage pupils to eat more healthily. We will continue to work closely with health boards and local authorities to develop and encourage healthy eating in schools. The Health Education Board for Scotland also has a key role in the development of materials for dental and oral health professionals, voluntary organisations and the public on the prevention and early detection of oral health problems, including oral cancer. For example, key dental and oral health messages are promoted to the public through the publicity campaign, national smile week, which takes place in May each year. Many projects are local and involve local authorities, health boards and other organisations in promoting children's consumption of low-sugar food and encouraging regular toothbrushing. We will provide free toothbrushes and toothpaste to all children at the age of eight months and target distribution to pre-school children aged one to three in areas of deprivation, which will total 100,000 Scots children by 2001. A further initiative to combat dental disease in children is the early years enhanced capitation scheme, which was introduced in 1998. We have also earmarked a further £1 million this year for an enhanced registration payment scheme for six to eight-year-old children in some deprived areas. It will include a requirement for fissure sealing the first molars of those children. The use of unfilled resin on the pits and fissures of teeth has been demonstrated to be an effective preventive measure. We are currently discussing with the profession the detail of the initiative and its implementation. Encouraging young children to register with a dentist, advising parents on toothbrushing and reducing sugar in the diet are all necessary elements in the promotion of oral health.

If Mr Rumbles will bear with me, the next section of my speech will address some of the issues that he raises. We need our general dental practitioners to play a key role in developing policy with local health services and other organisations. The education and training of dental practitioners and of practitioners in the professions complementary to dentistry are vital. That is why the Scottish advisory committee on the dental work force was set up in 1999 to take forward strategic planning for the whole dental work force. Its report "Workforce Planning for Dentistry in Scotland: A Strategic Review" is available at the back of the chamber. It is a discussion document that looks to the future and seeks to address over the next 10 years the issues that Mr Rumbles raises. We spend £171 million on general dental services in Scotland and we know a great deal about the quantity of service that is delivered. The payments system for general dental services still relates in the main to quantity. We need to review that for the future. We have already made available additional funding to support the initiatives that I have mentioned, such as dental access schemes and the requirement for fissure sealants. We need to consider what resources will be required to implement the action plan. We believe that our public health initiatives and the action plan for dental services in Scotland provide a starting point for a co-ordinated approach to improving the dental and oral health of people in Scotland and for further debate about how we should do that. In that spirit, I commend the motion to the chamber. I move, That the Parliament notes the vital contribution which dental services make to health improvement and patient care; affirms its commitment to an effective and accessible NHS dental service for all who wish to use it in rural and urban Scotland, and welcomes the recently published Scottish Executive action plan for dental services in Scotland as a first step in improving the dental and oral health of Scotland and addressing inequalities in dental health.

I am grateful for the opportunity to record both Susan Deacon's and my thanks and appreciation for the support that the health council movement has given to patients and the national health service over the past 25 years. That was formally recognised recently, when Susan Deacon hosted a reception in Bute House for past and present council members and their staff, but it is also fitting that this motion offers us the opportunity to mark in the chamber the significant contribution of the individuals who make up the health council movement. Health councils were created more than 25 years ago to ensure that the views and wishes of the public and of patients were heard by the NHS in Scotland. While their work in the wards and committee rooms of the NHS has often been central to the development of the health service, it has often—as Mr Davidson was right to point out—gone largely unnoticed by the public and patients who benefit from it. If anyone here doubts the influence of these lay volunteers, they need only consider the impetus  that the health council movement has given to the concept of patient-centred care. Local health councils and their national association have long advocated such a commonsense concept, and the success of their campaign has resulted in a significantly increased demand for their services. They have not complained at that, however; they have simply got on with the job. I will return shortly to the issue of work load, but I will first pause to underline the commitment and dedication—and, as Mr Harper pointed out, the cupboard space—of the 250 or so individuals who do an immense amount of work at any one time. The benefits and improvements that have flowed from health councils' partnership with the NHS and the people it serves can never be fully measured and, on behalf of the Executive, I am happy to salute the efforts of this small band of volunteers who, in the best traditions of public service, give so freely of their time and talents for the benefit of us all. However, as Malcolm Chisholm was correct to say, anniversaries are not simply a time for congratulations; they also offer a chance for reflection on achievement, on successes and on failures and, most important, lessons for the future. Twenty-five years of health council effort has taught us the value of listening and learning from patient experience. It has taught us the value of partnership—councils have forged strong links between people and communities and the NHS bodies that serve them. It has also taught us the value of progress, through renewal and modernisation. The health council movement has, like the NHS, which it serves, changed beyond recognition in its lifetime. The Executive shares with the health council movement a commitment to listening to and learning from direct patient experience. The programme for government pledges to "strengthen the patient's voice and . . . work to ensure that patients, and their carers and families, get the response and support they need through every stage of their care." Our partners in the health council movement strongly support that commitment, which encapsulates a change in culture for which they have long argued. A change in culture is required whereby the NHS learns to listen to and act on the direct experience of patients and carers. The message is clear. Patients and carers want a seamless approach to the delivery of care and to receive the care that they need quickly and with confidence. Only a culture of partnership can provide that. Partnership working is at the heart of our plans to modernise the NHS in Scotland. It is a different way of developing and implementing health and  social care, which will enable us to harness the ideas, enthusiasm and commitment of the staff who deliver the services and the patients and public who use them. As several members said, involving users in the redesign and reconfiguration of services offers the best prospects of soundly based decisions that achieve sustainable improvements. A partnership with patients is at the heart of the health council movement. Patients are a part of developing the vision of the patients project, to which Patricia Ferguson referred. It is a project that will ensure that boards and trusts become and remain more patient centred and publicly accountable. It will involve more members of the public in the health service, in different ways, so that they will become more skilful and knowledgeable, as will the service professionals with whom they are involved. When Susan Deacon met the Scottish Association of Health Councils last year, it supported that vision but felt that the challenge and work load associated with such a step change in the culture of the NHS presented the movement with some key questions about its future direction and development. In spite of the fact that, as Patricia Ferguson pointed out, health councils have gone through two major reorganisations since 1975, they agreed to do so again and to examine the need for and role of the health council movement against the background of the wider public involvement agenda. Funding has been provided for a development officer to support health councils further in that work. With the decision to develop a Scottish health plan, we are keen to build on the unique public involvement experience of health councils and their staff. We have therefore commissioned the Scottish Association of Health Councils and the chief officers group to submit papers addressing the strengths and weaknesses identified in current patient and public involvement arrangements. The chair of Greater Glasgow health council has agreed to be a member of a group to consider what the plan might say on policy development and public involvement. Two health council chief officers have been seconded from their posts to provide full-time support to the development of the plan. The involvement of the movement in developments is central. The abolition of community health councils that is outlined in the English NHS plan is of no direct relevance to the process in Scotland; indeed, our solution will be a Scottish one. We remain committed to ensuring that the public and patients are fully involved in the design and delivery of our health services. We can achieve that only by drawing on the experience of the health council movement, which we are celebrating tonight. I know that members will join  me in congratulating health councils on 25 years of hard work supporting the development of a truly patient-centred NHS.  Meeting closed at 17:29.

I too commend Sylvia Jackson for giving us this opportunity to discuss this important  matter that covers a number of procedures from the relatively innocuous electrolysis and ear piercing to the piercing of parts of the anatomy that many of us, such as Brian Monteith and Elaine Smith, find it hair-raising to contemplate. Personally, I am with Margaret Ewing's mother on the matter, but I cannot speak for everyone in the chamber and in any case others' views may not be obvious at first glance. Several concerns have been raised, and from different angles, many of them to do with young people—which is right as they tend to be the ones who are interested in this kind of fashion. Parents and their concerns about their children have also been mentioned a number of times. Like Jamie Stone, I have personal experience of this issue. There is understandable worry about the environment in which skin piercing is carried out and about the standards of hygiene being observed. Sylvia Jackson rightly drew attention to the potential health risks of body piercing in particular. Usually, problems are local and trivial and arise from wound infections, although Richard Simpson pointed out that while we believe that to be true we do not know. Piercing can also result in serious blood-borne viral infections, such as hepatitis B or C. I do not think that I will have time to address Keith Raffan's specific points about HIV and hepatitis C, but that is not to treat them as unimportant. Sylvia Jackson mentioned the SNAP report, which will be published today. It may provide information on the concerns raised by Keith Raffan.

That seems an entirely reasonable request and I undertake to do so. Our knowledge is developing. We will get back to Keith Raffan, who I know takes a proper interest in the matter. I will say a little about some of the background. Tattooing, particularly of young people, has been mentioned. The Tattooing of Minors Act 1969 makes it an offence to tattoo young persons under 18 years of age. An age limit is in place but, except in Edinburgh, as Sylvia Jackson explained, Scottish local authorities do not have specific powers to regulate skin piercing businesses. Some local authorities have taken an active interest in such businesses. As Sylvia Jackson said, that is reflected in the fact that the Scottish Centre for Infection and Environmental Health has recently produced a guidance note in response to inquiries from councils. We should not, as Brian Monteith said, assume that those who provide skin piercing services are universally irresponsible. At the UK level, the European Professional Piercers Association and  the Association of Professional Piercers have produced guidelines for their members and would have to be included in any consultation arising from our concerns. Sylvia Jackson outlined the legal position in England and Wales, which I will not take the time to repeat. The UK Government has concluded that primary legislation should be introduced in England and Wales to give local authorities outside London specific regulatory powers. However, parliamentary time at Westminster has not yet been found. Consent is a difficult issue, as many parents are content for their children to have their ears pierced and parents will differ from each other and from their children in their belief of what is acceptable at particular ages. The Age of Legal Capacity (Scotland) Act 1991 states that a child under 16 does not have the legal capacity to enter into a transaction unless specifically allowed by statute, so there is some protection, at least in insisting on consent from the parent. One of the two associations to which I referred says that procedures should not be carried out on anyone under the age of 16 without parental consent. The other says they should not be carried out on anyone under the age of 18. I appreciate that that falls short of some of the concerns that have been expressed this evening. In closing, I return to the key issue raised by Sylvia Jackson: the need to address the possible health risks of body piercing. The Executive recognises the need to assess the effectiveness and adequacy of current arrangements and to consider what different arrangements may be necessary. We are committed to conducting a consultation exercise. I confess that the commitment on that was made some time ago and that this evening's debate has allowed me to return to it. I instructed officials today to prepare the consultation exercise as soon as possible and to set it in motion before the end of the year, at the very latest. I will give Parliament a timetable for it in due course and information on how it will be carried out.

I am happy to take up that suggestion. We will also include councils in the consultation, as they would have to implement any controls needed to provide safeguards. We will also have to address whether there should be exactly the same regulatory regime everywhere in Scotland.

I take the point—I made my comment as a confession. Given that I instructed the preparation of the consultation today, it would be wrong to make an immediate pronouncement on how long it will take, but when we have a clear idea on that we will inform Parliament. As several members have said, our consideration of the issue must take place against the background of an increasing fashion for skin piercing. We are rightly concerned and we must ensure that skin piercing is carried out in a safe and hygienic manner. I assure Sylvia Jackson that the debate has moved the matter forward.  Meeting closed at 17:38.

The British Orthoptic Society advises that the guidelines for the screening of children's vision by orthoptists are in the process of being updated. A revised set of guidelines will be available within the next few weeks.

I agree with Mrs Ferguson. We continue to monitor Scotland's need for orthoptists as well as their availability and access to training, in particular at two universities in northern England. Current vacancy levels indicate no recruitment difficulties. The importance of early screening is exactly why the national screening committee's child health sub-group has prioritised the matter and guidelines will be issued soon.

At the start of the debate, I posed some questions about the Tories' promise behind their motion—and we should remind ourselves that this is a Tory motion. The Tories therefore have to answer those questions—I have listened to all the speeches, and the questions remain unanswered. Many Opposition members reiterated the arguments of the royal commission. The power of the commission, its analysis and its principles is not at issue. We commissioned that report, we have welcomed it and we have implemented many of its recommendations. Almost every Opposition member has used today's debate to lambast the Executive, to attack the partnership and then to  hide behind a complaint that we brought politics into the debate. How dishonest is that? When we announce our immediate plans for care of the elderly next week, they will demonstrate how we intend to invest resources in reducing delayed discharge—

No. We intend to invest resources in allowing more people to access home care, in helping people to live longer at home, and in helping people to return home from hospital rather than entering residential care. We will invest in more respite for more people, and—yes—the plans will outline how we will address greater consistency and fairness in charging for services, which, as Hugh Henry and Margaret Smith rightly said, vary across Scotland.

No. Not one Tory member has addressed those issues. Not one of them has explained how their commitment on personal care will expand care or improve its quality. I appreciate that Nicola Sturgeon is new to her brief—I welcome her to it—but she should understand that the recommendation that we are discussing today would not unblock a single bed in Scotland.

Absolutely. Better working between health and social work services is one of the things that will contribute to unblocking beds. So is increasing resources to local authorities for community care. However, the recommendation in today's motion would not address those issues.

No. No one on the Tory benches has admitted to us how many acute sector beds they will close and what other cuts they will make in the health service to pay for their promise. Malcolm Chisholm was right. Not one of the Tories has had the nerve to set this in the bigger Tory picture.

No.  The Tories have argued disingenuously all morning for an extension of state-funded care, while the bigger Tory picture is of a Tory party committed to privatising all but an emergency service NHS.

No. How can the Tories seriously argue that personal care will be provided free by the NHS, while William Hague and Liam Fox are saying that hip replacements and cataract operations will have to be paid for under the Tories?

Let me come to that point. Are Tory members really saying that Westminster Tories will make £16 billion of cuts and leave public services in Scotland untouched? Are they saying that a Conservative Government at Westminster would allow tax breaks for private health insurance in Scotland and, at the same time, allow Scottish Tories to fully fund the NHS from taxation? That is not devolution; it is simply unbelievable.

I will come to that later. Both Tories and SNP members have raised important issues about care of the elderly, but the motion does not address them. Would it unblock beds? No. Dorothy-Grace Elder spoke about the principle of means testing; the royal commission recommendation would mean the continuation of means testing. Would the motion end means testing? Would it improve or extend care? No. The truth is that the motion is an empty promise, because it would not deliver what many believe it would. Many members said that older people want to keep their houses. The royal commission makes a number of recommendations on that, and we will respond to them next week. The best way to keep one's house is to go on living in it; that is what people want to do. That has to be a priority, because recent research has shown that as many as 45 per cent of people in residential care could live independently with the proper support. They are in residential care because the care system has failed them, not because they want to be or need to be. That is the most urgent area of need, and the motion misses it altogether. That is not the only urgent area of need. When we announce our plans for care of the elderly, we will acknowledge that, as our amendment does. I  say to Ian Jenkins that we will keep on seeking ways to improve care of the elderly, with improved quality, greater innovation and greater equity over time. This is not the final word on any aspect of long-term residential care of the elderly—but government is about priorities. Many members enjoined me to listen to older people, and I do. One thing older people say to me is that I will be old one day. I know that. Not so long ago, Christine Grahame recited a well-known poem about growing old disgracefully. I want to do that, too. I want to live my own life in my own way, in my own home, going to my own pub and sitting in my own seat at Easter Road on a Saturday. I want to turn up at my local Labour party branch and noise up the local MSP—especially if he or she is a minister. I want the services to let me do that—the motion would not help me. I want that for my parents, too. I want them to be at home. That has to be our priority now in the long-term care of the elderly. I say to Christine Grahame that the motion would not help the woman in the poem to live how she wants to. The amendment holds out the hope of continuous improvement in the provision of long-term care for the elderly.

rose—

Our policies are dictated by the need to ensure that we get the maximum benefit for the  maximum number of people and use resources most effectively to improve the lives of Scotland's people. In what sense does the motion contribute to that?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member acknowledge that her comparison is a false one? If the woman broke her hip and went into hospital, that would not be her home for the rest of her life. The most important thing would be to ensure that—rather than finding herself in residential care because  she could not access services in the community—the services were there to enable her to continue to live independently. The motion does not address that.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I know that the Tories think that they have picked a difficult debate for the Executive to respond to. But in many ways it is a real treat, because we will, quite properly, announce our intentions regarding care of the elderly to Parliament next Thursday. We will detail how we intend to use the significant resources for community care that were announced last week by the Minister for Finance. That will complement announcements that have already been made, such as the Minister for Communities' announcement that all Scotland's pensioners will have central heating within five years of 2001. Our plans will be subject to Parliament's scrutiny next week. What is special about today is that we actually have a Tory policy to scrutinise. After months of health debates and community care debates in which the Tory contribution consisted of little but criticism, half-truths and personal abuse, we have a clear proposal—or do we? David McLetchie says that the Scottish Tories are committed to the implementation of the Sutherland recommendations, but what does he mean? That is not a new commitment. Mary Scanlon made it at the Tory party conference back in June—or did she? What she said on 26 June was that health care for the elderly would be free. However, that is not what Sutherland recommended. Three days later, she announced that nursing care for the elderly would be free. That is not what most people would think of as full implementation of Sutherland. By last week, the Tories were agreeing that health-related personal care should be funded by the NHS. That is not what Sutherland recommended, either—or is it? It is extremely unclear. I do not know, and neither, it would appear, do the Tories. Perhaps it is not surprising that the Tories have some difficulty with the Sutherland report. As David McLetchie quite rightly acknowledged, the royal commission was set up to consider how the system of funding long-term care that the Tory Government left behind could be improved. David McLetchie criticises us for taking 18 months to make it fairer, but, of course, the Conservative party took 18 years to make it unfair. We have been making it fairer by implementing  many of the royal commission's recommendations. The carers strategy has doubled resources for carers services. Direct payments have been opened up to the over-65s. Some £7.5 million this year has been devoted to funding better joint working between health and social work services and the joint future group is about to make recommendations to turn such working from the exception into the norm. We have developed national care standards for the first time. We have created space in this year's legislative programme for the creation of the commission for the regulation of care. We will respond to the remaining recommendations next week. The Tory motion gives the game away. It is focused solely on the personal care recommendation. That does a disservice to what David McLetchie acknowledged is the carefully researched and argued work of the royal commission.

I have my own views on why the Tories focused on that recommendation. I repeat the point that all the other recommendations that Ben Wallace claims to have no problem with were not implemented during 18 years of the previous Tory Government. The recommendations address the unfairness of the system that the Labour Government inherited in 1997. The motion focuses on the personal care recommendations, so it is that promise from the Tories that we should examine. Who would it benefit? What would it deliver for Scotland's older people? How would the Tories pay for it? The cost of the proposal, as David McLetchie said, would be about £110 million. That is well known. What is less well known is the fact that the majority of the resources would reduce the cost of care for around 7,000 people—those who pay all their costs in residential and nursing care. The remainder of the 34,000 Scots who are in residential or nursing care would see no change from that recommendation of the report, and no benefit from the investment of £100 million. Even those 7,000 people would not see their care improving and there would be no change at all in the quality of their care. David Lipsey, a member of the royal commission, said: "since seven in 10 of those in long term care are already fully funded by the state, the extra spending would go entirely to the remaining three in 10 who contribute to their  care, and who are by definition the best off among them."

The point is that we have to address the situation in which we find ourselves. We have to recognise that what we do over the next two weeks or two years will not be the final word on long-term care of the elderly. It must continue to develop over time, and that is quite proper. Some people might argue that the others can look forward to benefiting from the recommendation when they enter residential care, but they cannot. Four out of five Scots will never require residential care. Of the one in five who require it, more than 70 per cent will still not benefit from the proposal. That equates to 7,000 beneficiaries out of 34,000 people in residential care, out of 340,000 Scots over 75 and out of three quarters of a million Scots over 65.

No. As we have made clear, we believe that resources that are devoted to older people must and will be increased. Where has the under-investment been? In the 10 years to 1999, spending on home care increased by £15 million, and spending on residential care increased by £125 million. We believe that we must provide more care for more of our elderly people; that we must provide better care for our elderly people. That is entirely in line with the recommendations of the Royal Commission on Long Term Care. Would the Tories' promise provide more care? No. Would it provide care for more people? No. Would it provide better care? No. We have to make choices about our priorities. I spend a great deal of time listening to older people, both individuals and their representative organisations.

No. There is no doubt that many older people worry about what support they might need, but what comes over loud and clear is that they want to live independently for as long as possible. This is one of the great strengths of the Sutherland report: it majors on the importance of older people to our society. The Tories must explain how their motion—this promise of theirs—helps older people who want to  carry on living at home. While the Tories try to do that, Sarah Boyack is getting on with the business of announcing a concessionary travel scheme, which will help every pensioner in Scotland to maintain their independence. David McLetchie, to his credit, talked about how the Tories' proposal would be funded. That is not new either: back in June, the Tories announced that the £110 million would come from two sources, the first being £70 million of unidentified savings in the NHS. What will they save that on? Fewer doctors? Fewer nurses? Linear accelerators? Alas, they do not tell us. They will save the remaining £40 million by unblocking blocked beds. I puzzled over this one for a while, and then I remembered Mary Scanlon's parliamentary questions about the cost of a nursing home bed compared with the cost of an acute hospital bed. Use the back of an envelope, do a bit of subtraction and some multiplication and there is the £40 million. What the Tories do not say however, is that realising that saving from unblocking the beds and transferring the resource to long-term care would mean having to close the acute hospital beds. Here is the sting in the tail of the Tory promise: they will pay for it by closing thousands of hospital beds.

No. That is just another old-style Tory promise, which concentrates on a relatively small number of people and which will be funded by £70 million of cuts in health services and £40 million of cuts in bed numbers. That is what the Tory press release on the announcement says. The royal commission report is a welcome and important document. That is why we commissioned it, why we have begun to implement so much of it and why we will begin to implement more of it next week. However, it does not stand alone. Investment in older people has to mean investment in more care—more care at home, better-quality care, warmer houses and cheaper travel. Our guiding principle must be providing the maximum benefit to the maximum number of people. We have to tackle the greatest need first. Next week, we will announce our plans for the care of the elderly. The plans will face up to the hard choices about the most immediate priorities, but they will invest significant additional resources to deliver significant improvements for a significant number of Scotland's older people. By focusing on one recommendation of the royal commission report for the sake of political expediency, the motion falls short of that. The motion is not about helping our older people, it is about helping the  Tories; on that basis, it should be rejected. I move amendment S1M-1215.1, to leave out from "calls" to end and insert: "notes the report and recommendations of the Royal Commission on the Long Term Care of the Elderly; welcomes the Commission's emphasis on the importance of older people in our society; welcomes their concentration on issues related to the quality of care, the balance between residential care and care provided in the home, and the value of joint management and resourcing of services for older people; welcomes the additional resources announced in the spending review for the care of older people, and calls upon the Executive to ensure that these additional resources are used to deliver significant improvements in care for the largest possible number of older people, particularly those in greatest need and to continue, over time, to work towards fulfilling the Royal Commission's objectives of fairness and equity in the care of the elderly."

I too welcome the formation of the cross-party group on palliative care. I acknowledge Michael McMahon's role in that, and in securing today's debate. As Richard Simpson pointed out, palliative care in Scotland is a success story of partnership between the national health service and the voluntary sector. Michael McMahon also made the important point that the principles and approach of palliative care should inform the care of all patients. The fundamental concern of palliative care is to respond to the totality of each person's needs. It should be provided in the setting which best meets those needs, whether in hospital, at home, in a nursing home or in a specialist palliative care unit. The motion makes the link between cancer survival and the need for palliative care, and that link with cancer reflects the origins of modern palliative care, as Richard Simpson mentioned. Michael McMahon is right to acknowledge some improvements in the figures for cancer survival. For the majority of cancers, survival has increased substantially over the past 20 to 25 years. That applies particularly to malignant melanoma of the skin, to testicular cancer, to leukaemia and to colorectal cancer. It is also true of breast cancer. International comparisons are always difficult, because of differences in population coverage, data quality and case mix. For most cancers, however, the prospects for Scottish patients who survive for up to five years after diagnosis are excellent. Driving those improvements further is, and must be, a priority. As several members have said, cancer survival is only one element in determining the need for palliative care. I know that, for some time, the providers of palliative care have been looking beyond the traditional association between palliative care and cancer. It is now clear, as several members have mentioned and as the Scottish Executive accepts, that the principles of palliative care have a much wider application. They should be brought into play from the time of diagnosis onwards, not just in the terminal phase of an illness. They can transform the management of other progressive conditions; motor neurone disease and Parkinson's disease are the two that are most mentioned, but HIV/AIDS and our other clinical priorities, coronary heart disease and mental health, can be added. Palliative care can bring enormous benefits to patients with end-stage heart failure. That is a clear example of a need which all too often goes unmet. That is something that our coronary heart  disease task force has picked up on and will mention in its report. The role of palliative care in relation to mental health has been fully set out in the report, "Positive Partnerships". Patients with severe mental illness who go on to develop a life-threatening illness must have their physical symptoms relieved. They also need psychological and spiritual support, and our ability to work together in the best interests of the patient is always tested in tackling a combination of physical and mental health needs. The palliative care approach gives the best chance of success. The motion mentions the need to ensure that palliative care is adequately included in strategies for the care of people with cancer and other chronic illnesses. The Scottish cancer group leads and directs Scotland's cancer strategy. It strongly represents the voice of palliative care, and I can assure members that palliative care is an integral part of the development of cancer services. Key documents are health improvement programmes, trust implementation plans and joint social care plans, which require consideration of the cutting across from the NHS to social work. However, I take on board Fiona McLeod's comments—she has now gone, I presume to Inverness—regarding social work services, and I will consider them further. Every health board in Scotland has developed a palliative care strategy. To date, 31 hospitals in Scotland have either specialist palliative care teams or palliative care support nurses. However, we are not complacent. The Scottish Executive health department has commissioned the Scottish Partnership Agency for Palliative and Cancer Care to undertake an assessment of how far the health boards' strategies embrace the palliative approach. Further, in conjunction with the agency, we are encouraging the development of a managed clinical network in palliative care, with specific reference to pain relief. The Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network guideline on cancer pain has recently been published, and the evidence base for the network is in place. As Michael McMahon said, the knowledge is there; those are the kinds of measures that should help to spread the good practice that every speaker has said that we must achieve. We have also funded the pilot programme of hospices as resource centres and we are analysing the results so that we can roll the programme out across Scotland. Standards are being developed for palliative care which the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland recognises as the underlying core principles of care for all patients with cancer.  Those standards are being fully incorporated into the standards for colorectal, lung, breast and ovarian cancer care. Much is said by the Scottish Executive about modernisation, and people jump to the conclusion that it must mean hi-tech equipment or new buildings. There is a place for those, but I agree with the message that has come across in the debate, that a modern NHS has to care as well as treat. Modernisation of the NHS is about making its services more caring; as has been said, that is the future of the health service in Scotland. Palliative care is patient centred. It is very difficult, but it demonstrates that we can put our aspirations for the NHS into practice if we have the imagination and commitment to do so. The widespread support from all parties for the cross-party group on palliative care is a clear and welcome sign of that commitment, which I am sure will continue through the lifetime of this Parliament.  Meeting closed at 17:37.

I add my thanks to those of Susan Deacon for the notable contribution of Sir David Carter to improved public health in Scotland. His annual report marks a significant change in the approach to public health that a year of this Parliament and this Executive has brought. It is not only the Executive but this Parliament that has firmly and decisively acknowledged the health gap between rich and poor. It did so last September and has done so again today. That common ground is welcome and essential if we are to build the decisive consensus that we need to turn Scotland's health record round. Ken Macintosh was right to cite the example of drink driving to show that we can change the culture in Scotland for the better. The consensus that has been achieved today extends to our accepting the Conservative amendment, which adds to our motion. However, we do not accept the SNP amendment, which seeks to replace some of the motion. We have seen a decisive shift in action and resources—the courage to use the significant additional resources for the NHS to refocus their distribution on inequalities. We have seen the dedication of further resources very specifically to fund public health through the health improvement fund. The CMO's review of the public health function has ended the decline in public health medicine that Kay Ullrich referred to. To give one example, only two weeks ago Lothian Health appointed four new public health professionals.  Susan Deacon and I know well that one of Sir David's greatest recent concerns has been the misinformation on the MMR vaccine. I do not have time to respond to Lloyd Quinan on that important issue but I want to emphasise that we must be careful about stoking parents' fears. Another welcome shift that the Parliament has brought about is the acknowledgement—seen again today in this debate—that health and well-being is not only about physical well-being; mental health must be central to public health. Sir David's report highlights particular concerns about young people with mental health problems, as Duncan Hamilton mentioned. It is staggering that one in four of us will be affected one way or another by mental illness, each with their own specific problems and difficulties, yet it is an area of health that has not received the public attention that it should have. Allied to that is the high rate of suicides in Scotland, also referred to today—874 in 1999—which is deeply worrying. That is a huge problem to be addressed and has been a neglected area, but we are beginning to put that right. Mental health is a priority for HEBS and in our health promotion efforts generally. The £26 million health improvement fund that Susan Deacon announced last month includes resources for measures aimed at promoting good mental well-being and tackling suicide among young people. We intend to pilot a helpline for young people, men in particular, who are at risk of suicide. The Executive is also organising a conference in November, which I will address, to consider how best we can reduce suicides among young people in Scotland.

I will consider that and get back to Fiona McLeod. A number of members have referred to the role of voluntary organisations in not only mental health but public health generally. I would like to draw Parliament's attention to the announcement in the spending strategy plans published yesterday that the mental illness specific grant will be increased by £1 million each year from next year. By my unaided calculation—so that is a health warning—that is a 7.9 per cent increase. Mental health is one of the areas where the spectrum of Executive initiatives comes together. Social disadvantage, a disturbed home life, disrupted education, damp housing and a depressing environment can all contribute to poor  mental health. I agree with Des McNulty, Richard Simpson and others that all our policies and budgets must contribute to health. I have said before that for this Executive every budget is a health budget. That was never clearer than yesterday when the Minister for Finance announced investment after investment that will make a difference to our people's well-being. That included improved public transport, 100 new and refurbished schools to improve the quality of education and the better neighbourhood services fund. I can assure Kay Ullrich and others who raised the role of local government that we are very aware of the great historical role of municipal government in advances in public health and of its continuing role. That is why the 10.5 per cent increase in local government funding will contribute greatly.

No. I am short of time. As a number of members have pointed out, providing central heating for 70,000 pensioners will make a clear difference to their well-being. There is more to come. We agree with Mary Scanlon on the importance of through-care for drug users. Announcements on the use of resources for drugs will come in the next few weeks. It is the combination of those improvements in life circumstances and the improvements in lifestyles driven by initiatives in diet, sexual health and smoking cessation that can begin to build the virtuous public health cycle that we all wish to see in Scotland. The Minister for Health and Community Care was caught out yesterday—it does not happen often—when she confessed that she had not read the Edinburgh Evening News . She clearly and properly has more important work to do. I confess sadly that I read it every day. A week or so ago, it juxtaposed two areas in my constituency and pointed out that living in one as opposed to the other meant having three times the chance of suffering coronary heart disease. One was where I lived when I was first married and where my daughter was born; the other is where I live now. I moved because I wanted a house with a garden. Does it make sense, is it fair and is it just, that along with the garden I also get a statistically longer life expectancy? No, it is simply wrong. In the past year, I have returned to where I used to live to open food co-operatives, to launch a smoking cessation programme, to launch fruit bars in the primary schools, to visit the community health project and the drug rehabilitation programme and to open the health fair. Things are beginning to happen. Malcolm Chisholm gave another example from north Edinburgh. The  political will that we demonstrate here today, and the resources that were announced yesterday, are being matched by the professionals and the community activists on the ground. The last words go to Professor Sir David Carter: "I think we can now accelerate these improvements and help people to start well, be well and stay well for longer than ever before" Amen to that.

No, there are sufficient funds in the unified budgets of health boards.

A number of health boards' drug evaluation panels have agreed that Zyban's effectiveness depends very much on additional support such as counselling. I understand that Lothian Health is currently developing a programme of cessation counselling that will take account of this new weapon in the armoury against smoking.

Zyban is a new drug and information about and experience of its use are growing slowly. I agree with Mary Scanlon that doctors must make a clinical judgment before prescribing the drug, and must be convinced that there is a genuine desire to give up smoking and to attend support counselling.

Scotland's older people will benefit from a package over the next three years that will include an extensive programme of measures to provide better care services and concessionary fares. Also, as the Minister for Communities has announced, 70,000 pensioners will receive free central heating and insulation. Those are three of the most important issues for retired people.

I agree that in the many meetings that I and colleagues such as Jackie Baillie and Sarah Boyack have had with older people over the past 18 months, transport is one of the first issues that they raise with us. That is why we intend to respond on that issue. Community transport has a great role to play, as do concessionary fares and some of the measures  in the Transport (Scotland) Bill.

As recently as last week I pointed out that the timetable for our response to the Sutherland report had been set out in December. I have held rigorously to the position that we would respond in the context of the spending review and in the days following that. Bill Aitken's question is a last-ditch attempt to get me to break that timetable, but I am not willing to do so.

This is a matter for Grampian Health Board. The decision to prescribe a digital aid for a patient must be taken at local level based on clinical judgment and clinical priorities. Nine different types of digital hearing aid are available to the NHS in Scotland through the central  contracts negotiated by Scottish healthcare supplies.

Digital aids are not suitable for all patients, but we are aware that local advice to patients is not always consistent. Indeed, we have asked our officials to approach health boards and trusts, find out the current position, assess it and report to us. If Mr Rumbles has specific information that he wants to send to us, I will ensure that it is fed in to the process.

Through different members' debates we have had some consideration of screening. We are advised on this matter by the national screening committee. The point that the member raises is under consideration, and we will consider the committee's recommendations when they are given to us.

I join Euan Robson in congratulating Shona Robison on her success in obtaining this debate today. It is a strength of this Parliament that it can find time to discuss a condition which, as Ms Robison said, is little understood and about which there is a lack of awareness. Fibromyalgia is a difficult and complex condition, as all the speakers in this debate have indicated. It is true that it is not fully understood, even by some medical professionals. There has been a great deal of commitment from both professional and voluntary organisations, but gaps remain in our knowledge about its cause, diagnosis and treatment. We heard about a number of case studies in this debate, and it is clear that fibromyalgia can be the cause of considerable pain and disability. Unfortunately, there is no straightforward,  universally adopted, accepted diagnostic test for the condition. There is not even general agreement about what it should be called. It has been referred to not only as fibromyalgia but as fibrositis, fibromyositis, fybromyalgia syndrome or muscular rheumatism. The condition is characterised by pain and tenderness in the muscles or the tissue next to the muscles. It is often accompanied by fatigue and sleeping problems. The difficulty faced by the medical profession is that such symptoms can be caused by a wide range of medical conditions, due to a spectrum of causes. In the case of any particular patient, the doctor may be unable to make a definite diagnosis. The condition appears to be most common in women, as Mr Robson said, although it also affects men and children. Since Mr Robson's correspondence with the Minister for Health and Community Care, to which he referred, I am pleased to say that we have found some incidence statistics, gathered by the information and statistics division of the common services agency of the national health service in Scotland. Some 2,029 people with fibromyalgia were seen in the year to 31 March 2000. That figure came from a sample of 53 Scottish general practices, taken from different communities and with a combined population of 307,741. That would give an incidence of 0.66 per cent for Scotland. The incidence referred to in the motion may be rather higher than there is evidence for, but I cannot dispute that the uncertainties surrounding fibromyalgia and the fact that the statistics depend on diagnosis by GPs may well mean that there are undiagnosed cases. The NHS provides a range of services to which people with the condition have access, some of which may alleviate some of the symptoms. Aerobic exercise such as swimming and walking can improve muscle fitness, heat and massage may give short-term relief and antidepressant medications can help improve the quality of sleep and muscle relaxation. Many people with fibromyalgia may also benefit from a combination of exercise, physical therapy and relaxation. The motion suggests that the condition is frequently overlooked or minimised by doctors. Let me make it clear that that should not be the case. All general practitioners receive appropriate training to help them meet the needs of their patients. Training for general practice is intended to provide the future GP with the skills, knowledge and experience necessary to provide quality services to NHS patients. That should and does include conditions for which the diagnosis and treatment are not yet well understood. That approach is designed to ensure—as Ben Wallace was urging—that future doctors have an improved  capacity to respond to changing patterns of disease, changing needs and modern patterns of health care delivery. Nevertheless, I appreciate the concerns that have been expressed. The understanding of conditions with no known cause or cure should include an understanding of fibromyalgia syndrome. Today I have asked the chief medical officer to look into the matter and to assure me that it is included in training for general practitioners. The motion refers to access to benefits, which as we all know is a matter reserved to the Westminster Parliament. However, there is no condition that either automatically entitles a person to disability benefits or automatically excludes them. Everything depends on the effects that a condition has on a person's capacity, not on the name of the condition that is diagnosed. If members are aware of cases of constituents who are having difficulty with benefits—which should not happen—or insurance claims, as Mr Robson described, the best route is for the local member to take them up.

The point I was making is that the decision of such doctors should relate to particular activities, as prescribed by the Department of Social Security—a department for which we have no responsibility—rather than to the name of the condition that leads to problems. Many speakers referred to research. In all cases, health research funds are not ring-fenced for particular conditions. However, priorities for budgets reflect analysis of the burden of disease and of potential benefits. Within those parameters, the chief scientist's office, which is the Scottish Executive health department's principal source of research funding, is always prepared to consider well-founded applications for research into a wide variety of conditions. Indeed, the CSO is currently providing more than £10,000 funding for a research project at Ninewells hospital medical school, whose work Ms Robison referred to and which began on 1 September. That project, which is a study of bone mineral density in patients suffering from this syndrome, follows a recently completed project on the role of physical trauma in the onset of fibromyalgia. The medical school itself is conducting a long-term self-financed study, due to finish in November, on prevalence and clinical associations. So it is  clear—and Ms Robison made this point too—that, at least at Ninewells, the doctors take fibromyalgia very seriously indeed and are taking steps to improve awareness. I hope that today's debate will be a further step towards ensuring that there is broader awareness.  Meeting closed at 17:30.

It is for Grampian Primary Care NHS Trust to make arrangements for emergency provision in its area. Dentists in the Grampian area who have patients registered with them under national health service capitation or continuing care arrangements are required to provide emergency cover to those patients under their NHS terms of service. In addition, the trust has arrangements in place to provide emergency dental services for unregistered patients and is currently discussing with the Executive the development of a more comprehensive emergency dental service for Grampian.

I acknowledge Mr Macdonald's interest in that area—I have answered questions from him before. I agree that the out-of-hours general medical practitioners service in Grampian and Aberdeen is particularly good. I asked my officials to speak to the primary care trust and it has assured me that it is considering that service, with the intention of establishing whether it can build out-of-hours emergency dental services in a similar fashion.

We have begun to make some progress. Progress could always be faster—we would always like it to be faster. We recently published "An Action Plan for Dental Services in Scotland", which contains some immediate measures that will be taken. The plan has been discussed and agreed with the British Dental Association. It includes a review of some of the issues that Mrs Ewing raises, for example access to NHS dentists. Measures are in progress—I hope that we will see the benefits of them soon.

It is a fair comment from Mr Rumbles: access in rural areas in particular is not prominent in the document. However, improving access to dental services is part of the main thrust of our future work. I note his point that there are particular problems in rural Scotland—we must take cognisance of that.

We are implementing one of the two main recommendations on the regulation of care. The recommendations on charging for care are being considered in the spending review. We are making considerable progress in implementing other recommendations.

There is no delay. The charging recommendation was always going to be part of the next comprehensive spending review process, which is now coming to a close. I made that clear on 2 December 1999, and again on 10 February, 2 March and 9 March this year. It does not matter how many times Mr Hamilton or his colleagues ask the question; that has been the clear answer, and there has been no delay. When the time comes, we will respond.

I have already explained that there is no delay. The process that is being followed is the process that we have always described. I am puzzled by the contention that there is a demonstrative majority in this Parliament; I do not think that that contention has ever been tested.

I spend a great deal of my time  meeting older people, their organisations and those working with them, so I am conscious of their concern that the quality and extent of care for the elderly should be extended. Whether the Sutherland recommendation on personal care would be the best and most effective way of doing that is another question altogether, and one that we shall answer when we report on the spending review, as we have repeatedly undertaken to do.

I congratulate Mr Chisholm on securing today's debate. I am pleased that so many members have signed the motion and have either spoken or sought to speak on it. That reflects the growing interest in dementia, which is a great and important thing. Dementia is a disease that many fear and misunderstand. We have to overcome such fear and misunderstanding. The Executive agrees with the motion: the care of people with dementia represents one of the greatest challenges to health and welfare services throughout Scotland. As several members have said, there are around 61,000 people in Scotland with dementia, and as Dorothy-Grace Elder said, two thirds of that number have mild dementia and often live in the community at home or with family. The third who have moderate to severe dementia tend to be in a care home or hospital. That means that many agencies such as health boards and trusts, local authorities and the voluntary sector have a responsibility to improve the quality of care for people with dementia. Care is a complex of early-stage service support, medication where appropriate, counselling services, respite care, home care, day care, adaptations to housing or special needs housing and sometimes long-term care, all of which have been mentioned by many members. That matrix of services makes the "Framework for Mental Health Services in Scotland" very relevant, as Dr Richard Simpson pointed out. Launched in September 1997, its continuing aim is to focus the efforts of all agencies to ensure that  the required complex of services is available. We have already said that there is still much work to be done on implementation of the framework, and the mental health and well-being support group continues to visit health board areas to push this work forward. Furthermore, the proposed Scottish commission for the regulation of care will have a major role in ensuring and improving the quality of care available to people with dementia, in both day care and residential care. The importance of the quality of care was mentioned towards the end of the debate. Indeed, the National Care Standards Committee is drawing up national standards by which all services will be regulated. The draft standards on care for older people have been prepared by a working group that has been chaired by Professor Marshall, who is the director of the Dementia Services Development Centre, and are out for consultation. It is right that the motion should acknowledge that much of the progress in dementia care in Scotland has been driven by organisations such as Alzheimer Scotland and the Dementia Services Development Centre, which is based in Stirling. We should acknowledge Alzheimer Scotland's leading role in the Alliance for the Promotion of the Incapable Adults Bill, which worked so constructively with the Parliament in the passage of the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000. The Dementia Services Development Centre has done much innovative work in areas that have been referred to, such as training, and it has done some extremely important work on dementia-friendly design. Its work in both of those areas can be seen played out in day and residential care throughout Scotland. A range of community care policy developments by the Scottish Executive will contribute to better services for people with dementia. They include joint working between agencies, supported by the modernising community care fund; the carers strategy, which was announced in November, and the developments that will flow from that; and, as Mary Scanlon mentioned, the work of the joint futures group, which will be developing its recommendations this month in four seminars around Scotland. Many of those developments are recommendations of the Royal Commission on Long Term Care of the Elderly. As has been said, the recommendations that are relevant to funding care will be progressed in the forthcoming spending review. Mary Scanlon made the important point that those who have dementia should retain their dignity. It is central to our community care agenda that care should be designed to what users want.  That holds good for people with dementia. The Dementia Services Development Centre has nearly completed a two-year project seeking to develop ways in which people with dementia can be encouraged to express their own thoughts and feelings on the services that they receive and on how service practitioners and service providers listen and act on those views. That gives an important underpinning to the improvement of the quality of care. Such innovative work is typical of the work of the centre and is one reason why we provide it with £133,900 a year. For some time, the centre has been planning a new building as the next stage in its development. More than £1 million has been raised by public appeal from individuals and from organisations in the Scottish financial and business community. I am glad to take this opportunity to announce that we are contributing £500,000 to allow the centre to proceed to the tendering stage.  We have hardly touched on a subject that has a broad range of aspects, but time is short. The Scottish Executive acknowledges that we can do much to improve the quality of care and services that is provided for people with dementia. We have begun the process of change, but we are only at the beginning. We will continue to support that process, to which this debate has contributed.  Meeting closed at 17:18.

In the first meeting of Parliament after the summer recess last year we debated health and we are debating health in the last meeting of Parliament before this summer recess. Health has been the top and hem of this Parliament's first year. We have debated it on many occasions; it has featured heavily in question time and in members' business. There has often been a sense of déjà vu or, as Duncan Hamilton would say, déjà entendu. Unfortunately he has never yet reached the stage of déjà compris. He understands nothing more now than he did a year ago. In the past year, what has the health service been doing while we talk? It has carried out 50,000 more operations than it did the year before. It has carried out 13 per cent more heart bypasses, more hip operations and started pancreas transplants. Accident and emergency departments have seen 43,500 more people; consultant clinics have carried out 62,000 more appointments and there have been 50,000 more at out-patient clinics. Mental health teams—as Susan Deacon said—made 85,000 more visits and community nurses and health visitors made an astonishing 277,000 more visits. More dentists are practising in Scotland than a year ago and fewer consultant posts are vacant than were a year ago. Every day the NHS is serving our people and serving them well. It is not complacent to recognise that; it is right. I have to say it must be worth a prize if it gets us accused of arrogance by Mike Russell.

There is no underspend. There is a rollover; 100 per cent of it is spent in the NHS. The problem with understanding is the lack of understanding of the Opposition.

As I said, every day the NHS serves our people, but it can serve them better and it wants to serve them better. That is why, in the past year, we have acted where the service needs it. As Richard Simpson said, £13.2 million has been invested in linear accelerators for cancer care. Mary Scanlon talked about intensive care and high-dependency wards; £6.8 million has been invested in that. Recently, £60 million was invested to reduce waiting times and reduce delayed discharge, which Christine Grahame mentioned. We recently agreed £4.5 million of incentive payments for GPs as incentives for flu vaccination for next year. That was negotiated directly with the BMA. Another matter that we are addressing with the professions is that raised by Brian Adam: what happens following suspension of members of staff. There may be an opportunity to talk in more detail about that at another time. Margo MacDonald mentioned investment in diagnostic equipment. This morning, Susan Deacon announced that £30 million would be invested in diagnostic equipment such as CT scanners. Statutory controls on generic drugs have been mentioned. At 12 noon today, Lord Hunt announced that statutory controls will be imposed on generic drugs. In a full year, that will save the Scottish health service as much as £20 million. We have lifted NHS spending to an unprecedented £5.42 billion. However, the NHS can and wants to serve better. That is why in the past year we have begun the reforms that will allow it to do that. Margaret Jamieson reminded us of the redesign of cataract services in Ayrshire, which is underpinned by the changing attitudes in the profession. David Mundell and Paul Martin talked about the need to use IT. As an example of telemedicine, there is the teleradiology link to the Garrick hospital in Stranraer, in David Mundell's constituency, which he will be able to see for himself within the year. If he goes to any GP surgery, he will see the IT equipment that has been provided since the Labour Government was elected in 1997. Other reforms include the introduction of joint  appointments such as that of child health manager of Highland Health Board and Highland Council, and the other examples in Lothian to which Bristow Muldoon referred. There is a new national cervical screening programme. I could go on. Anyone who tries to dismiss those improvements as soundbites simply insults those who make them work, day in and day out.

No. This is long-term improvement and it now has the leadership of the modernisation board and the engine of the modernisation forum, which includes the BMA, to drive it forward in partnership with those who make our service what it is.

I am coming to that. Ian Jenkins and Tommy Sheridan talked about the need to take staff with us. That is one of the primary things that we have to do. That is why the modernisation board was preceded by the Scottish partnership forum, which had Unison at its heart and which discussed exactly the issues that Tommy Sheridan raised, such as staffing. There has been much talk about a positive approach and giving alternatives. When I saw that the SNP amendment talked about "new and imaginative methods" for the NHS, I thought that perhaps the SNP shared our vision for the NHS. I listened for new and imaginative ideas from Kay Ullrich, and I heard one. If I understood it, it was to put her on the modernisation board. We have discussed it and, I am sorry, the answer is no.

Mind you, that was an idea. Andrew Wilson and Duncan Hamilton managed two whole speeches with barely a mention of the health service at all, never mind a new idea.

No, I do not have time. This week, there was a chance to engage in the building of a healthier Scotland. On Monday, we held the first healthier Scotland convention. In many ways, it was an inspiring day, which had at its heart a vision of what is possible for our people if we have the will. Kay Ullrich, Duncan Hamilton, Mary Scanlon and Ben Wallace were invited, but they could not make it.

It is true that the notice that was  given was short, but it was the same for everyone. Five ministers and 150 leaders from the NHS, local authorities and the voluntary sector were there. Some Health and Community Care Committee members were on committee business in the Borders, but Kay Ullrich, Duncan Hamilton and Mary Scanlon were not. What was it that they were so busy doing?

We know what they were doing, because we could read the quotations they gave that evening and the following day. Their priority is not health, but headlines.

No, I do not have time.

No.

There has been much talk of the £34 million. I can see why it is an important sum of money for the SNP; in its 1997 manifesto, it is all the additional money the SNP would have allocated to the health service. Compare that with the almost £0.5 billion that we provide. As for the Tories, they would either use the money for tax cuts, as David McLetchie said last Thursday, or give it back to the Treasury, as he was suggesting by Sunday. Perhaps the Tories would use it to subsidise private health insurance so that they can charge for hip replacements and cataract operations, which is what Liam Fox was talking about in Glasgow last week.

I will give way to Mary Scanlon. I ask her please to tell us what she was saying.

No. I will give way to Mrs Scanlon if she wants me to.

Mrs Scanlon, health may be devolved, but regulation of the insurance sector is not. The real reason— [Interruption.]

The real reason the SNP talks so much about the £34 million is that it is a conjuring trick. It gets people to look at the £34 million on the one hand in the hope that they will not notice the £5.4 billion on the other. The Tories have a conjuring trick too. Theirs is the one where you put the watch—the NHS—in the hankie and smash it to bits. They would smash the health boards, the primary care trusts and the local health co-operatives, but the people know that the Tories are the Tommy Coopers of politics—when they give the hankie back, the watch is still smashed.

I am winding up.

Those who made it to the health summit would have heard Professor Phil Hanlon talk about an important factor in life expectancy—hope and optimism. I was reminded of a Chinese saying, not from Mao Tse Tung—I will leave that to Keith Raffan—but from Confucius, who said that a leader must deal in hope. The Opposition fails that test. The SNP deals in despondency—it says that there is crisis and chaos and catastrophe. There is not. The Tories deal in despair. They tell us that we will have to go private, that the public NHS cannot cope and cannot handle it. Well, it can. The NHS was born in the hope of a better society. Every day, our people use it with the hope of better lives. This Executive—this partnership— deals in hope in the certainty that we can have a better NHS. We will not be deflected.

I ask Mr Adam to withdraw that remark, which was patently untrue. I did not leave the chamber and I was listening to every word that he said.

Will the member take an intervention?

I have a genuine point.

Continuous improvement in accessing specialist out-of-hours and crisis services is an ambition set out in our published policy for mental health. That ambition is being pursued by the care agencies.

To have a service in place but not to ensure that those who need it know that it exists and how to access it is a theme that runs through a number of developments in the health service in Scotland. A further example is the extension of the NHS helpline—the Scottish version of NHS Direct. The framework for mental health services, which calls for crisis services as part of the template for local services, has a six-year implementation period. The mental health and well-being support group has the task of advising on and helping to advance those developments. The group will take account of the point that Nora Radcliffe raised.

We are working together across ministerial briefs to ensure that various groups of people—for example, rough sleepers and looked-after children when they leave the care of the authorities—have the access and information about the wide-ranging services that they should have. Scott Barrie's point is important, and it runs as a theme through the developments that we are trying to make.

The information that Kay Ullrich requests is not held centrally. However, statistics on delayed discharges from national health service hospitals of patients awaiting places in nursing and residential homes are to be collected quarterly.

I do not usually respond to letters that I have not seen, but Mr Devine will be pleased to know that this week we have allocated an additional £10 million to local authorities to do what he requests in his letter. It is interesting to note that Annabel Goldie referred to the provenance of that £10 million and that it was referred to as funding for trees. The £10 million is being spent on doing exactly what was requested—to free up as many as 1,000 delayed discharge beds in the NHS.

Mr Mundell has raised the matter previously at question time. I offered to discuss it with him, but he did not take up the opportunity to meet me. However, we expect the report to come soon and I will study it carefully when it arrives.

We have.

In January, the Minister for Transport and the Environment launched in the Scottish Parliament the revised, and overall more challenging, air quality strategy for Scotland. The revised strategy lays down air quality objectives and dates in relation to the eight pollutants of most concern to human health. In addition, this year the Scottish Executive expects through the Scottish Parliament to implement European Union legislation on the sulphur content of liquid fuels and two directives on air quality, with the overall aim of further improving air quality in Scotland.

Those are exactly the reasons why the air quality strategy to which I referred required  local authorities to review and assess air quality within their areas. Local authorities must ensure that areas of particularly poor air quality are dealt with. I understand that Aberdeen City Council is nearing the end of its air quality review, so it is too early to pronounce on the situation in that city. However, where an air quality objective is unlikely to be met, the authority will be required to declare an air quality management area and to draw up an action plan in order to remedy the situation.

The key point is that the Executive will continue to consider air quality in the round. Many factors contribute to the problems of pollution, such as ozone, which is different from other particulate matter problems. Elaine Thomson pointed to traffic and congestion as being key contributors to our pollution problems and the Transport (Scotland) Bill will help us to take action on that. We must consider all the factors that contribute to poor air quality in order to produce a strategy that will improve the air in Scotland.

I am aware of the report, which focuses on benefits, pensions and employment opportunities for carers. The Scottish Executive is committed to supporting carers under its strategy for carers in Scotland but it has no function in relation to those reserved areas. The Executive is in regular contact with the United Kingdom Government on a wide range of matters, including carers issues, and I will ensure that the interests of Scottish carers are represented.

It is not the case that we have delivered only lip service to carers in the past year. We have delivered a doubling of the resources earmarked for carers services and those resources are now—in discussion with carers—being applied to improving the range of services available for carers. We have also undertaken the biggest ever social services, Scottish Executive, Scotland Office campaign to identify hidden carers and ensure that they are put in contact with the services that they need.

One of those services is welfare rights advice to help carers to maximise their benefits and income. Charging for social work services is entirely a matter for local authorities, which can choose whether or not to charge. Some do and some do not. I am conscious, however,  that there is a great deal of inconsistency across Scotland in the way in which those charges are applied. The joint futures group is working with me—we meet again on Monday—and this is one of the matters that we are considering.

I thank Elaine Smith and acknowledge her interest in this matter, as expressed during the recent carers week. The carers legislation working group was one further aspect of the carers strategy announced to Parliament in November. We had a choice whether to pursue carers legislation quickly—everyone agreed that it was needed—or to do it in careful consultation with carers organisations. The organisations have taken the time to meet on a number of occasions to develop proposals for me. I have not set a deadline, but I expect their proposals to go out to public consultation later this year.

Reducing the number of delayed discharges is a high priority. A sum of £60 million is being made available, on top of existing record levels of funding in the national health service, to accelerate the delivery of a number of priorities, including a reduction in the number of delayed discharges. A learning network is being established to encourage the sharing of best practice.

Bristow Muldoon is absolutely right. In response to previous questions, I have pointed  out that the audit of delayed discharge that is under way has revealed that there are some 42 reasons for delayed discharge. If we are ever to make a difference, we must think hard about long-term solutions, which will include joint working, rapid response teams to ensure that admission does not happen unnecessarily, and community rehabilitation to ensure that people can return to their homes once a care package is in place. There are good examples, and the purpose of the learning network is to ensure that good practice is spread throughout Scotland.

I have been aware of the work of Milestone House and Waverley Care Trust for many years and have visited Milestone House on a number of occasions and in a number of capacities, most recently last year as the Deputy Minister for Community Care. I have participated in a number of fund-raising events for Waverley Care Trust, although—unlike Margo MacDonald—I have never sung on its behalf, which is probably wise. As David McLetchie said, Milestone House is situated in my constituency. However, I must make clear the fact that it is as the Deputy Minister for Community Care that I speak today. Milestone opened in 1991 as an 18-bed unit for men and women. It was developed as a resource to provide residential respite, palliative and terminal care for people with HIV-related illness. Interestingly, it was, I believe, the first of five AIDS hospices that were planned for Scotland but it was the only one that opened. It is designated as a nursing home, and the type and volume of the services that it provides are in response to the identified need and predictions for the course of HIV at the time. That is true of the whole service package in Lothian for people with HIV-related illnesses, including other Waverley Care Trust initiatives such as the Solas resource centre and the clinical care that is provided by the NHS. The fact that those predictions were not realised has led Lothian Health, City of Edinburgh Council and Waverley Care Trust to review those services. Through the effective communication of prevention messages to vulnerable groups, and through the introduction of new combination drug therapies, many fewer HIV patients develop AIDS.  People who have AIDS are now living with the disease rather than dying from it. In 1999, the number of new HIV infections was 157, the lowest number since 1994. In 1999, the number of diagnosed AIDS cases—and I think that Margaret Smith cited this figure—was 54 compared to 126 in 1993. When Milestone House opened, it was also thought that HIV was more easily communicated than has proved to be the case. Therefore, at that time there was a perceived public health case for isolating AIDS patients. As the number of new AIDS cases has reduced markedly, and is likely to remain at that level, the case for sustaining a separate hospice is much weaker. At Milestone House, the number of people who require palliative care has dropped from more than 25 a year to around seven a year, and in the first nine months of 1999 there were only three deaths there, many fewer than there had been in previous years. That is good news, but is no cause for complacency. Any let-up in the prevention and education work would run the risk of allowing such welcome trends to reverse. That is why we continue to invest in HIV prevention. The group that is reviewing HIV health promotion will report to me in the next few weeks. However, the changes in the understanding of the epidemiology of AIDS mean that health and social care provision must be reviewed and that the delivery of services must be modernised. With that in mind, Waverley Care Trust and its two funding partners have carried out two major reviews in recent years. There has not been a rushed review or consideration. It is the responsibility of Lothian Health and City of Edinburgh Council to ensure that appropriate provision is made. They must ensure provision for those for whom combination therapy is ineffective or inappropriate, and they must ensure that that provision delivers both respite and palliative care as well as the range of other support that is required. The recommendations from the second review since 1998, which are being considered, propose, as David McLetchie said, that services that are currently provided at Milestone House should cease on 31 March 2000, provided that appropriate alternative respite resources have been developed and put in place to ensure the minimum disruption to users. That recommendation was made on the basis that a more flexible model of respite care provision will be required to cater for the changing needs of different populations that are living with HIV—gay men, drug users and people who have been infected via heterosexual transmission. In practice, the new service means better targeted respite  support along with community-based services that are provided at home. The proposed new service configuration was described accurately by David McLetchie, and I do not intend to go through it again. The service must be viewed alongside prevention and education work and alongside the clinical health care that, in Lothian, now requires a budget of more than £2.6 million for HIV and AIDS-related medicines. Lothian Health and the local authority are actively trying to identify a suitable site for this new type of facility, the aim being to find a site that is more readily accessible to users than Milestone House. I echo some of the comments that have been made about the tranquillity of the current site. However, the appropriate site for the delivery of the service must be a decision for Lothian Health, the local authority and Waverley Care Trust. I repeat that it is my understanding that existing services at Milestone will continue until the new service provision is established. That is clearly an important assurance to give. The new services will have to be funded according to the appropriate criteria for health and social work services. Waverley Care Trust will, in due course, agree the funding package with its partners. Those services are delivered by a partnership of Lothian Health, the council and the voluntary sector provider, which is Waverley Care Trust. I expect that to continue to be the case, but the detail of the package will depend on the configuration of services, which is rightly a matter for the partners involved. I understand that the review team, which included Lothian Health, City of Edinburgh Council and Waverley Care Trust, is content with the outcome of the review. Last month, the council adopted the recommendations in principle, and Lothian Health will consider the review at its board meeting next week. People have called today for a swift conclusion to the review; I think that the demands in those calls will be met. If the case for a specialist hospice provision in Lothian is not made, I do not think that the case for a national hospice in Edinburgh is made either. Research points to people preferring to remain in their own homes and to be as independent as possible. The thrust of thinking in community care generally is against services that take people far from home and family. However, I take the point that Milestone has been used by people from outside Lothian. Currently, the number of residents of Milestone from outside Lothian is around 11 per cent—one or two residents at any one time. I also take the point that the residents have to have access to a proper mix of services. In that light, I have asked my officials to check with all health boards and their local authority partners to  ensure that, like Lothian, they have in place a proper mix of service provision for HIV and AIDS sufferers. It is their clear responsibility—as it is the responsibility of Lothian Health in Lothian—to have the right mix of services available to meet the needs of the users of those services. Needs change, and so do services. However, the principle of meeting needs does not change, and that is the principle to which we must hold as we consider this change in service configuration.

I recall that at one of the first ministerial engagements that I undertook in connection with the learning disability review, a young man with a learning disability said to me forcefully, "We are never listened to." I promised then that they would be listened to now, and I hope that this debate gives people with learning disabilities and their carers confidence that that is the case, today and in the future. Perhaps we have run the risk of painting too bleak a picture. Michael Matheson is right: we should acknowledge the good work that has been done and the many dedicated members of staff who work in that area. I also agree with Michael's view about what is an historic day. Lothian made a proud boast last year that no one with a learning disability in Lothian lives in a long-stay institution. By the end of this year, no one from Lothian will live in a long-stay institution anywhere in the UK. There are examples that can be followed and which show that we can make such ideas work. Expenditure on social and heath care for people with learning disabilities has risen from £235 million to £270 million over the past four years. However, it cannot be denied that the disparity raised by Duncan Hamilton exists. Per head of population, less is spent in Scotland on people with learning disabilities and on services for them than in England, and the disparity is even more apparent when Scotland is compared with Wales. However, I do not accept the conclusion of Duncan Hamilton's argument. The flaw in the SNP amendment is that that disparity does not point to underfunding—rather, it points to a lack of priority in funding services for people with learning disabilities. The key point is that we could double resources tomorrow, but if learning disability does not get its share, or those resources are spent on  the wrong services, we will not have solved the most significant problem.

I am not in danger of setting up a dichotomy, false or otherwise. However, Mr Hamilton is in danger of failing to lift his eyes above the immediate future to look towards the long term. Any commitment on funding made by me today would have no validity whatever in 10 years' time. It is important that we change the priority for people with learning disabilities and the configuration of services that support their lives, because such steps will still be making a difference for people with learning disabilities 10 years from now. The amendment lacks that long-term vision. While we are still on resources, Mr Hamilton also made the point that we cannot pay for old and new at the same time. Of course that is correct, but that is exactly the purpose of the change fund. In my opening speech, I said that we will soon make clear the extent of that change fund within the spending review process. We know that the broad policy for community care for people with learning disabilities is right—today's debate has shown that. However, we also know that being in the community is not the same as having a full and fulfilled life. Mary Scanlon and Richard Simpson both made the point that we must have confidence in the new services. For elderly carers, that is a key issue, and we must acknowledge that it is easier to have confidence in bricks and mortar than it is to have confidence in a care package. One reason the commission for the regulation of care, which will be introduced, through legislation, next year, will regulate and inspect day services and services delivered at home is to give us that confidence. Mary Scanlon was also right to point out that the number of people with learning disabilities is growing annually. That may be because people are living longer, but I agree that more research must be undertaken, and that will be one of the functions of the Scottish centre that we intend to set up. Many members have drawn attention to the fact that we have waited 20 years for the review. If that is the standard—we hope that it is not—we will not get this chance again in our political lives. Well, most of us will not, but I suppose that it is possible that Duncan Hamilton will get the chance again during his political life. [Laughter.] I do not want to  think about that. The crux of the matter is that that standard is the same for people with learning disabilities. We must get it right this time for them, and that is why I welcome constructive criticism. I will address some of that criticism briefly. Placing local area co-ordinators in local health care co-operatives is but one suggestion and we are keen to discuss how that should be organised. Tricia Marwick talked about the range of tenancies in supported accommodation. I believe that we need a range of tenure options, but Scottish Executive guidance on tenancies is clear that full tenancies should be the norm, and I will discuss with colleagues how we can ensure that that guidance is adhered to. However, the debate gives me the opportunity to acknowledge the importance of the work in that area of housing associations, such as Key Housing Association, Ark Housing Association, the Carr-Gomm Society and many others. I am pleased to say to Tricia Marwick that the chief nursing officer will review the training of learning disability nurses and their role in the light of the review. Richard Simpson and several others talked about the importance of getting the reprovisioning process right when we consider closing institutions. That process must be transparent, it must be done with consultation, it must involve users, it must involve carers and—I say this to Dennis Canavan—it must involve staff. Dennis Canavan spoke about what he called repatriation. I assure Dennis that location is not a funding issue. However, I say with reference to the hospital at Larbert that, because reprovisioning involves every local authority in Scotland, it is hard to see how that can happen without some bureaucracy. That situation was created many years ago, as the example that Dennis gave illustrates. The key thing when arranging packages is that people should have someone who can act as their advocate. I commend Dennis Canavan for being an efficient and effective advocate for some of the patients at the hospital in his constituency. Nora Radcliffe and Johann Lamont talked about the importance of advocacy generally, and I assure them that that is a key recommendation of the report. Given that it is Down's syndrome awareness week, we should note that this debate has been not about people with learning disabilities, but about us. It is our attitudes that must change. Learning disabilities must be much more to the fore in our minds. We have come some of the way, but the difficult part of the journey lies ahead. Margaret Smith is right—that is a responsibility of everybody in this chamber and beyond. In my opening speech, I spoke about the  meeting of an ex-staff member and an ex-patient from Gogarburn, which took place just outside the chamber. That ex-patient's journey had taken him from Gogarburn to the doors of this Parliament. This review has opened those doors today, and we must never again shut out people with learning disabilities. Tricia Marwick was right: people with learning disabilities may not find a place in the sun, as the world can be a palace of the winds, but the world is where they want to be—the same as us.

We spoke about learning disabilities recently, in the debate on community care, but learning disabilities have not had their due place on the community care agenda. As politicians, we must take responsibility for that, or for some of it at least. I hope, therefore, that members will value the opportunity to debate this matter in its own right today. People with a learning disability will continue to be denied the fullness of citizenship if we do not change the way in which we view them. We must overcome the public's negative views, professionals must manage less and listen more and attitudes must change. Politicians must show a lead, which is why it is important to bring the voices, the aspirations and even the dreams of people with learning disabilities to our Parliament for the first time. For too long, learning disabilities have been no one's priority; the learning disability review is about changing that. Over the past 20 years, most European countries have been developing new, modern and effective services and support for people with a learning disability. Indeed, much progress has been made in Scotland, where we have some fine examples of innovative services. More than 4,000 fewer people live in long-stay institutions, but a further 2,000 Scots could live more independently. In the 21 st century, no one should be in hospital because they have a learning disability. A learning disability is not an illness. That is the headline of the review, but at its core are values the Parliament holds high. It puts people first. It promotes social inclusion, equality and fairness, and the opportunity for people to improve themselves through continuous learning. Sadly, those are the very qualities that people with learning disabilities have often not enjoyed to date. Anyone who thinks that the review is just another glossy document is badly mistaken. It reflects strongly the experiences of people throughout the country, many of whom have never before have been asked what they think, feel or want. It is the authentic and powerful voice of people with learning disabilities. No one who was at the launch of the review a month ago can deny  that. The previous review of services for people with learning disabilities in Scotland was carried out more than 20 years ago and addressed the balance between hospital and community care. This review, too, began by looking at those services, but it changed course almost immediately, to concentrate instead on people's lives and lifestyles. It recognised that people's lives are what matters and that services must support them. That was a watershed. It conditioned the review and the report, and I believe that it must serve as an example to this Parliament for its future thinking. The review involved people who use services, and their carers. It involved visits, speaking directly to people in their homes and holding seminars. It also had a well used website. Users and carers were members of the national steering group and they conducted their own roadshows to bring out views and opinions. I took part in some of the visits and attended some of the conferences. I also held an interview on the website. I wanted to see and hear what people thought and felt, and that was made powerfully clear to me. The most potent message of what is possible always comes through personal example. I think of one young woman, whom I met in Aberdeen, and her mother. They provided an outstanding example of the approach that we want following the review. The young woman has a learning disability and a physical disability. She uses a wheelchair, electronic communication and a carer whom she interviewed and appointed herself. Through her care manager, Grampian Service Brokerage, her family and, above all, her determination, she attends college, swims, goes to aromatherapy classes and works for Asda part time. It is no special job—she monitors and controls the closed-circuit television, which is bad news for shoplifters as she is particularly adept at tracking them. The one part of the job that she cannot do, her carer does. Asda gets a valued worker, she gets the chance to earn a proper wage and the shoplifters get their collar felt. A job, a home, some leisure time, a life—that is what "The same as you?" means. There are 29 recommendations in the report and they all contribute in some way to what people want. People want more control and say over their lives. The recommendations would strengthen advocacy services and extend people's entitlement to direct payments. People want better-quality, more consistent and more person-centred care and support. Under the recommendations, there would be a new type of local area co-ordinator to organise support in the community; personal life plans for  everyone with a learning disability who wants one; and more help and support through short breaks. People want new opportunities that support inclusion. We need modernised day services that focus on personal development and employment. We want people to have more mainstream and less specialist supports, and more integrated and better-developed community-based services that will lead to the closure of the remaining long-stay hospitals by 2005. Above all, people want a new vision for learning disability generally. We propose, therefore, to set up a new Scottish centre for learning disabilities. It would be a resource to support users, carers and agencies, to promote public awareness and to tackle discrimination and stigma. We also propose to set up a national network for people with an autistic spectrum disorder and to introduce partnership in practice agreements that would give a clear focus for local authorities and health boards when working together to develop services. Finally, we propose to create a change fund, to help local authorities move quickly towards the vision for people with learning disabilities. We have sent out about 7,000 copies of the report—I had some trouble getting one for myself today—and are asking for comments on its implementation by the end of August. I make no apologies for the review taking 18 months to complete. The effort to ensure that it was accessible and inclusive was important. I make no apology for now ensuring there is the time for a wide constituency to hear and engage with its conclusions. I attach considerable importance to the views of the Parliament's committees—the Health and Community Care Committee, the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee and the Education and Lifelong Learning Committee—and that is why I am pleased that the whole Parliament has this opportunity to discuss the recommendations. The review is the start of a 10-year journey. I want to go forward with a fair wind from this chamber. We cannot stand still and wait. I intend to keep up the momentum. We will make an early start on setting up the Scottish centre. We expect to go out to tender soon and it is my aim to have the centre up and running this autumn. The centre is pivotal to reshaping the future. It is a key marker of our commitment to the vision of the review. I intend to entrench the user and carer perspective, which has run through the process of the review, in the work and management of the centre, which will be a key player in making a reality of the recommendations. We have begun discussions with some of the key organisations that will be involved in  implementing specific recommendations. The need for new resources to implement the review as a whole, particularly through the change fund, is being considered carefully in the current spending review. Those who might try to argue that nothing can happen without new resources are simply wrong. We expect local authorities and health boards, with their local partners, to make an early start on identifying where they can do better within the existing pool of resources. Local authorities and health boards spend more than £270 million a year—a substantial amount—on direct services for people with a learning disability. Too much of that—37 per cent—is tied up in bricks and mortar and in services that lack the focus that this review demands. The review makes very clear that the key resource issue is the priority given to people with learning disabilities and what it is spent on. That has to change if any increase in resources is to deliver what we want. The review indicates how we can spend better. "The same as you?" can move learning disabilities in Scotland from negative to positive, from policy drift to a vision for the future, from people with learning disabilities being ignored to their being valued. The solution is not easy, but in one sense it is as simple as this: someone I know who worked years ago in a long-stay hospital told me that she met an ex-patient whom she had known as one man in a ward of many. She said hello and asked what he was doing these days. The first thing he said was, "I don't live in Gogarburn any more and I get to choose what I do." That's what "The same as you?" means. This Parliament is accountable to the people of Scotland. They include people with learning disabilities who have made clear what they need and want. I hope that we can embrace their vision, endorse these recommendations and discuss how we deliver them. I move, That the Parliament notes that the report of the Learning Disability Review, The same as you?, was issued on 11 May to a wide range of consultees, calls for the fullest possible debate on how its recommendations should be implemented, and looks forward to a future where all relevant agencies work together with people with learning disabilities to ensure that they can live as full lives as possible in our communities.

The care and treatment of individuals with eating disorders such as anorexia nervosa or bulimia is covered by the framework for mental health services in Scotland that was published in 1997. Health boards and NHS trusts are expected to develop specialist services for the treatment of those and other psychological disorders, based on an assessment of local need.

The important thing is that an integrated care package will be available to sufferers. It will include a range of measures from health education to psychological and psychiatric therapies and in-patient facilities. The key to getting that right is to get local agreement. The mechanism for that is the mental health framework. The mental health and well-being support group is beginning a series of visits around health boards, to help with the implementation of that framework. Any gaps in the service will be identified in that process and, as the framework rolls out, sufferers of anorexia will benefit.

It is for the health service locally to ensure that interpretation and translation services are provided where necessary.

I understand that Glasgow City Council agreed last week to fund interpreting and translation services for asylum seekers when accessing health care. That funding will come from the resources provided to the council by the National Asylum Support Service.

The Greater Glasgow Primary Care NHS Trust is taking the steps it considers necessary to ensure that asylum seekers receive the same health care services as any other resident in the area.

The Audit Commission report—as Ms Fabiani probably knows—is about the lessons to be learned from the interim arrangements introduced in England in November 1999. Those interim arrangements do not extend to Scotland, so the situation that was examined is not extant in Scotland. Nevertheless, some of the findings will be useful for Scotland. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities is aware of the report and is getting a copy on publication. We have undertaken to examine, 18 months into its operation, how the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 is operating in the areas that are devolved to us. Any action that we take then will depend on the outcome of the findings that are relevant to what is happening here in Scotland.

I would like to join in the general congratulations for Duncan Hamilton on securing this debate today. It will help to raise the profile of dyspraxia in Scotland. As we have heard, dyspraxia is a complex condition. It is not fully understood even among some medical professionals. It is not entirely neglected: 97 research projects on various aspects of dyspraxia are taking place in the UK today. Some are aimed at improving the condition  in adults; although most of the debate has focused on children, this is a lifelong condition, as Duncan Hamilton correctly said. There is also a much wider body of research into conditions such as dyslexia and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, which are associated with dyspraxia. In Scotland, the Royal Aberdeen children's hospital is doing research into dyspraxia and there are eight ADHD projects—one at Ninewells hospital in Dundee and seven at the Yorkhill hospital in this city. Dyspraxia is not easy to diagnose, partly because it has so many symptoms that can be present in any combination. We have heard about many of the symptoms during the debate—general clumsiness, confusion between right and left, extreme sensitivity to touch, poor short-term memory and body awareness, and difficulty with learned tasks such as using a pencil or cutlery, or getting dressed. Dyspractic children can often have speech problems, which can be very severe. In spite of that, they are usually of average or above average intelligence. Many of the problems may appear at some point in the development of young children who are not dyspractic, which all adds to the difficulty of diagnosis. There is no standard accepted treatment for dyspraxia and unfortunately no known cure. The main source of help for a dyspractic child is, as we have heard, in occupational therapy, physiotherapy and educational support, which can help the child to cope with his or her difficulties and to achieve his or her potential to a much greater degree. I am not sure that we can say that the incidence of dyspraxia in Scotland is as high as 10 per cent. The Dyspraxia Foundation's website estimates that 2 per cent of families in the UK are affected by the condition. I make that point not to be critical, but to acknowledge further the difficulties of evidence-gathering on a condition that is not well understood.

That is entirely possible. The condition is poorly understood. The only statistics that are held centrally are for people who are discharged from hospital with a primary or secondary diagnosis of dyspraxia. A primary diagnosis means that dyspraxia was the reason for referral to the hospital; a secondary diagnosis means that the patient has been admitted for another reason but has been found to have dyspraxia too. There were only 117 diagnoses of dyspraxia in 1999 and a further 25 diagnoses of specific  development disorder of motor function, which may include some with dyspraxia. In some ways those statistics have little value. For example, they do not include out-patients; conversely they may include more than one admission of the same person. Whatever the incidence of dyspraxia, I can understand and sympathise with the desire of families affected by the condition to see it included in the pre-school screening programme. There is no doubt that the earlier any developmental difficulty is diagnosed, the earlier the child can be helped. I will respond in a little detail to the proposal in the motion. The Executive is advised on screening programmes by the national screening committee, which has a children's sub-group. National in this context means the whole of the UK, to give a broader statistical base. This is an eminent committee of experts that has continued to operate since devolution last year. The Executive has representatives on the national screening committee and the sub-group and both have Scottish members appointed for their expertise in particular areas. When the national screening committee and the children's sub-group consider new possibilities for screening programmes, they work to overall criteria that include requirements that there should be a diagnostic test that is simple, quick and easy to interpret and accurate and that there should be a recognised standard treatment for the condition. Neither of those factors is generally considered to apply to dyspraxia at present.

I would be very surprised if it was not aware of the research, but I will ensure that it is aware of it. The children's sub-group of the national screening committee does not have any immediate plans to include dyspraxia in its programme of conditions that may be included in national screening programmes in the future. It would be dishonest to say anything different in this debate. That is not to say that it ignores developmental disorders. Its future programme includes dyslexia, speech and language delay and conduct disorders, which are—as we have heard—all conditions that are often closely linked to dyspraxia. If screening programmes for those conditions are introduced in time, children with dyspraxia may benefit indirectly.  There is some movement down the route that Duncan Hamilton asked for, although dyspraxia is a less immediate destination than the motion desires. I make the point that the map is a clinical one, not a political one. There is no standard accepted medical treatment to help dyspraxia, but educational support can help almost all children with dyspraxia; that has been graphically described during the debate. In schools, a learning support teacher is often involved. If necessary, referrals can be made to community child health and to educational psychology. A medical officer and a psychologist can see the child, meet the parents and decide what needs to be done. If it is felt that dyspraxia is the problem, an occupational therapist can be called in to advise the teacher on ways to help the child.

I take Mr Mundell's point. I make it clear that the situation that he described in his personal case is not acceptable. That level of difficulty in getting the required support is not acceptable.  Many of the possibilities of support arise through school. I will comment on what we can do to make that more effective for others in future. Children with dyspraxia will be among those who will benefit from the £12 million inclusion programme that was announced by Peter Peacock in the debate on special educational needs. Members who were in the chamber will recall that he recognised that in-service training for teachers was crucial for the early diagnosis of dyspraxia. That has been one of the points—although, I agree, not the central one—that has been raised in the debate. He pledged that resources would be made available to work towards increasing the effectiveness of in-service training. Today, Peter Peacock and I have agreed that he will refer the matter of dyspraxia to the national special educational needs advisory forum and seek its advice on how we can ensure that what we do is effective. In conclusion, I congratulate Duncan Hamilton on bringing this little-understood condition to our attention today. Our debate and the number of signatories to the motion, as well as research, greater recognition among teachers and the work that is beginning in the Highlands and Islands, to which the motion refers, will move us a little way along the path of better understanding, which must underpin an improved response to dyspraxia in the future.  Meeting closed at 17:40.

The water byelaws prohibit the use of lead fittings which may come into contact with water that may be used for drinking. Where such contamination has occurred, the health consequences will vary according to the amount of lead ingested by the individual along with other factors.

The important point that Nora Radcliffe makes is that the practice is already illegal, which means that byelaws should be enforced. The incident that she mentioned has led to some action: for example, all health boards have been asked to reiterate good practice in drinking water, which is to take drinking water from the mains tap wherever practical. A new leaflet is also being produced. Furthermore, the Scottish Centre for Infection and Environmental Health is planning a survey for next spring of a significant number of new houses to identify the extent of the problem.

Lead solder is already banned,  except in certain applications such as central heating systems where the water cannot come into contact with people directly. The byelaws already exist and should be enforced.

The point is that lead solder is a useful building material as long as it is used safely. The byelaws ensure that the only place where it can or should be used is where there can be no possibility of contact with drinking water.

I understand that the Coach House Trust assists people with mental health, drug and alcohol problems and people with learning disabilities to overcome barriers to living a full life in the community.

That is exactly the kind of work that we wish to encourage. It aims to help people return to the possibility of full-time, mainstream employment. I believe that the trust has been recently successful in a bid to the National Lotteries Board, and that that funding is matched by the local authority and the local health board. If Ms McNeill wishes to write with more detail on her question, I will be happy to look into the matter.

I am happy to repeat the point: that is  an excellent example of different agencies and funding streams pulling together. I would suggest that, if a walkabout with Trish Godman brings success with £30,000 bids, I would be very happy to take her with me around many similar projects.

When I spoke to Sir Stewart Sutherland only last Friday, he said, "I have to admit that there has been substantial progress on all the other recommendations of the report."

I acknowledge that the Conservative party introduced that act very recently. One of the things that, unfortunately, has kept us very busy is  setting up the carers legislation working group to work on replacing that act with the kind of legislation that carers need and want.

Will Dorothy-Grace Elder give way?

We spent 18 months with people with learning disabilities on a review. Here is the one thing they asked above all: "Close those hospitals."

Will the member give way?

That is an outrageous convolution of what I said. I said that we are proud of the closures of long-stay hospitals for the learning disabled and of acute psychiatric hospitals. I am happy to boast of those closures because they are freeing people to live their lives more fully in the community.

The explanation of the discrepancy is that the nature and configuration of home care is changing. There has been a 13 per cent increase in the number of people working in home care, and an increase in intensive care packages of more than 10 hours. Those are the packages that will produce the effects for which so many members have called today. I suggest that Ms Robison listens more carefully to the figures.

I tried to make clear to Parliament that the exact purpose of this debate is to report on progress on those initiatives. If Mrs Scanlon is looking for progress on the carers strategy, she should not ask SPICe; she should ask carers and the carers organisations who are making progress with the strategy as we speak.

We have heard many quotations—for example, we heard an interesting Karl Marx quotation yesterday. I simply make the point that Kay Ullrich's quotation comes from a fairy story.

Today's debate provides a welcome opportunity to restate the importance of community care to the Scottish Executive's agenda of improving the lives of the people of Scotland. I want to report on progress across the community care programme, update the Parliament on some initiatives and indicate some milestones ahead. Community care services look after some of the most vulnerable people in society. A significantly falling number of vulnerable people, but still too many, live in hospitals. The vast majority of people with care needs live in the community. A relatively small number live in residential and nursing homes. Most live either on their own or with their families. A lot get help from informal carers, be they family, friends or neighbours. Community care services have to deal with a growing case load. We are all living longer. Family situations are changing and informal care is not always available. People with severe disabilities are surviving at birth and living longer and people with high levels of dependency are now living in the community rather than in hospital. Quite rightly, the expectations of people who use services and their carers are also rising. The aim of community care is to improve people's lives and opportunities. We aim to do that by: putting people at the centre; enabling them to be included in the community by supporting them, preferably in their own homes; providing services that are flexible, cost-effective and appropriate to people's needs; ensuring quality services by regulating care services and staff; and encouraging joint working towards a joint future for service agencies. Those are the cornerstones. But community care does not stand still. In some areas, we are doing what was unthinkable not that long ago. Community care must constantly progress and improve. That is our aim.  The Executive's programme for government set out our commitments and our priorities. We have launched a strategy for carers. Next year, we will establish a social services council to increase the professionalism of the social care work force; we will also establish the Scottish commission for the regulation of care. Last week, I launched the Executive's review of services for people with learning disabilities. People have waited for more than 20 years for this review, and many have waited a lifetime for the changes that it heralds. We are gathering responses, to further refine it between now and August, and it is my intention that this Parliament should have the opportunity, as part of that process, to debate the learning disability review in its own right. The review proposes: a new kind of care organiser, a local area co-ordinator, to organise individualised support for people, to ensure that the services that they receive are those that they need; more access to direct payments, to allow people with learning disabilities to build for themselves the service and care package that serves them best; lifelong service planning, to manage the transitional times in people's lives. Too often, support can fail when someone moves from school to adult life, from the parental home to independent living, or when they are living on their own, when carers die and are no longer there to care for them. The review also proposes the closure of all remaining long-stay hospitals for people with learning disabilities by 2005. Within a month, I intend to set in motion the creation of a Scottish centre for learning disabilities, to ensure that the momentum behind the review is maintained. However, I do not claim credit for the review or its launch: it was people with learning disabilities and their carers who created and launched it. The review made visits and spoke directly to people in their homes. It held seminars that people were able to attend and set up an interactive website that many people made good use of. People who use services and their carers were also members of the review's national steering group, had their own consultative group and carried out 11 road shows throughout Scotland. That is exactly how we want to go about making the new Scotland: through genuine and comprehensive consultation, outside the usual suspects and vested interests. We want to involve service users throughout the system, and to put people's experiences at the heart of our thinking. People's experiences will not be just at the heart of the Executive's thinking, but at the heart of the thinking of every agency that is involved. When I launched the carers strategy, in November last year, we doubled resources that  were earmarked for carer services. I undertook to ensure that local authorities consult local carers organisations in developing new and improved services. That dialogue is taking place as we speak, and I have taken part in some of it. It is a tough negotiation, but a real and meaningful one that will shape the services that are available to carers throughout Scotland. At the same time, the carers legislation working group that was promised in November, which includes carers and their organisations, has met on several occasions to develop proposals for new carers legislation. A few weeks ago, in this city, I launched the biggest-ever Scottish Executive social services media campaign to put hidden carers in touch with services for the first time. Hundreds of people have responded to our adverts in the newspapers and on local radio. They have responded to the national health service helpline, which, since 1 April, has been expanded and extended to include advice for carers. The helpline staff were trained directly by carers and their organisations. The publicity materials for the hidden carers campaign were produced in conjunction with the carers organisations. Every step of the way, we have moved this strategy forward in partnership with carers themselves. Carers organisations have welcomed their role, but they have pointed out to me, quite rightly, that I have increased their work load. I am pleased, therefore, to announce that I am making available a further £200,000 to help voluntary organisations that represent carers to play their part in supporting the implementation of the carers strategy. That will enable them to work more closely with local authorities and health boards, and with carers themselves, to develop the new and innovative services that carers need and want. I shall write to carers organisations today, to invite them to submit bids for those resources.

As is so often the case, Mr Hamilton has missed the point. This is specific funding for a specific task that we have asked the organisations to undertake. It is right that we resource them to do that task.

I am happy to acknowledge the work that Sylvia Jackson has done with the Relatives Association Scotland, bringing representatives to meet me to discuss the role they feel that the association can play. I acknowledge that it may fill a place in the continuum of caring that is not covered by other associations. That association is of the kind that could and should bid for the money I have announced. I will ensure that it is included when we write to organisations about the money. Involving users in service design is the best assurance of quality standards, but we also have a duty to secure standards. Plans are well in hand to legislate next parliamentary year and to establish in 2001 the Scottish commission for the regulation of care and the Scottish social services council. The commission will regulate services in a systematic, sensible and balanced way. It will cover not just those services regulated at present but also home care and local authorities direct provision. It will ensure a level playing field for providers and quality assurance for users of services. We have set up the national standards committee to prepare the ground for the commission. It is developing standards, in close consultation with all stakeholders, including users and carers. I am pleased to announce today that I have authorised the publication of the first tranche of standards, covering residential care for older people, children and people with mental health problems. That will be sent out later this week for wide consultation. Further sets of standards will be issued in due course; home care will be included in the next set. The Scottish social services council will regulate staff. We have two aims in that: we want to protect vulnerable people by ensuring that those providing services are appropriately regulated; but the need to encourage the professionalism, education and training of staff is at the heart of our policy. We have been very pleased by the responses received to the consultation paper. A policy paper will be issued next month containing our proposals for both bodies. We are also making significant progress on mental health. The mental health framework is now beginning to deliver. I met recently with some of those benefiting from its implementation in Aberdeen. Success there is firmly based on user participation in the planning group—not token but 50 per cent user participation. Earlier this year, Susan Deacon and I hosted a mental health  summit to hear at first hand how we should accelerate progress. The outcomes will help shape the way ahead, with the mental health and well-being support group driving progress throughout Scotland. For the elderly, our work on care standards, on the carers strategy and on the encouragement of more user-focused, integrated services all serve to meet many of the recommendations of the Royal Commission on Long Term Care for the Elderly. We will extend direct payments to people over 65 this year, extending the opportunity to purchase flexible care packages suited to their individual needs—another recommendation of Sir Stewart Sutherland's commission. Funding for care is being actively considered as part of the spending review. People need a system that is sustainable, fair and consistent, and I am determined to deliver that. If user involvement is common to all those initiatives, so too is joint working, which has moved on enormously since community care as we know it was implemented in 1993. However, there is still a long way to go. The crux of the matter is that we must stop organisational, cultural and other barriers affecting the way in which we deliver services. I do not want to hear that the services that people need are delayed by debates or disagreements about who is responsible for providing them. People want speedy, reliable and effective services. They want just one assessment wherever possible. They do not know or care who provides the service. They want to avoid duplication, delay and frustration. Those were the key themes of "Modernising community care: an action plan", and we have provided funding of £7.5 million this year to back the changes outlined in that document. There are signs of positive change, but too often change is project-based or applies only at an operational level. The level at which strategic and financial decisions are made is often where such ideas are not well developed. Agencies need to concentrate on using the knowledge that they have gained on joint working and applying it further upstream. For example, I would like programme budgets to be developed for the whole of a client group or an area, or more substantial change such as that envisaged under the Perth and Kinross Invest to Save project. Everyone now has some experience of joint working. The time for piloting and analysis has passed; it is time to move onwards and upwards. Driving that movement is exactly the purpose of the joint futures group, which I chair. Our main task is to agree a list of joint measures that local authorities, boards and trusts should have in place, and to set deadlines by which that is to be  done. The group has identified a range of subjects that are well known and well recognised. It is considering how to develop better systems and approaches for shared assessments, and how to share information better between social care, health and housing. We know that those things should be in place. They will help to overcome the professional, organisational and cultural boundaries, and they will focus on more integrated services, reducing the bureaucracy and improving outcomes for users and carers. The group is also considering other issues, such as the balance of care between residential and home care, options for charging for personal care at home and how to share best practice among the relevant interests. There are many examples of good practice. Care services have changed enormously. Between 1994 and 1998, community care services have supported a reduction of more than 7,000 long-stay beds and increased respite admissions to residential care homes by 54 per cent. Staff numbers in home care have increased by 13 per cent, and more and more packages of intensive care of over 10 hours are being delivered. Those figures illustrate the positive overall trends, but the examples are all around for us to see. We have successfully closed Gogarburn hospital in Edinburgh and successfully provided alternative care services in the community. Joint working was at the heart of that. The closure plan was sustained through two restructurings in the health service and the reorganisation of local government, but the will was there to make it work, and it has worked. In Glasgow, Inclusion Glasgow creates packages of care that comprise a mix of funding from health, social care and housing. Of 28 people who used to be in Lennox Castle, all have their own home, seven own them and some have jobs. None has returned to hospital. In Ayr, two local NHS trusts and the local council formed a rapid response team to prevent hospital admissions and facilitate early discharge, and there is close working with all professions. As a result, between January and March this year, 819 acute bed days were freed up, there were 108 early discharges and 85 admissions were prevented. Joint working does deliver, but it can deliver much more than better services. I do not doubt that we will hear criticism of service provision this morning. I would be astonished if we did not. Some of that criticism will be justified and some of it will not be. I do not doubt that we will hear much talk of where resources are and how many resources there are. I hope that we will also hear something of the vision and the imagination that  we need—the vision that drives the best of community care in Scotland. That vision should fire our imagination, as anyone who was at the launch of the learning disability review will know. That review started off as an examination of services, but it quickly turned into an examination of people's lives. After all, it is not only the NHS that saves lives, nor is it only surgeons who give back the possibility of participation in the richness of life, but our social workers, care assistants and home helps. It is not only the Prison Service that incarcerates but, too often in the past, the learning disabled hospital, the acute psychiatric ward and even the residential care home. Too many lives have been lived in the shadows. The common thread in our community care agenda—its purpose—is to bring those lives out of the shadows. That thread runs through the carers strategy, the learning disability review, the new care standards, intensive home care packages and the extension of direct payments.

No. I am winding up. That approach is not cheaper or easier, but it is better. It is also possible, if we hold to the vision of support for those with disabilities, the elderly and those with mental health problems. We must support them to live their lives to the fullest; to have, or to continue to have, a home, friends, a job, respect and dignity; to be as free as they can be; to have the things that we all want; and to be, as the learning disability review puts it, "the same as you". I move, That the Parliament commends the Executive's approach to community care, which aims to put the people using services and their carers at the centre, building on Modernising Community Care: an Action Plan ; welcomes progress on the Strategy for Carers in Scotland, published in November; welcomes the work of the National Care Standards Committee to ensure the quality of care provision through national standards; welcomes the consultation on proposals for the independent regulation of care services and staff; welcomes the setting up of the Joint Future Group in December; welcomes the publication of the Learning Disability Review report The same as you? on 11 May 2000, and calls upon the NHS, local authorities and the voluntary and private sectors to make joint working a reality in every aspect of community care, in a Scotland where everyone matters.

I am, as Gordon Jackson put it, the man minister. I am well aware of the contribution of the Epilepsy Association of Scotland and its partner organisations toward enhancing awareness of epilepsy in Scotland and improving services—as is Susan Deacon, who has met representatives of the organisation. In November last year, she addressed a Scottish Executive funded symposium on epilepsy organised by the EAS. I know that she joins me in endorsing all that has been said—most recently by Gordon Jackson—in praise of the work of the Epilepsy Association of Scotland and its partners in the Joint Epilepsy Council and of all that they are doing to improve the public perception of epilepsy. As every member has said, epilepsy is not an uncommon condition. As Mr Watson correctly said, an estimated one in 130 of the population has the condition. The great majority of them—70 per cent or more—will lead full and productive lives once they have been assessed and started on appropriate treatment. Mr Watson made an interesting point when he said that that must mean that there are people around who could be role models for others but who, for whatever reason, feel unable to come forward. As Margaret Ewing said, it is possible to go into history to find role models. The three that I came up with are Julius Caesar, Peter the Great and Byron. I am not sure they are role models for a normal life, but the point is that it seems that only by reaching back into history do we find role models. There must be role models around now, which would help. Epilepsy still seems to inspire fear and hostility in some people. It is difficult to imagine why. Epilepsy is not contagious and a person having a seizure is not likely to harm anyone else—the stigma attached to it is irrational and rooted in the ignorance and superstition of the past. There is no place for it in the Scotland that we want to see. As members are well aware, the current clinical priority areas in Scotland for physical illnesses are coronary heart disease, stroke and cancer. They are the big three killers and they must be tackled first. We do not propose to add epilepsy to those clinical priorities, but that is not to say that we neglect the condition or consider it unimportant. There has been a considerable drive in the NHS in Scotland to improve treatments for people with epilepsy. One of the initiatives that we can take pride in is the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network, known as SIGN. SIGN guidelines bring together all the evidence about a particular condition and present a digest of best practice. A SIGN guideline, the "Diagnosis and Management of Epilepsy In Adults", was published  in 1997. It covers nine key topics, such as how to diagnose epilepsy, when to start treatment and choice of first drug. We are not complacent: the guidelines can be improved. Arrangements are now in hand for revising and updating the guidelines, which will be distributed throughout the NHS. I hope that that provides some of the momentum that Mr Watson called for to ensure wider adoption of good clinical practice throughout health boards and health trusts. We are also ready to learn from work done elsewhere. One of the last publications of the English clinical standards advisory group was a report on epilepsy. We have made arrangements for the executive summary of the report, with the information that the whole document is available on the Department of Health website, to be distributed to the NHS in Scotland. We expect both publications will be of interest to health boards and NHS trusts in reflecting and planning the provision of services for people with epilepsy in their areas.

The revision of the SIGN guidelines is in hand; it should not take an undue length of time. The English clinical standards advisory group report is available and arrangements for its distribution are under way. I am glad that Mrs Ewing intervened, because I wanted to say that the points she raised earlier—about patient-centredness and equality of access—run through the advisory group guidelines. I hope that those two publications will provide momentum in bringing about the improvements for which members have argued. Good communications between primary and secondary care are essential, as Dr Simpson said. We are seeking to promote the concept of managed clinical networks, which will benefit people with many conditions, particularly epilepsy. I know that managed clinical networks do not sound as exciting as some advances in health care, but they are a powerful way of redesigning services so that all the points at which patient care is delivered are linked. They cross traditional boundaries between primary, secondary and tertiary care and bring together all the health care professionals involved in delivering the service, which is extremely important when dealing with a condition such as epilepsy. Not only are clinicians around the country exploring the idea; the Epilepsy Association of Scotland has signalled its willingness to play an active part in the development of services. Its engagement is both  crucial and welcome. We should not forget those whose epilepsy is associated with serious disabilities or learning difficulties, or both. The Scottish Executive acknowledges that without the extensive care provided by informal carers, more people would need support from the statutory services to remain in their homes. The national carers strategy is one measure that will benefit the carers of people with epilepsy. Least of all should we forget the small minority of people with epilepsy who die suddenly and unexpectedly—often very young, and sometimes without ever having had a seizure previously. That is why we are contributing to the national sentinel audit that is currently being carried out by Epilepsy Bereaved, to ensure that its work covers Scotland, too. Our determination to advance our understanding of the condition is also demonstrated by the fact that the chief scientist office is currently funding two two-year research projects at a cost of some £277,000.  As always, we do not have time to give as much attention to this issue as everyone would like. I want to close by once again saluting the work of the Epilepsy Association of Scotland, by recognising that epilepsy is a condition that affects many Scottish people and by assuring members that we will continue to strive to improve care for those who live with epilepsy and to bring epilepsy out of the shadows. I hope that this evening represents a small step towards doing that and I congratulate Mr Watson and the cross-party group on ensuring that we have taken it.  Meeting closed at 17:44.

Under normal budgetary rules, a substantial part of any additional costs will automatically be picked up centrally. I expect Greater Glasgow Health Board to meet the remainder from the overall resources that are available to it, which amount to more than £800 million this year.

I agree that we have a responsibility to make proper arrangements for those who seek asylum and refuge on our shores. It is right that Scotland and our cities play their part in that. I am confident that Glasgow will do so and that the NHS will play its proper part. As Pauline McNeill knows, the Executive continues to work on the funding of health services in Glasgow, taking into account Glasgow's particular health problems. We are doing that in particular through the on-going work on the Arbuthnott review, which has been debated in Parliament.

As members know, the arrangements for housing and living costs are a matter for the Home Office as part of an arrangement reached between it and the host local authorities—in this case Glasgow City Council.

I indicated in my original answer that some account is taken of the increase in the patient load in primary care through the general medical service's non-cash limited budget. That budget will be uprated to deal with additional patients. Generally, what is important in the debate is a sense of proportion. Greater Glasgow Health Board is responsible for looking after the health of just under 1 million people. When we talk in those terms, the increase is relatively small and I am confident that the health board will take the measures that it feels are necessary to ensure that services are delivered.

I appreciate the fact that the motion has covered a lot of issues, on which we could spend a great deal of time. Within David Mundell's motion is a criticism of what is described as the Executive's "agenda of political correctness". I point out that the Conservatives have on occasion used their debating time to discuss matters such as section 2A, when the same time could have been spent discussing services for the elderly and the disabled. I hope that such discussions will be the pattern for the future.

I have listened to the debate carefully. I appreciate and have certainly never denied that people face real problems and that services must improve. My point, however, is that considerable progress has been made. In the first year of the Parliament, a firm foundation has been laid for genuine and sustainable improvement in services for some of our most vulnerable citizens. That does not indicate indifference or complacency—it is a fact. We are helping agencies to work together to  focus on people's needs, setting higher standards, supporting Scotland's carers and increasing investment in health and social care. As I have said, we believe that listening is central to getting that right—taking the time to listen and to consult on issues such as, for example, national care standards. I am happy to listen in the chamber too. I did listen carefully and thought that I heard Mary Scanlon announce a Tory policy to remove community care from local authorities and shift it to the NHS. I confess that the idea flashed by before she could develop it, so I cannot be certain that that is what I heard. Trish Godman heard an echo of privatisation, which was perhaps there too, but Mary did not go on to develop that either. She did not develop either of the two apparently new policies that she announced. I listened in vain for constructive engagement from the SNP in how we can improve services for the elderly and disabled. I confess that I saw a glimmer of a constructive proposal in the SNP amendment, but maybe I was clutching at straws. Opposition members, as always, have focused on spinning the numbers, so that a £53 million increase in local authority social work is called a cut and introducing a proper census to identify regularly the scale of delayed discharge is called ignoring the problem.

No, I am sorry. Increasing NHS resources by £300 million and then by a further £173 million is called failing to invest. Progressing Sir Stewart Sutherland's recommendations on the care commission, on carers, on direct payments and on joint working between agencies is described as gathering dust and touchy-feely soundbites. Duncan Hamilton may not have described it as that, but Kay Ullrich certainly did. She referred to the sound of dragging feet. She has told me before that she hears dragging feet. I am quite concerned about it. I am reminded of Caligula, who constantly heard the sound of galloping horses in his head. Things ended rather badly for him.

No. Where was the debate about the new models of sheltered and very sheltered housing that I have seen in Brechin and Moray, where older people are being given the chance to move back to their own tenancies, which offer independence within the security of an intensive home care package? Where was the debate on community rehabilitation teams, such as the one in Edinburgh, which are so successful that they can lead to a reduction in  dependency following a hospital stay? Where was the debate on day care and respite for those with dementia, provided in homes not institutions, as I have seen in Stirling, Falkirk and Clackmannan? What about the brokerage of independent living fund direct payments in Grampian, which is giving disabled young people homes, jobs and the lives that they want? I agree that too many people do not have access to those kind of improved services, but they are around and I would like a rational debate about them. I am open to suggestions from anywhere as to how we can do more to spread good practice and bring in new and better approaches.

Certainly.

I thank Cathie Craigie for that invitation. I say to Duncan Hamilton that that was a tougher intervention than most of his. We have yet to hear from the Tories, for whom David Mundell is winding up. When I came in at the end of the previous debate, Peter Peacock pointed out that David Mundell is a reasonable and positive member of the Parliament. I go along with that, so I look forward to hearing him develop the policies that were hinted at by Mary Scanlon. I look forward to hearing about the Tories' new ideas, their alternative approaches and their proposed strategic shifts in service delivery. Presiding Officer, I am nothing if not an optimist.

Can I take it from that, that Kay Ullrich believes that the formation of the independent Scottish commission for the regulation of care is a touchy-feely soundbite? The formation of that commission meets one of the key recommendations of the Sutherland report.

It will come as no surprise that I reject the terms of the Conservative motion. Apart from anything else, it is a bit of an all-embracing motion for a 90-minute debate. However, I welcome the choice of this morning's topic, which is of great importance. I have to agree with colleagues on the Scottish National party benches that it is a pity that the Tories chose not to address the motion that they lodged. Mary Scanlon spent more time talking about the Minister for Health and Community Care than about the elderly and disabled people who feature in her motion. They received no mention at all. I welcome the debate because improving support for our more vulnerable fellow citizens is precisely the kind of opportunity offered to us by the people of Scotland almost a year ago. I join Mary Scanlon in welcoming the decision by the Health and Community Care Committee to conduct a major investigation into community care and care for the elderly. Since last year, we have increased investment  in services for older people to around £2 billion. Making something of the opportunity that we have means not only spending more but spending better. It means putting people at the centre of services, listening closely to what the people who use those services have to say and acting on that. Every time I meet representatives from older people's organisations or disability groups, they all ask for widened access to direct payment schemes, to allow them to have care packages tailored to individual needs. I confess that that is not a message that I expected to hear, but it is a pervasive one. I have listened, and the Executive will, this year, extend direct payments to people over 65. That is an improvement to service demanded by those who want to use the service. The overriding message that I hear is that, like everyone else in Scotland, older people and people with disabilities want to live full, independent and secure lives. We do not presume that older people are passive recipients of services, but where people need support, they expect it to be flexible, appropriate, efficient, sustainable and of high quality. That is why we have focused on better and quicker decision making, helping more people to get care at home, and that is why we insist on agencies working better together. We are taking steps to ensure that we move from rhetoric about the benefits of joint working to real changes that benefit the users of services. This year, £7.5 million has been invested specifically to do that. It is unfortunate that Mrs Scanlon does not recognise that agencies can work together. Indeed, Highland Council has been able to appoint someone to lead on children's services, and there is no reason why bodies providing services for older people cannot also work together.

That is a good point. The joint futures group, which I chair, is currently developing practical non-negotiable steps to ensure better joint service delivery. Aids and adaptations are  one of the areas that it is examining, and I think that we should perhaps go beyond merely giving advice and be more directive about things. I hope to make progress on that issue soon.

I have just taken a lengthy intervention and I would like to move on. I am watching the clock. Any serious approach to improving services must have quality of service provision at its heart. That is why we will establish the Scottish commission for the regulation of care, which will for the first time enforce uniform national standards in all areas of care—residential, day and home care—whoever provides it. Older people themselves are being fully involved in the process of drawing up the care standards that will be used. The standards of residential care for older people will be issued for wide consultation very soon. We have also recognised as never before that much, and perhaps most, of the care that is delivered in Scotland is provided by informal carers. As we speak, carers throughout Scotland are discussing with local authorities how the £10 million that has been earmarked for carers services will be used. That is local authorities being held to account: not by the Executive, but by the people who depend on the services that the authorities provide. Carers who have never received support are responding to a media campaign to identify hidden carers. Those are not small measures—they will make big differences. They are not quick fixes—they are changes to how services are designed and delivered. Alongside those measures, we are aware of the need to address issues of charging for care. Funding for care is being actively considered as part of the spending review. The work of the joint futures group on charging for home care will feed into that. I agree that people need a system that is sustainable, fair and consistent, and it must consider funding of home care as well as residential care. I am determined to deliver that, and I will take the time to get it right.

It would not be possible to respond to those issues in the time that I am allowed, but I wish to make this point. We are not ignoring those issues and concerns—we are addressing them, but we are addressing them thoroughly. We are working with local authorities and health boards to ensure that improvements are sustainable, and with users and carers to make sure that the improvements are what is needed. However, clearly there are priority areas on which we can focus investment now. That is why earlier this week we announced that £60 million of the additional national health service funding in the budget will be distributed to the NHS in Scotland. But before that can be spent, the service must demonstrate how it will improve performance in four key target areas, one of which is a major drive in conjunction with local authorities to minimise delays in discharge from hospital. From 1 April we introduced a mandatory quarterly census of delayed discharge, not only of the number of discharges, but of the causes, of which there are at least 40. That means more information as well as more resources to allow a permanent reduction in delayed discharge. In summary, investing resources, setting higher standards, driving joint working and putting people at the centre of service design and delivery is the path on which we have set out in the past year. We will not be deflected from it, because it is the right path. I move amendment S1M-790.2, to leave out from the first "notes" to end and insert: "welcomes the Executive's commitment to improving service provision for frail elderly and disabled people in Scotland by creating modern user-focused services; notes the progress of the Carers' Strategy in Scotland, the drive towards joint working between the NHS and local authorities, and the development of national standards for care; further notes the additional funding for health boards announced this week to be used in part to reduce significantly delayed discharge, and endorses the Executive's vision of a Scotland where every older person matters."

I am grateful to Mr Gibson for raising this difficult and serious issue. It is not the first time that he has raised the matter in the chamber, and I am sure that it will not be the last. I am glad that many MSPs have supported the motion and have spoken in this evening's debate. One life ended through suicide is a tragedy. More than 1,000—the figure mentioned by Mr Gibson—is a huge and unacceptable waste, bringing in its wake untold grief for families, friends and loved ones. There is little point in further rehearsing the statistics that Mr Gibson gave so succinctly. We must do all in our power to stop this appalling loss. We must consider the variety of contributing factors. Mental illness plays a significant part and contributes to about 30 per cent of the total number of suicides, of which around 15 to 20 per cent spring from severe depressive illness, and about 13 per cent from schizophrenia. However, there are other factors. Misuse of alcohol or controlled substances is often implicated, creating intolerable personal and domestic problems and loosening inhibitions, facilitating the act of suicide. As many members have said, life circumstances cast a sombre shadow. Poverty, unemployment, inhospitable environments, money problems and  dreary housing conditions can all combine to make life seem no longer worth while. It is worth returning to the focus of Mr Gibson's motion, that young men are particularly vulnerable. The reasons for that, which have been referred to, are correct. They may lack helpful family support. They may have poor prospects of a worthwhile job. They may lack a sympathetic ear to confide in. Indeed, they may find it difficult to confide even if that sympathetic ear is available. They therefore deserve our special attention. Against that background, there is much that can be done, and is being done. A raft of measures are being taken by the Executive to improve quality of life, to enhance job prospects, to deal with social exclusion, and to create a climate of tolerance, support and social well-being. They are all necessary, and will help to tackle the problem. However, I agree that we need to take more specific steps. Some have already been taken. For example, in September 1998 the Government introduced important new measures to reduce pack sizes of paracetamol and aspirin, which was aimed at reducing the incidence of impulsive overdose, and introduced new warnings on labels to emphasise the risks associated with overdose. Richard Simpson referred to the framework for mental health services in Scotland, which offers best practice in the organisation of care and preventive measures. It recognises the isolation that can lead to suicide attempts, and encourages health boards and their partner care agencies to organise programmes of assertive outreach, which ensure continuing contact with those considered to be at risk. Indeed, the framework also promotes suicide prevention projects in collaboration with interest groups and the voluntary sector, as Mr Gibson said. Mental health is one of the three main clinical priorities for the national health service in Scotland. That is signalled in a number of ways. Spending on mental health has kept pace with general health spending over a period of years, but this is not the debate to pursue the point that Mary Scanlon made. We are increasingly conscious of the need not just to deal with mental health problems, but to promote positive mental health. Clearly, that could have an impact on suicide prevention. There has been much discussion of research. The chief scientist office and I are open to suggestions for research that will help to reduce the suicide figure. A good deal of research is on-going. For example, the Executive is contributing to the funding of the national confidential inquiry into suicides and homicides by people with mental illness. That inquiry is examining the health records of all individuals who have committed suicide or homicide and who were in contact with  mental health services in the period up to the incident. The study hopes to identify common behaviour patterns, symptoms and so on in exactly the way that many members have referred to tonight. Indeed, the first report of the inquiry, entitled "Safer Services", which covered only England and Wales, was published last year. We are looking at its recommendations, and we await its next report, to be published shortly, which will cover Scotland. We hope that it will give us the information that we need to take our strategy forward. The chief scientist office, which has responsibility for encouraging and supporting research into health services, has awarded funding of more than £135,000 in the past three years for two projects related to suicide and deliberate self-harm, but that is part of a wider national and international research effort. Indeed, the national research register lists 168 current research projects on suicide, so much research is being done, but Mary Scanlon was right: it is difficult to see what evidence there is for the effectiveness of prevention strategies. Many trials have been too small to generate conclusive findings. Even in high-risk groups, for example, those with a history of self-harm, fortunately, suicide is still a rare occurrence. Although in such a group its incidence is 100 times what it is in the general population, the suicide rate is still only one in 100. Sometimes it is difficult to move from research to practical measures. Mr Gibson is right that there is experience elsewhere. Susan Deacon visited Finland earlier this year to discuss with her opposite numbers their approaches to a number of matters. One of them was suicide prevention, in which they have had some success. We are reflecting on the Finnish experience and whether it could be applied here. One of the lessons that was learned was that it takes 10 to 15 years to see the effect of trying to reverse such a tragic trend as that to which Mr Gibson's motion refers. I am sorry that I cannot, in the time that is available to me, respond to all the points that have been raised, but I would like to conclude by welcoming the interest of Mr Gibson and other members in this very emotive issue. It is an issue that the Executive is determined to tackle through both general and specific measures that are informed—as is appropriate—by the available research. It is incumbent on the Executive to listen to suggestions and we will examine those that have been made by Mr Gibson and others in the debate.  Meeting closed at 17:41.

Lip-reading tutors may receive assistance from the Scottish course to train tutors of lip-reading based at Donaldson's College in Edinburgh. In addition, where there is local demand, help may be delivered through local authority community education services and through colleges of further education. The Scottish Executive awards a specific grant for social work training to local authorities, which can use it to train social work staff in lip-reading according to their assessment of local needs.

I thank Mary Scanlon for pointing out just how many people are affected by deafness or difficulties with hearing. It is important to ensure that a variety of approaches to enable people to communicate with others are provided, because different approaches are appropriate in different cases. There is considerable variation around the country in what is required and how requirements can be met. Therefore, the best way of matching need and availability is through the voluntary sector and local authorities, which understand needs. A couple of years ago, ministers increased section 9 funding by £150,000 over two years to facilitate training in sign language and lip-reading. Organisations such as the Royal National Institute for Deaf People and Deaf Blind UK benefited from that funding. The Scottish strategy, which is made up of local responses, is more important, and we will continue to endeavour to deliver that.

I agree that it is extremely important that professionals consider the full range of their clients' needs. It is an issue that Ms Lamont raised with me a couple of weeks ago. I have asked for information to be sent to her on that matter.

That is a constructive suggestion—I hear what Margo MacDonald is saying. It seems that the demand for lip-reading tutors is relatively recent. Indeed, one of the problems is that the need has not been well quantified; there is a lack of information. Following on from Ms Lamont's question a couple of weeks ago, I have asked for some information to be gathered. I take Ms MacDonald's suggestion in the spirit in which it was intended.

I will be brief, too, but I want to step into this orgy of thanking, which Mr Gallie took a little further than I was entirely comfortable with. We have heard how the new Parliament has been able to legislate more quickly and in greater volume. I want to mention the group of people who have suffered more than everyone else for that—the civil servants of the Scottish Executive. Angus MacKay and I would particularly like to put on record our thanks to the bill team—my 11 other brains. That is a joke that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee will appreciate. I want to address some of the points that have been raised. The Executive intends to bring the provisions for attorneys and access to accounts and funds into force in April 2001. Part 5 will come into effect in the summer of 2001. As Roseanna Cunningham said, provisions on care establishments will follow in the context of our proposals for the new Scottish commission for the regulation of care, which will take over the supervisory role referred to in part 4. Our target for putting in place the commission is April 2001. However, that will depend on the legislation needed to set it up. Intervention orders and guardianship will come into effect in April 2002. The Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Bill is the first large bill on a major policy area to be passed by the Scottish Parliament. As Christine Grahame said, it will put Scotland alongside the best systems of law in the world on this subject. If the Parliament were to vote against the bill today, it would put back by years—as Dr Simpson mentioned, hundreds of years—any reform of the law protecting one of the most vulnerable groups in Scotland. That would disappoint all those people who have campaigned for change, including more than 1,000 concerned citizens who, over the past nine months, have written to us in support of the bill. Defeating the bill would serve no one's ends; if we pass it, history will show that this Parliament, in its first major policy legislation, is serving the interests not of the powerful, not of the vociferous, not of the partisan, but of those who, up to now, have been voiceless and vulnerable. We can all—every one of us—be proud of that, and I commend  the bill to the chamber.

Amendments 111 and 112 are minor technical amendments. Amendment 111 is a change to the Land Registration (Scotland) Act 1979, consequential on third-party protection in the bill. Amendment 112 removes an incorrect line of text from the consequential amendments to the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984. The substantive amendment, amendment 113, is, as was intimated during the stage 2 debate, a further change that is required to the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986. It ensures that, subject to the usual statutory tests, legal aid will be available not only to a person with an interest in the personal welfare of the adult with incapacity but to a person with an interest in the adult's property or financial affairs. Stage 2 amendments to the appeals provisions of part 5 require a further change to the 1986 act. Decisions about medical treatment may now be appealed by anyone who has an interest in the adult's welfare. The amendment ensures that, subject to the usual statutory tests, legal aid will be available not only to a person claiming an interest in the affairs of an adult with incapacity but, where appropriate, to a person having an interest in those affairs. I move amendment 111.  Amendment 111 agreed to.   Amendments 112, 113, 124, 153 and 125 moved—[Angus MacKay]—and agreed to.

I tried earlier to demonstrate that amendment 1 was unnecessary. Mr McLetchie's question was interesting, and I bow to his knowledge of the law, but today we are making legislation, and if the amendment says something that is already the case, and we accept that that is  the case, at the very least the amendment creates duplication, and duplication within legislation makes for bad law.

If the amendment is an attempt to change the common law position, that was an interesting confession indeed, in the terms of this debate. The amendment is not only unnecessary, but unwise. It is flawed on three counts. First, it uses terms that are not defined in the bill; we have debated that already. In spite of the levity with which that point was treated by at least one member, it is crucial. That is a serious flaw. Secondly, the amendment seeks to introduce a prohibition, but fails to do so because it does not stipulate a sanction. The amendment says nothing about what the action or sanction should be if someone chooses to ignore the terms of the amendment. Thirdly—the greatest flaw, as pointed out by Gordon Jackson—the amendment is unwise because it would certainly encroach on common law judgments similar to the Law hospital judgment. From the beginning, we have taken the view that we will not, at the moment, legislate for those PVS cases. We will allow case law to be built up and allow the Court of Session to deal with it. The bill is separate from common law and does not encroach on it. In spite of the attempt in the amendment to avoid that, it is our view that the amendment would encroach on such judgments. If the purpose of the amendment is clarity, it is severely flawed. It will fail in its purpose and create confusion, whether by intent or by accident; I do not judge. The clarity lies in the assurance that nothing in the bill allows the hastening or causing of the death of an adult with incapacity.

In the interests of clarity and given that we are discussing undefined terms, perhaps Ben Wallace can define surgical procedure, which the amendment refers to.

Amendment 30 is a technical amendment that clarifies that the ethics committee may take into account matters other than those prescribed by the regulations when ethically appraising protocols. During the stage 2 debate, I undertook to consider a point made by Christine Grahame about the intended meaning of section 48(3A). For the avoidance of doubt, amendment 142 seeks slightly to amend the wording of that subsection to ensure that our intention is very clear that research that does not meet the "real and direct benefit" test should be subject to the conditions set out in subsections (1) and (2). I move amendment 142.  Amendment 142 agreed to.  Amendment 30 moved—[Iain Gray]—and agreed to.

I am grateful to Mr Gallie for agreeing to withdraw his first amendment and for setting out the reasons for his second. That amendment seeks to amend the new general appeal provision in section 48A, which was added at stage 2 as a catch-all measure to provide an appeal facility to the sheriff and thence to the Court of Session in relation to decisions on medical treatment. As Mr  Gallie has pointed out, amendment 144 seeks to widen the appeal provisions in section 48A. It contemplates decisions taken by a sheriff being appealed to the sheriff principal. However, part 5 of the bill, to which the amendment refers, does not envisage that a sheriff will take decisions on medical treatment. Were that to occur, there is provision elsewhere in the bill to meet it. For example, appeals against decisions of the sheriff on incapacity are provided for in section 12. Moreover, section 2(6) provides a general appeal provision in circumstances where there is no specific appeal power. Against that background, I turn to Executive amendment 155. Section 48A provides that an appeal can be made to the Court of Session with the leave of the sheriff principal. That is in line with appeal provisions elsewhere in the bill. However, in this case, there is no right of appeal to the sheriff principal and it is considered unnecessary for the sheriff principal to be involved in determining whether there should be an appeal to the Court of Session. The decision on leave to appeal to the Court of Session should rest with the sheriff. Our amendment provides a process that is both quicker and cheaper. I hope that members will accept that amendment 155 is reasonable and is designed to streamline the appeal provision. I invite Mr Gallie to withdraw amendment 144, too, on the basis that section 48A, subject to further amendment, provides the correct procedure for appeals.

As Mrs McIntosh says, this amendment covers ground that was rehearsed at stage 1 and covered fully at stage 2. It reiterates the concerns of those people who fear that the bill opens the way to what they have called passive euthanasia. As we made clear at stage 2, nothing could be further from the truth. We have no plans to change the law on euthanasia and we repudiate calls to legalise euthanasia. An act of euthanasia, in which the injuries were not self-inflicted, would be regarded as the deliberate killing of another; it would be dealt with in Scots law under the criminal law of homicide. Nothing in the bill changes that position. Any health professional, like any other individual, who acted by any means—whether by  withholding treatment or by denying basic care, such as food and drink—with euthanasia as the objective would be open to prosecution under the criminal law. That is the general position, which the bill does not alter. That will be made clear in the code of practice, which will be issued under the forthcoming act, and in guidance to health care professionals. I appreciate the concerns that Mrs McIntosh has expressed and relayed, and I would like to clear up what the bill does and does not do in that respect. The bill enables doctors to give desirable medical treatment to adults who, for one reason or another, are unable to give consent without fear of legal challenge. It does not make any provision to harm adults with incapacity. For a start, section 1 sets out the general principles of the bill, requiring all interventions in the affairs of an adult with incapacity under the bill to benefit the adult. As we discussed earlier this afternoon, section 1 reinforces that concept by requiring any intervention also to be the least restrictive option in relation to the freedom of the adult. Self-evidently, to cause or to hasten death would be the most restrictive option with regard to the adult's freedom. It would not be in any sense allowed.

I believe that Mrs McIntosh's amendment is both unnecessary and flawed. In view of the time that I have, I will demonstrate now that it is unnecessary and hope later to be able to demonstrate why I believe it to be flawed. The general principles of the bill must always be read with the other parts of the bill, particularly section 44, which has already been discussed. That section authorises doctors only "to do what is reasonable in the circumstances, in relation to the medical treatment, to safeguard or promote the physical or mental health of the adult." The most frequent criticism of that section has been that it will allow patients to be starved or dehydrated, for whatever reason. The people who make that criticism do so in the face of the facts. The fact is that section 44 cannot be read as allowing any such thing. Section 47, which has just been debated, provides that "any person having an interest in the personal welfare of the adult"  can challenge a treatment decision in court. Even if a welfare attorney or guardian were to behave completely unscrupulously, they would have to contend with the possibility of a challenge from others. Section 74 provides an additional safeguard. It makes it an offence for any person exercising welfare powers for an adult under the bill—which could include doctors or proxies—to ill treat or wilfully neglect that person.  I should also make it clear that the bill does not detract in any way from a doctor's ethical, professional and common law duties to care for his patients. The safeguards are stringent. They ensure that any treatment given to an adult with incapacity will keep that adult as well as they can be, and will offer hope for improvement where possible. Nothing in the bill authorises the withdrawal of nutrition and hydration, whether given artificially or by conventional means. Nothing will permit a patient to be denied basic care, starved, dehydrated or otherwise mistreated. We have undertaken that the code of practice issued under the bill, and the guidance to help professionals, will rehearse those points and the ones that I made at stage 2.

Will Mr Gorrie accept that the logic that he describes is the principle from which we begin? However, we recognise that safeguards must be attached to the powers. For example, we limit the amount of financial resources a proxy can use in certain circumstances. That also breaks the logic that Mr Gorrie described, but I did not hear him oppose those safeguards.

These issues are important and complex. In discussing them, we have to consider the bill as a whole, not one part of the bill in isolation from the others and we have to consider the bill as it is now, not as it was. It has been argued that those who fear that the bill will allow euthanasia have no interest in the change that it proposes, but they have an interest in safeguards against euthanasia and in a reassurance that the bill will not allow euthanasia. Given that the Executive is not in favour of the kind of explicit prohibition that we will debate later, it is important to recognise that section 47 as it stands, and as it would be improved by the Executive amendments, is part of a structure of safeguards and provides assurance that the bill would not allow the hastening or causing of death of any adult with incapacity. Malcolm Chisholm said that we must consider the extent to which this is a listening Parliament if we support the Executive's view. This is a listening Parliament and it has powerful committees—the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and the Health and Community Care Committee—that have discussed and debated the bill at length at every stage. We should recognise that fact. Malcolm Chisholm should be careful about saying that his colleagues are misrepresenting what happened in other committees. The Health and Community Care Committee heard evidence from Parent Pressure. Members will have read that evidence and letters from that group. Indeed, I met Parent Pressure and heard its evidence. Everyone was moved by it. However, the Health and Community Care Committee was not persuaded by Mr Chisholm's argument.

I thank Dr Simpson for his helpful intervention. Although it would be a mistake to turn this debate into an argument about what did or did not happen, I should say that sometimes we can be careful or careless about interpreting events that have brought us to our present position. Let us return to the primary concern of today's debate, which is the rights of the adult with incapacity. We should not lose sight of the fact that the bill gives rights to proxies and other people for the first time; it does not take them away.

I have taken a considerable number of interventions, Presiding Officer, and must respond to certain points. On Trish Godman's point, normal legal aid rules would apply in such cases. The adult with capacity, not the carer, would be means-tested for legal aid support. These rights for proxies and carers are not trivial. Michael Matheson said that doctors must note the views of the proxy and the independent appointee. No—doctors must do much more than that. They must consider those views in the full knowledge that such consideration might have to be proven in the Court of Session, because it is a requirement of the bill. We are accused of making proxies go to court. The truth is that proxies will have to go court,  whoever takes the decision. Is Mr Chisholm saying that if doctors go to court, proxies will not have to go to court to defend their case? Of course they will.

No, I am sorry; I am winding up. The balanced framework that we have constructed makes going to court less likely, which seems preferable. However, we should remember that the adult with incapacity is at the centre of this issue. If a dispute over what is best for the adult cannot be resolved, who is more likely to say that the person is so important and the decision matters so much that it should go all the way to the Court of Session? Is it the doctor who cares for them, or the proxy who loves them? Every member who has spoken in the debate knows the answer to that question: it is a balance, and we must strike it.

Does Mr McAllion accept that there is an inconsistency in his argument? He argues that we should not legislate in proportion to what may be a relatively small number of cases and that the points made by another member should not be considered because they would apply to only a small proportion of cases.

Amendment 29 makes a small change to the procedures to be followed where an adult who is no longer incapable leaves an authorised care establishment. In such circumstances, sections 41 and 41A provide for a statement of the adult's financial affairs to be made and for the transfer to someone else of the management of those affairs. Where the adult is no longer incapable, provision is made for the statement and transfer to be made to the adult directly. Where the adult has not moved into another establishment or into local authority care, the supervisory body and the local authority will be notified of the move. As drafted, that provision applies even when the adult is no longer incapable. The Executive considers that there is no good reason for a capable adult to be tracked in that way and the amendment removes that requirement. I move amendment 29.

I will consider Roseanna Cunningham's point, but the more important consideration is that a report on the movements of someone who is no longer incapable should not be required, as such reports are not required for Roseanna Cunningham or myself. However, we should consider that point when drawing up guidelines for local authorities.  Amendment 29 agreed to.

This group of amendments revisits the comprehensive debate in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee at stage 2, concerning the right—or otherwise—of a proxy decision maker to refuse consent for medical treatment to be given to an adult with incapacity. That debate followed the comprehensive stage 1 led by that committee. This debate provides an opportunity to address the issues again, as well as enabling the Executive, through amendments 140 and 141, to demonstrate still further its determination to ensure that the rights of proxies are given due place and that we have a framework that works well, as it is impossible—as Phil Gallie rightly said—to find a perfect solution that will please all those with an interest in the matter. I expect disagreements between a proxy and a doctor over medical treatment to be few and far between. In most cases, disagreement will be  resolved quickly by amicable discussion. Doctors will have careful regard to objections that proxies raise and most proxies will be ready to be convinced of the need for treatment if there is such a need. When such agreement is not quickly reached, the involvement of a second doctor might well help the parties to reach a shared decision. I will take this chance to point out that, at stage 2, the Executive accepted amendments—particularly from Dr Simpson—that ensure that the second doctor is independent both of the first medical practitioner and of the health board. They will be appointed from a panel by the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland. However, our efforts today should not be aimed at establishing the primacy of one group or the other—proxy or medical practitioner—but rather at doing our best to establish a framework in which the best decision for promoting the health of the adult can be made. The framework that we painstakingly reached at stage 2 is the right one on which to build. That framework stresses consultation, discussion and the involvement of independent opinions. It allows either party to call the decision of the other into question and it opens the appeal route to both parties and to any other person who has an interest in the personal welfare of the adult. Importantly, it allows a challenge where the nominated doctor says that the treatment should not be given. It is a framework of openness and reflection; it stands in contrast to the assertion of the right of one party or the other to what would effectively be a veto. Above all, the framework puts the rights and the safeguarding of the adult with incapacity at the centre, where they properly should be. In practice, there are relatively few circumstances in which serious disputes could be imagined. The first, and most unlikely, of those is that a proxy and doctor could collude for their respective interests to withhold treatment from an incapable adult, with the intention of causing or hastening death. Unlike the amendments lodged by Mr Gallie and Mr Chisholm, section 47 as it stands permits anyone who has an interest in the personal welfare of the adult to challenge the decision in the Court of Session. The second circumstance would arise if a hospital doctor believed to be necessary a treatment that the carer feared might have unwanted side effects and therefore opposed. Amendments 138 and 139 would force both parties into an unpleasant confrontation in court if the matter could not be resolved by discussion. Section 47 sets in train a mechanism for resolving the disagreement by involving an independent medical practitioner, nominated by the Mental Welfare Commission. It is not enough to say, as Mr Gallie's and Mr Chisholm's amendments do, that the proxy must give reasons for refusing  consent. Who is to say whether the reason is a good one? What sanction exists if the proxy simply fails to give a reason? The amendments stay silent on those questions. Section 47 also gives a voice to relatives who hold no official appointment, by allowing an appeal to any person who has an interest in the personal welfare of the adult. At stage 2, however, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee considered that we should bring in greater lay representation, and the Executive amendments would enable proxies, in cases where they so desired, to bring a lay opinion into the process. That is the purpose of amendments 140 and 141. The person could be a lay person, or the adult's general practitioner, or someone from a voluntary organisation that had an interest. We believe strongly that section 47, as it stands, is a way of moving forward—from the debate that tries to suggest that either proxies or doctors always know best—to a framework that allows the best solution to emerge for the adult with incapacity. We hope that it commends itself to the chamber today.

The extent of the consideration of the financial implications for resourcing is contained in the financial memorandum. There is considerable work to be done on regulations and guidelines, but we must consider how to ensure that resources are available for local authorities to meet the needs.  Amendment 12 agreed to.  Amendments 13 to 15, 133, 16 and 17 moved—[Angus MacKay]—and agreed to.

The Executive's intention is that the  arrangements for assessing incapacity should be appropriate both to the setting in which an adult with incapacity lives and to the reason for the assessment. In general, the doctor in charge of the adult's care is the one who should assess incapacity. He or she is the person most likely to be available and to be aware of the adult's condition and medical history. Mr Gallie's amendment seeks, in fact, to require a specialist psychiatrist to be found to examine and certify incapacity in the case of an adult resident in an authorised care establishment. The Executive can see no good reason to impose such a procedure for the management of funds of adults residing in care establishments. Although Mr Gallie presented the procedure as simple, in some remote areas it would be extremely impractical to find a psychiatrist to carry out that task. To introduce a requirement under section 35 for such a specialist would be entirely inconsistent with part 3, where there is no such requirement, although the amount of funds that may be managed under part 3 could be greater. I hope that members will acknowledge that the amendment is neither necessary nor sensible, although I recognise the intention behind it. The bill as it stands makes consistent and workable arrangements for certification and assessment with safeguards. Mr Gallie rightly draws attention to potential abuses by a small minority, but I remind members that section 35(6) provides safeguards to ensure that there is no conflict of interest for certifying medical practitioners. That subsection requires that the certifying medical practitioner must not be related to the resident adult or any managers of the establishment, nor may he have a financial interest in the authorised establishment. Given that safeguards already exist in the bill, I hope that for the sake of consistency Mr Gallie will withdraw amendment 136.

Yes. On Roseanna Cunningham's point, it will come as no surprise that I cannot provide the number of certified psychiatrists. However, as Dr Simpson said, because of the number of available psychiatrists, there are already pressures and practical difficulties in, for example, carrying out sectioning under the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984. There is discussion about whether the new mental health legislation will have to take cognisance of that—we know that there are practical problems already. On the other side of the coin, some procedures under the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 do not require the participation of such authorised medical practitioners; even within the terms of the act, that is not a requirement in every instance. Mr Gallie rightly referred to the seriousness of this provision in connection to the management of financial resources. However, for consistency's sake, we should consider the certification of incapacity in, for example, an emergency situation under part 5. Surely that is also a most serious decision, yet there is no suggestion that a certified psychiatrist should be available to certify incapacity before a medical practitioner could provide required treatment. If the amendment was agreed to, the inconsistency would be significant.

Amendment 6 is a technical amendment to clarify that the Mental Welfare Commission has a duty under the bill to investigate complaints only where the local authority, which is the primary complaints body, has not done so satisfactorily or has failed altogether to conduct an investigation. I understand that the commission is happy with the amendment. I move amendment 6.  Amendment 6 agreed to.  Amendments 7 to 11 moved-—[Angus MacKay]—and agreed to.

Amendment 12 is a technical change to ensure consistent references in part 1 of the bill to matters on which local authorities, the public  guardian and the Mental Welfare Commission are required to liaise under the bill. Amendment 133 clarifies the power of a local authority to investigate, as a matter of urgency, circumstances in which the personal welfare of an adult may be at risk. There is a need to do that explicitly in section 8 to make it clear that the functions of local authorities in this regard apply to adults who are present in the local authority's area. The general definition of local authority in section 76 includes only the authority where the adult resides. I move amendment 12.

No.

Mr Gallie lodged his amendment during stage 2, when the definition of incapacity was discussed thoroughly by the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. The Executive has not changed its view that we should reject the amendment. I will explain our serious concerns about the proposals that it contains. Mental disorder is one of the two threshold criteria in the bill for assessing incapacity, the other being inability to communicate because of physical disability. Incapacity must then be assessed in relation to particular acts or decisions. That functional approach is extremely important. The purpose of the two threshold criteria is, as Mr Gallie said, to limit to some extent the group to which the bill applies. There would be grave risks in assessing incapacity without some kind of threshold. It is not the bill's intention to class as incapable people who merely made decisions that others thought were unwise or irrational. The amendment introduces an alternative threshold criterion of "mental disability", which we consider to be imprecise and unhelpful, as it is  likely to catch too many people within its scope. Mr Gallie said that his was a broader definition—our view is that his definition is too broad. Mr Gallie's amendment refers to "impairment or disturbance of mental functioning". However, that concept is potentially very subjective. There is a danger that those responsible for assessing incapacity would be encouraged to take into account the quality of a person's decision-making process in determining whether they were legally incapable. Such subjective judgment could damage the rights of people whose capacity or incapacity was being considered. The definition of mental disorder in the bill is drawn from the terminology used in the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984. There are considerable advantages in consistency between different pieces of legislation and in familiarity for the medical and legal professionals and others who work with those definitions. During stage 2, we said that we are prepared to review the definition once we have received the Millan committee's recommendations. If necessary, we shall amend the incapacity legislation at that time. However, we do not think that the definition in the amendment of "retaining the memory of decisions" adds anything to the bill. Further explanations will be provided in codes of practice and guidance.  An incidental effect of the amendment appears to be the fact that it removes the requirement to try to communicate with the adult by whatever means suit them, before deciding that they are incapable. That may not be intentional, but it was considered extremely important by the Justice and Home Affairs Committee at stage 2 and runs counter to the Executive's policy that communication should always be attempted in a way that best helps the adult concerned to express themselves effectively. If, as Mr Gallie said, the amendment has been prompted by lingering concerns about whether the definition of mental disorder covers all the underlying conditions that should be included, specifically the effects of head injuries or a stroke, our medical and legal advice is that those conditions fall within the definition. That ties in with well-known international medical terminology. The definition already spells it out that mental disorder is "however caused or manifested." "However caused" is intended to cover whatever physical accident or illness led to the condition causing incapacity. The Executive acknowledges that the current  definition of mental disorder in the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 needs to be reviewed and updated. That is why the committee chaired by Bruce Millan was set up to undertake that work. When it reports, we will have the advantage of the Millan committee's wide public consultation and expertise. We will then be able to maintain the advantages of consistency between incapacity law and mental health law. We will also avoid the likelihood of two changes to the existing definition in quick succession, which would be difficult for both professionals and the public to follow. The Executive's view is that it would be most unwise to accept this change to the carefully considered definition of incapacity in the bill. I hope that the amendment will be withdrawn.

I welcome this opportunity to address the Parliament and I thank the Health and  Community Care Committee for raising these important issues. Several important points have been raised during the committee's deliberations over the two petitions to which Margaret Smith referred. We are giving careful consideration to the report's individual recommendations, which we welcome as a valuable contribution to the work that is already under way to make the NHS more responsive to the needs of individual patients, the preferences of the public and the views of its staff. The two reports have in common an expression of people's real concerns about proposed changes to their local NHS. I welcome the fact that the committee acknowledges the importance of local decision making. This Executive is committed to change in the NHS, because without change we cannot deliver on our commitment to provide the people of Scotland with a world-class national health service—an NHS that cares as well as cures. If we are to embrace change, we must engage, in a meaningful way, with the people in communities who will be affected. We must build a partnership that is founded on trust and a willingness to share information, and we must consult meaningfully. That is our policy. The process has already begun. The white paper "Designed to care" sets out a clear and challenging agenda to ensure that every aspect of NHS care is designed from the perspective of patients. Each board and trust has been required to designate an executive director with responsibility for patient and public involvement. We believe that we have started to experience the benefits of that. For example, the board meetings of all health boards and trusts are now open to the public; the good practice guidance on public involvement that is set out in the Scottish Consumer Council's report "Designed to Involve" is being implemented; local health councils and other planning partners are now involved in the strategic development of health improvement programmes; and patient groups are being involved in the on-going work of trusts—for instance, in overseeing the elimination of mixed-sex accommodation.

Indeed, and the next thing I wanted to say is that there are no grounds for complacency. We are at the beginning of a process of continuous improvement—I may be able to come back to the situation to which Mr  Henry refers. There have been calls, which Margaret Smith repeated today, for the Executive to issue guidelines to health boards on informing and consulting staff and the general public and on the accountability of health and trust board members. We are doing that. We agree that the 1973 guidance is outdated. We have begun discussions on revising and updating it. We would be happy, too, to enter discussions on revising and updating Duncan Hamilton, since he is of the same vintage. Perhaps that is what we try to do day in, day out. Since coming to office, we have made it clear that health boards and trusts must operate, and be seen to operate, with probity and propriety and to be open and accountable to the communities they serve. If any of them still believe they can operate as a secret service they will not be able to hold that belief for much longer. They must involve patients, their carers and families, staff, the local community and elected local representatives in decisions about services being provided in their areas.

We are reviewing the system of NHS governance and looking at performance indicators and related measures of accountability. Public engagement will be judged. Codes of conduct and accountability have been in place since 1994 and stress the importance of openness and dialogue with communities. Health board and trust members have to subscribe to the codes when they are appointed. The code of accountability makes it clear that boards and trusts are accountable, through the chief executive of the NHS and the NHS management executive, to Scottish ministers. The chief executive, as accounting officer, is also accountable to Parliament. Board members also have a clear line of accountability; they are appointed by the Minister for Health and Community Care on behalf of the Scottish ministers. As ministers, we are accountable to Parliament. Since 1995, there has been a code of practice on openness; boards and trusts must abide by the code, which was extended in 1998 to ensure that all trust board meetings are held in public. We do not regard the codes as sufficient; they need to be renewed. We are working towards establishing the appropriate balance of advice,  guidance, training and support—mentioned by Margaret Smith—and, where appropriate, statutory provision, to create an accountable, inclusive NHS fit for the Scottish people. That work will be informed by other changes, such as the introduction of the Ethical Standards in Public Life (Scotland) Bill and the freedom of information legislation under consideration by Parliament.  If members cast their minds back to the debate of 16 December, they will remember that we are committed to widening the range of people who are appointed to the boards of health bodies so that boards are more representative of Scottish life. In that debate, Susan Deacon undertook to write to every member to ask for their help and I am happy to renew that call today. We are actively seeking people from a range of backgrounds to broaden the representation on boards. Susan Deacon has written to a wide range of bodies in Scotland to try to do that. Most boards already have local councillors as members and we want that practice to continue. I do not say that that is enough. Indeed, Susan Deacon and I have made it clear to NHS chairmen and senior managers that they must forge open relationships with staff, patients and their families, local communities and elected representatives. They must ensure that there is constructive communication about the development of service provision. Margaret Smith spoke about relationships with staff, particularly in the context of one of the committee's reports. At a national level we have established the Scottish partnership forum, which brings together—around, rather than across, the table—NHS staff representatives, trade unions, management and Government. That way of working is being rolled out across the NHS and local partnership forums are being formed. Structures are being introduced to bring about the cultural shift to which Margaret Smith referred. I think the committee recognises that health boards and trusts face a difficult task in redesigning local health services to provide modern and responsive care that meets real local need. Health boards and trusts also face the difficult task of engaging and communicating effectively. There will be some hard decisions to make, some of which will be met with informed and reasoned opposition, as has been the case with local fears about the future of Stracathro. I stress once again that no decisions have been made yet about the future of services at Stracathro or at any other facility in Tayside.

I repeat the point that the delivery of services and the balance between access and appropriate high-quality services are the substance of the acute services review. Within that framework, decisions have not been taken. The committee's work underlines the fact that decisions may encounter understandable—although perhaps unnecessary—fears. That is particularly true if proposed changes involve mental health facilities and, in particular, facilities for mentally disordered offenders. There is unanimous agreement on the need for a local forensic unit to serve Glasgow's population. The siting of the unit was always going to be a controversial issue that would cause considerable public and media debate. The guidance on health and social work care for mentally disordered offenders that was published in January 1999 put into effect modern thinking on care for the mentally ill. Few people these days argue that it is in the best interests of patients to keep them locked away in old Victorian institutions, miles from their families and homes. Where possible, care should be provided in the community in an environment that maximises the possibility of rehabilitation and return to an independent life. Of course, that care has to be provided under conditions of appropriate security, with due regard to public safety. We cannot expect the public to accept that if we do not engage with them. The difficulty of getting that right was highlighted in the public debate on the proposed unit at Stobhill hospital and we must learn from that experience. Richard Simpson's very detailed report has raised important issues for both Greater Glasgow Health Board and the Scottish Executive. We are considering the report and will respond shortly. I am confident that Greater Glasgow Health Board knows that it must learn from the experience of Stobhill when it carries out public consultation exercises in future. Steps are already being taken in the Executive to ensure that, in future, the NHS will engage in effective dialogue with the people it serves. What does that mean? Effective dialogue and communication is about engaging, openly and transparently, the people and communities who will be affected by a decision. It cannot be done at the end of a process to inform those concerned of the decision that has been taken. It must evolve and involve. Effective communication is about a process in which information is shared and dialogue is fostered in an attempt to reach common understanding and a shared decision. It is about recognising that when people and communities are involved from the beginning, supported and  informed, they do not make irrational decisions. Real dialogue recognises that people and communities can make tough choices and take difficult decisions when they are informed about the issues and feel that they have been part of an inclusive process. As Margaret Smith said, effective communication has to happen day in, day out, not just when major issues are being dealt with. Under our patients project, we will improve the way in which the NHS communicates with patients, their carers and their families. We will ensure that the NHS engages local communities in a partnership founded on trust, based on a willingness to share information and to consult widely and comprehensively. We will work to create a climate that ensures that NHS staff, patients and their families, and local communities and their elected representatives, are involved and can contribute to the development of the services that are provided by their NHS. However much we change and improve the culture of consultation and dialogue, we must always remember that we need to improve and change our NHS. We must take our people with us. We must not only inform and consult them, but support and involve them in the development of the services that they use. That is not easy, but it is essential. The work of the Health and Community Care Committee is a welcome contribution to getting it right.

As I indicated in a debate in Parliament on 2 December, we have broadly accepted one of the two main recommendations and will consider the other during the present spending review. We are making considerable progress in implementing the other recommendations.

Mr Canavan's question purported to be about progress, but that is not the case. We have made progress on the Scottish commission for the regulation of care; on joint working between health and social services; and on the availability of direct payments to older people, which I hope will be introduced this year. We have also introduced the carers strategy. Those measures are all recommendations from the Sutherland report. I made this point last week, and I will make it again today: people who reduce the commission's report to a single recommendation which they then spin into a soundbite do the commission's work no service at all. We will consider the second main recommendation in the course of our current spending review.

It seems that that question was more about Sir Stewart Sutherland's letter than the Royal Commission on Long-Term Care of the Elderly. I am not sure which bill is being referred to, although—[MEMBERS: "Oh."] I believe that Christine Grahame's bill concerns dementia sufferers. I have considered it and have reached the conclusion that its terms would be impractical. None the less, we continue to support many measures to improve the care of people who suffer from dementia.

Since 1998, the fund has offered support to 72 separate projects, spanning every health board area in Scotland. Over £6.6 million has been allocated so far to the projects and related activity.

Mr McNulty has highlighted a particular project that was supported by the fund; indeed, 17 projects in the Greater Glasgow Health Board area have been supported by the fund. Glasgow 1999 culminated in an especially successful international conference on dementia in which I took part. The conference drew in innovative ideas in dementia-friendly design from across the world, and it was especially well co-ordinated by the Scottish Dementia Services Development Centre, a world leader of which we in Scotland can be very proud.

The mental health and well-being development fund is very much about progressing the mental health framework, which has been widely accepted across the service since its publication in 1997. Projects are provided with first-year funding to get them started, and the projects must progress the framework. However, the Minister for Health and Community Care and I believe that the implementation of the framework could be accelerated. That is one of the reasons why we held the mental health summit last month and why we have formed the mental health support group. We look to that group to advise us on the targets at which we might aim.

We are determined to ensure that everyone in society, and the vulnerable in particular, can live in safety.

We are developing a number of initiatives to improve our confidence in services for older people who live in care. Next year, we hope to pass legislation to set up the Scottish commission for the regulation of care, which will inspect and regulate residential care and advise us on what further measures need to be taken.

We have developed a significant number of the Sutherland commission's recommendations in extremely important areas such as the regulation and inspection of nationally consistent care standards; the introduction of direct payments for older people; and the carers strategy, which came before the Parliament in November. People who reduce Sir Stewart Sutherland's report to one recommendation and focus solely on that do a disservice to the commission's work. We will develop the report's proposals in the context of the comprehensive spending review, which is already under way.

Although we will always consider such research and its policy implications, I should point out that we continue to fund the national  telephone helpline which is run by Action on Elder Abuse and provides confidential support for anyone suffering abuse. That organisation has recently produced research which we are currently considering.

The Executive was pleased to note that 92.3 per cent of the target group received MMR vaccination in the third quarter of 1999. We want to see that figure rise to 95 per cent, so that a sufficient level of immunity is achieved to prevent continuing transmission of the viruses among the population.

Mary Scanlon asked a couple of important questions. Rates for MMR take-up are not falling across Scotland, which is good news. The figures for the past quarter in Glasgow show an encouraging increase. That level of take-up is not reflected in all health board areas: in Highland, Shetland and the Western Isles, the figure remains below 90 per cent. We are discussing with health boards local measures that might improve take-up rates. Mrs Scanlon asked about research into a link between MMR vaccination and autism. There has been press coverage of fears relating to that link recently. Relevant research has already been carried out. An epidemiological study in England in 1999 failed to identify a sudden increase in the incidence of autism following the introduction of the MMR vaccine. Nevertheless, the joint committee on vaccination and immunisation keeps the area under constant review and the chief scientist's office in the Executive would consider funding any well-constructed proposals for further research. We continue to produce, through the Health Education Board for Scotland, leaflets to reassure parents that hundreds of millions of doses of the vaccination have been used all over the world and that the vaccine has an excellent safety record.

The suggestion that delivering a three-component vaccine separately is safer has been made without any supporting scientific evidence. It has been recommended neither by the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation nor by the World Health Organisation. None of the vaccine manufacturers has applied to the Medicines Control Agency for a licence to produce single mumps or measles vaccines. We fear that administering the three parts of the vaccination separately would mean that some children would miss one or two of the injections or would be exposed to infection while waiting for their second or third injections. We have no plans to offer separate vaccines for measles, mumps and rubella on request at the  moment. However, I will take this opportunity to emphasise the fact that we view this as an important matter, which we will keep under review. It is important that we never forget how serious the diseases of mumps, measles and rubella are. They cause death, disability and severe illness. We will do whatever we can to increase the take-up of the vaccine to the 95 per cent level.

There have been some strange cases of mistaken identity this afternoon.

Digital hearing aids have been available in Scotland through the NHS since June 1999. A wider choice of digital aids will be available from 1 April. A comparison of two of those aids is included in a research project that is under way in Fife.

Budget overspends should not interfere with an essential service such as the supply of hearing aids. Of course, digital hearing aids might not be the best solution for all patients, and decisions about which hearing aid best meets clinical need would always be made by the clinician in charge of that patient's care.

As Mr Davidson knows, pre-five health is a priority for the Scottish Executive. I do not have the details of plans to hand, but if Mr Davidson would like to write to me, I would be happy to supply the information in writing.

As Johann Lamont knows, there are various ways in which people who suffer from deafness are able to communicate. Indeed, we had an excellent debate recently on British Sign Language. Already, some funding through section 9 and section 10 Scottish Executive grants goes to support the training of interpreters and teachers in both those areas.

The issue of charging for car parking in hospital grounds is one that generates a lot of attention. I recognise that it is doing so in West Lothian—although not only there, as Dr Simpson indicated. I am grateful for the opportunity to make one or two points in reply, and in particular to explain the policy that applies to car park charging by NHS trusts. I will start by making a few general points. We all know that there are very few hospitals with sufficient space to cope with the demand for car parking within hospital grounds. Car park spaces,  therefore, are at a premium. People often arrive at hospital under stress. They are not helped by selfish motorists, some of whom may not even be in the hospital, who abuse the car park system. The inevitable results include double parking, parking on yellow lines, pavement parking, the use of disabled bays by non-disabled individuals and unsafe access to main entrances at peak times. Hazards are created for staff, patients, visitors and ambulance crews. Complaints and frustrations sometimes can lead to difficult, and even violent, situations. Hospitals are encouraged to be crime conscious, but cars parked in hospital car parks are easy targets and are often broken into and vandalised. The introduction of additional security inevitably means increased costs for trusts. No one wants the funds for that security to be diverted from the funds for direct patient care. The decision to charge for car parking facilities is one that must be taken locally by trusts. In considering proposals to charge, trusts are best placed to address all the issues in the light of local circumstances and to take account of the needs of staff, patients and visitors. Car park charging in hospitals is well precedented throughout the UK. In Scotland, a number of NHS trusts have already introduced schemes. Those schemes had the approval of the Scottish Executive health department, and took into account the ground rules that were drawn up. Indeed, as a couple of this evening's contributors indicated, trusts and health boards have recently been reminded of those ground rules. We expect them to be applied consistently when consideration is being given to implementing charging schemes. I am happy to re-emphasise those ground rules for Fiona Hyslop. First, any decision to charge for parking must not be driven by a desire to generate income for patient care. Secondly, the trust board must be able to justify the proposals, for reasons such as the need to cover the cost of expanding parking facilities, to make existing facilities more secure or to better manage existing facilities. Thirdly, in considering proposals, trusts are asked to consider inviting tenders from commercial contractors, to ensure best value. Finally, and above all, staff, patients and visitors need to be consulted about the proposals. Trusts are trying to improve the situation for patients but, of course, during the consultation process, they need to set out clearly the reasons for the need to charge. St John's West Lothian Healthcare NHS Trust has significant parking congestion problems on the St John's Hospital site. Mary Mulligan and James Douglas-Hamilton have confirmed that from personal experience. The trust feels that the level of complaints and the frustration caused by the  current lack of car parking cannot be sustained. There are a number of reasons for that. The increasingly intensive use of St John's Hospital, the phased closure of Bangour Village Hospital and the increasing use of clinical services by residents from the west side of Edinburgh mean that the trust has to ensure that adequate parking facilities are available. The trust has been considering several options, one of which is to increase the number of parking spaces from 900 to more than 1,100, and to double the number of parking spaces for the disabled to 70. However, we encourage other solutions and, as Bristow Muldoon made clear, there are other solutions that should be looked at. In my constituency of Edinburgh Pentlands, West Lothian Council and Edinburgh City Council recently combined to secure a much-needed bus service from Currie and Balerno to St John's. In addition, I recently attended the opening of the new Pentland Medical Centre by the Minister for Health and Community Care, which includes facilities for consultants from St John's to come to their patients in the west of Edinburgh, rather than having their patients travel, and doing so by car—at least, before the bus service comes on stream. Measures such as those, which can reduce car parking problems by reducing car use, are to be welcomed and encouraged. The trust has worked with West Lothian Council to draw up a revised timetable for public transport to ensure access from every town and village in West Lothian, so there are other options that need to be explored. In relation to car parking and the potential for charging, we have sought and been given an assurance by West Lothian Healthcare NHS Trust that it took the decision to consider proposals for car park charging based on the urgent need to improve both the quantity and the quality of parking on the St John's site. I am further assured that any revenue accrued will be used to defray the cost of managing and maintaining the facility. The trust has taken no final decision about the way forward. It wishes to consult further and I expect it to do so. In particular, the trust will carry out a further traffic analysis survey and a survey of patients, visitors and staff. I say to Mrs Mulligan that I expect the trust to get round the table with West Lothian Council and others who have an interest in this matter. Only then should a final decision be taken. I stress again that car park charging is a matter for local determination. I expect that West Lothian Healthcare NHS Trust will act with the interests of patients, staff and visitors at heart and will carefully take account of all the views expressed before reaching a final decision.  Meeting closed at 17:32.

Through the Scottish community diet project and social inclusion partnerships, the Scottish Executive funds a range of initiatives that address food poverty in ways responsive to local needs. The forthcoming appointment of a national dietary co-ordinator will give added impetus to that work. However, the principal driver for reducing food poverty rests in the Executive's strategy for tackling poverty overall, as set out in "Social Justice: a Scotland where everyone matters".

Significant resources are being targeted at food poverty; for example, £2 million over three years to deliver the diet action plan. We are appointing a national dietary co-ordinator to give added impetus. The key is to attack poverty generally. In Scotland, we have to build a national consensus for change. One of our problems is that  we sometimes take an ironic and perverse pride in having a poor diet. With its public health agenda, this Executive is keen to turn that round and make the change. There will be targeted resources and an impetus to change our health. We must no longer have the poorest diet in Europe.

Within the agendas of the national health service and the education department, a number of initiatives are being aimed at schools, among which are the promotion of the eating of fruit and vegetables in schools and the development of breakfast clubs. The new future fund money provides the opportunity for people in our more deprived communities to initiate locally based and targeted schemes, which are so important.

The Scottish Executive is in regular contact with the Home Office on a wide range of issues.

The consultation and discussions on the implementation of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 took place in the lead-up to the passage of that legislation at Westminster. The legislation deals with a reserved matter and was already under way when this Parliament was formed, as the First Minister said in this chamber last June. The representations were, therefore, not made by the Scottish Executive; they were made in 1998 by the then Secretary of State for Scotland.

The arrangements to which Mr Gallie refers, as he indicated in his question, are a matter for the Home Office. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and all local authorities have been involved in discussions with the Home Office regarding the possibility of providing accommodation for asylum seekers under the planned dispersal. The Home Office has also held discussions with potential private sector providers throughout the United Kingdom.

Scotland has a proud record of welcoming and giving hospitality to those who seek asylum on our shores. It is the Scottish Executive's wish that that continue. The best way in which we can do that is to ensure that we play a full and proper part in the national scheme that is being administered by the Home Office. However, as we announced in this Parliament, we will review the operation of the new arrangements 18 months after they come into force. That will give us the information that we need to discuss with the Home Office the way in which the scheme is operated.

We have a wide range of plans to encourage the delivery of integrated, person-centred health and social care services for older people.

No one thinks that a delay in someone's discharge is acceptable. All local authorities and health boards are working together to reduce those delays. One problem is, as I have suggested to Mrs Scanlon before, that there is a significant lack of consistent information across Scotland on the matter. We have set up a pilot project to establish the exact position. The pilot project has already shown that there are 40 different reasons for a delayed discharge, which is defined as a discharge delayed for more than two days. The situation that Mrs Scanlon referred to is only one of the reasons for delayed discharge.

On 2 December, I responded to exactly the points that Mrs Ullrich has just made. She was in the chamber at the time—perhaps her attention was elsewhere. The report by the Royal Commission on Long Term Care for the Elderly makes several recommendations, including two key recommendations. The first recommendation is for a national commission to ensure consistent standards of care. We are undertaking to implement that in legislation, which we expect to bring before the Parliament in the autumn. Its other recommendation, which was about the funding of long-term care, will be dealt with in the spending review that has already begun. That was the position put forward on 2 December. Of the two key recommendations, one is under way and the other will be dealt with as part of a process that has already begun.

The grant-aided expenditure guidelines for the funding for social work services  this year give a figure of £1.1 billion. That figure will increase by a further £43 million in the next financial year. Of that funding, 80 per cent goes towards community care and 80 per cent of the community care budget is spent on older people. Significant and increasing resources have been put into that area.

I congratulate Cathy Jamieson on raising this debate; this is an important subject that we take very seriously indeed. I am aware of many members' sincere concerns and have listened very carefully to everything that has been said. It is worth repeating that Scotland has a good record of responding to asylum seekers, and we are resolved that that should continue. That means ensuring that Scotland plays its full part in the national framework of support for asylum seekers. Under the devolution settlement, immigration and nationality, including asylum, is clearly a reserved matter. Consequently the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 is reserved. Support for asylum seekers by the secretary of state under part VI of the act is a reserved matter. The act institutes a UK-wide system of support for asylum seekers, which will be operated by the national asylum support service. The consequent amendments to social work, mental health, or children's legislation to which Cathy Jamieson and others have referred have been made. Any such future amendments dealing with support for asylum seekers and their families are matters for the UK Parliament. It is clear that it would be outwith the competence of the Scottish Parliament to seek to supplement the resources provided to local authorities by the Home Office to support asylum seekers, as this evening's motion asks.

A local authority that made section 12 payments now in support of asylum seekers would be acting beyond its powers. It would be a matter for the Westminster Parliament to return that power to authorities. Support for asylum seekers is a matter for the UK Government, on which there was proper consultation—in 1998—and debate at Westminster. However, the Scottish Executive takes seriously its obligation to ensure that asylum seekers in Scotland are properly and fairly supported within the system.

I was about to address that point. Cathy Jamieson and others raised concerns about the preparedness to receive asylum seekers under dispersal and the potential for direction to Scottish local authorities by the Home Office. However, there are three criteria, the first of which is that there must be available accommodation. Dispersal cannot happen unless the criteria are met. The effect of section 101 is that dispersal cannot happen by direction unless Scottish ministers confirm that the three criteria are met. We do not expect many asylum seekers to be dispersed to Scotland under the new arrangements immediately after 1 April. The 600 families for which Glasgow has agreed with the Home Office to provide support under the present scheme will be taken into account in early decisions about dispersal. Worry has been expressed about asylum seekers' access to health and social services. I confirm that the legislation ensures that asylum seekers will continue to have the same access to health and social services support and facilities as anyone else resident in the UK enjoys. That is an important point because there has been some confusion about the matter, particularly in the media. I acknowledge the concerns that have been raised this evening about support for asylum seekers. That is why I announced on 18 November, in answer to a parliamentary question, that we will review the operation of the act in Scotland about 18 months after its implementation. The review will take particular account of the effect of the act in the devolved areas of housing, social work, education and health.

Several members asked to what extent Scottish ministers consult the Home Office. There is constant contact and consultation. Any evidence of particular problems that the review produced—some hypothetical problems have been suggested tonight—would be used in our discussions with the Home Office. I will refer to two further parliamentary questions, which I answered yesterday, on the related matter of the reimbursement of Scottish local authorities for support they have given to asylum seekers and refugees. We will ensure that local authorities are  given support in the present system and under the terms of the new legislation. I confirmed in answer to those questions that we will lay before Parliament two special grant reports, the first of which will reimburse local authorities for expenditure they have incurred in the current financial year—1999-2000—in supporting asylum seekers. It is expected that that grant will total around £3.9 million, the money for which has been transferred by the Home Office to the Scottish assigned budget. The second special grant report will reimburse local authorities for the costs they have incurred during the current financial year in housing refugees from Kosovo. The total amount of grant is expected to be around £4.9 million, which will be met in full from the Treasury's UK reserve. There has been some interest in and media coverage of this matter, and I am glad that it has now been resolved satisfactorily.

Mr Wallace, in his brief intervention, made a number of errors. The 600 families to which I refer will be hosted by Glasgow under the previous arrangement and will receive cash support, not voucher support. In the new scheme, when a family remain after six months, there is an allowance for a special cash payment to be made, to allow them to replenish certain items they may have bought early on. However, it is not a switch to cash benefits. I have heard the concerns that have expressed during the debate. Given that support for asylum seekers is a reserved matter, I repeat that the scope for action is limited. However, in the meantime, discussions between the Home Office and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities continue, to seek to ensure the best possible outcome for asylum seekers in Scotland, under the new arrangements. The Scottish Refugee Council is involved in that. We will have a review of the new arrangements some 18 months down the line. I acknowledge that that does not go as far as some members would like, but I believe that these measures are fair, practical and realistic, within the overall constraints that apply.

With all apologies to Dr Simpson, I sat down because I had finished, rather than to take his intervention. I have heard his point and I will take it on board.

A number of measures, including the provision of grants under the Scottish dental access initiative and the appointment of salaried dentists, are already in place to increase the availability of NHS dental services in rural areas of Scotland, and further measures are in prospect.

As with so many of those matters, proper planning is a local issue. Grampian Health Board, as with all other health boards and primary care trusts, may apply to Scottish ministers for approval to appoint salaried dentists, where it believes that dental services are inadequate. As I have indicated, the Scottish dental access initiative is available to make grants where there is demonstrated unmet need or particularly high oral health needs. At the moment the grants are some £635,000, which includes grants in Aberdeen, for example, and Banff. As I indicated, we believe that more initiatives could be taken. A short-life working group has recently been set up to consider exactly what those initiatives might be, to try and improve access generally, but particularly in rural areas.

Oral health is one of the priorities that we have set for health, as are initiatives to try to reduce waiting times, so it is a matter that we expect to discuss. Once again, it is for the local health board and the local health trusts to try to resolve the problem that the member described.

The Minister for Health and Community Care meets representatives of health boards regularly to discuss a wide range of issues. The minister is meeting health board and trust chairmen in Dunkeld this afternoon, as we speak.

Clearly, we are concerned to ensure that all national health service trusts remain financially healthy. It is true that 18 trusts have forecast deficits. Recently, 12 of those trusts either improved or stabilised their position. However, it is important to keep a sense of proportion. The combined deficit is significantly less than 1 per cent of their forecast income. Our officials work closely with senior management in the affected trusts to help them prepare plans that will ensure continued high-quality patient care while achieving financial balance year on year.

Following wide consultation on its report, the Arbuthnott group has been asked to do further work on a couple of aspects. We emphasise that we remain committed to the principle of allocating health resources fairly. That means allocating them to try to deal with the kind of health inequalities that have been debated on a number of occasions in this chamber. Margo MacDonald's question is flawed. What makes change possible is the guarantee to each and every health board in Scotland that it will have real-terms increases in its resources over the coming years. No money will be taken away from any health board.

I refer Ms Cunningham to my answer to Mrs Scanlon.

I regret that the response to that invitation—kind though it may have been—is likely to remain the same, but of course we support the review and redesign of acute services. They are an important and powerful means of ensuring that people in all parts of Scotland have access to the highest possible standards of modern service. We believe—it is an important belief—that decisions on the detailed configuration of local services are best taken locally. Tayside Health Board is still developing its proposals for acute hospital services and we would encourage it to involve all its planning partners, the public and interest groups in that process. Although we are aware of concerns about services at Perth royal infirmary, those concerns are being considered in the context of the acute services review. We remain convinced that those matters are best decided locally in partnership with local people.

While we can argue about the meaning of optimum, we must have a vision of the kind of health service to which we aspire. The point that I was making, which has been made by many members during this and other health debates, is that we have no concept of the SNP's vision, because it has not been presented to us.

This has been an interesting, if rather short, debate. When we last debated health—just before the recess—I said that the relentless denigration of the national health service, which amounted to a counsel of despair, failed to acknowledge the care delivered by NHS staff 24 hours a day, 365 days a year—366 days this year. I am glad that the Opposition has seen its error and has attempted to put that right in its motion today. There has been a lot of loose talk about private health care in this debate. I want to make it clear that NHS staff deliver 95 per cent of health care in Scotland—we have only a tiny private sector. The only people who are interested in privatising the NHS are the Tories, as David Davidson made clear.

Not just now. David Davidson's speech was also extremely confusing, as it seemed to criticise us for not running the NHS as some kind of soviet-style command-and-control centralised organisation. Back in December, in the debate I mentioned, Susan Deacon and I expressed our confidence—not complacency—in our doctors, nurses and ancillary staff and their preparations for the winter period. We did not know then that they would in many cases face unprecedented levels of activity in January. Nevertheless, they did and our confidence was not misplaced. Our confidence was based on visits to hospitals, meetings with staff and the close examination of planning. The Opposition could choose to have confidence, too, as Cathy Jamieson did in forming an excellent contribution to today's debate. We are already—just into February—beginning to plan for next winter with staff. We are looking forward, not back.

As we have said many times, such decisions are for local planning. The on-cost of a decision such as that must be properly taken into account by the health board. I want to talk about a different kind of investment in the health service. Susan Deacon called the 136,000 NHS staff in Scotland the heart of the  service, which they are. That is why the pay increases that were announced in January are among the most important and effective investments that we can make in the health service. Investment in staff pay is not the problem, as the SNP seems to think, but part of the solution. Those pay increases are significantly above inflation—7.8 per cent for experienced nurses—to reward them, recognise them, respect them and retain them.

No, sorry. Mary Scanlon raised the specific case of GP practice nurses. Indeed they should be recognised and rewarded by their employers. The point is that practice nurses' employers are the GPs themselves, who are independent contractors to the health service. Not for the first time, Mrs Scanlon's grasp of the facts is sorely lacking.

No, I am sorry. You did not pay me that courtesy, Mary, and I shall not pay it in return.

This is an especially significant investment in Scotland, where there are 808 nurses per 100,000 people, compared with 620 in England. That is a reflection of the 20 per cent higher spend on the health service, which is being spent where it matters most—at the heart of our service. The fact bears repeating that public health spending in Scotland, as a percentage of gross domestic product, is one of the highest in Europe—and we are increasing health boards' allocations by more than 5 per cent next year although Scotland will receive the same spending review increases per head of population as England. All staff who are covered by independent pay review bodies will receive their pay increases in full—with no staging and no messing—backed up by a further range of measures on training, health and safety, and involvement in decision making. They will receive reward and respect. If staff are the heart of patient care, it must also have a home. That is why we are delivering the biggest ever hospital building programme in Scotland. This very day, Grampian University Hospitals NHS Trust will announce the go-ahead for the new children's hospital in Aberdeen. This is about investment in the future, but let us, for a moment, look at the past. We are reinvesting in and rededicating ourselves to a service that was ill served for 18 years under the Tories. No investment was made in radiotherapy equipment between 1992 and 1997, but we are now investing £12.5 million to try to put that right.

I do not have time to give way.

I am sorry—I will not give way. That investment of £12.5 million is part of the process in which we are replacing outdated buildings, eliminating mixed-sex accommodation and improving NHS pay in real terms. That is action. Robert Brown was right to draw attention to the absence of positive suggestions from the Opposition. Kay Ullrich mentioned the story from her mailbag about someone having to wait eight months for a cataract operation. She is right to be concerned about that, but Susan Deacon described how redesigned health care in Ayr has reduced the waiting time for such an operation from 12 months to one month. We acknowledge that there are problems and we seek solutions to them—that is government. Saying that independence from the UK is the solution to the problems of the NHS is nonsense. Of the SNP members who have spoken, I can excuse Fiona McLeod, who made a constructive contribution. I assure her that children's health is a priority. Can we do more? Yes. Are we listening? Yes. This week, Susan Deacon and I met 30 leaders in mental health. Today and tomorrow we will meet the chairs of all Scotland's health boards and trusts so that we can push forward the modernisation of the NHS. We must match the commitment of staff with resources and vision. The problem with the SNP motion is that it calls for an optimum health service. I do not know what that means. We will never reach the optimum—we can always do better. There must be continuous improvement and endless action to drive up the quality of care. There must be no limit to our vision. An endless quantity of words that are used to drive down confidence in the NHS, and vision with no beginning is, sadly, what passes for opposition in the chamber.

Will Mr Davidson give way?

Can I take it from that last remark that the SNP sees above-inflation pay increases for NHS staff as a problem?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

The National Aids Trust has been offered funding of up to £150,000 in the current financial year in support of the Healthy Gay Scotland campaign, as part of the Executive's effort to prevent the transmission of HIV.

I certainly agree that the use of public funds to promote pornography is inappropriate; it is also illegal. A number of misunderstandings are evident in Mr Johnston's question. Healthy Gay Scotland is not an organisation; it is a campaign to prevent the transmission of HIV. It does that by ensuring that adult gay men have clear, accurate and effective sexual health advice. Not only is that laudable, it is exactly what was demanded in the Government policy statement of 1995, which says that community-based voluntary organisations are best placed to develop health promotion—better placed than Government—among groups particularly vulnerable to HIV transmission. The Tory Government of that time got that one thing right. It is still correct.

I have examined the material and it is clear to me that it is aimed, in language that is accessible, at adult gay men who are seeking clear information about health risks and sexual practices. That is my view. I am happy to confirm it to Mr Johnston in writing.

We have had a wide-ranging and constructive debate, which does not surprise me because we know that there is a genuine desire to address the problem across the chamber and across Scotland. In that spirit, we will take away and consider many of the points made today, and I will try to respond to others now. I want to deal early in my speech with the issue of alcohol abuse, which was raised by many members, but most passionately and eloquently by Christine Grahame.  Believe me, the Executive knows that it cannot deny the damage wreaked on our society by alcohol. The debate about whether we should tackle alcohol and drug misuse separately or in tandem is alive in drug actions teams, in the NHS and in the ministerial committee. While today's debate dealt specifically with drug misuse, one message that the Executive must take away is that of considering an early debate on alcohol abuse, to give the subject the time that Christine Grahame's statistics show that it warrants. Both the SNP and Conservative amendments have considerable merits. However, we believe that neither can be wholly supported and I will come to the reasons later in my speech. First, I will return to the bigger picture, which is one that we largely share. We are striving towards concerted action to deal with the drug problem—action that embraces all the agencies that work on the problem on a daily basis as well as those who are affected by it. As David Mundell said, the truth is that we are all affected by drugs—every police officer, teacher and parent knows that. We can all make a difference, in our own ways, if we commit to a joint approach. That is what "Tackling Drugs in Scotland: Action in Partnership" is about. It is a long-term strategy because no short-term solutions are available—remedies must be long term and sustained—and because we must win the agreement of all key partners involved in its implementation for the long haul. We must develop clear and agreed objectives. We must bring together the key elements for success, and bring them together in a coherent way. The action that we take must be monitored and reviewed on a continuous basis, so that we know what works. This morning Angus MacKay talked about what we have done so far to turn our strategy into action. That action is based on four key pillars: young people, communities, treatment and availability. In her excellent speech, Fiona McLeod was quite right to say that we must think about our young people at every turn. That is why they are the first of the four pillars of the strategy.

Angus MacKay and others have made the point that there is no one problem and no one solution. Questions of the sort that Richard Lochhead has just asked are for the drug action team in Aberdeen. I will say a little more about  how we intend to make the drug action teams more effective. There is also a live debate about which are the most appropriate rehabilitation facilities. This morning we announced some research to ensure that decisions are taken on the best information. The issue that Richard Lochhead raises would be informed by better information, which we hope to have in the near future.

I certainly share that concern. Earlier Fiona Hyslop said that we face a hydra, and that the moment one of its heads is cut off, another springs up. This is a good example of that, and we must be constantly on our guard. It reminds us that we are dealing with an international business that will use every kind of new technology to get at our young people. We need to fight back against it in all arenas. I repeat that the four key pillars are young people, communities, treatment and availability. Our approach, based on those pillars, is to co-ordinate action across Scotland, so that all the arms of Government work together to ensure that existing funding of drug misuse services is used properly; to identify where extra funding could make a difference; to measure progress and act where it is not achieved; and to identify gaps in that action and fill them. We seek to work in partnership with all the main players, to act on the basis of top-class research, information and evaluation, and to seek out and produce that information when it is not available.

That would certainly be our aspiration, but we are dealing with a difficult and complex question. In every area of action, we must set clear objectives that take us closer to that aspiration. We have indicated that within 90 days we will set out in a comprehensive action plan the ways in which the Executive will support that work. However, we have already begun to take specific steps. First, there is a clear ministerial lead for the strategy, supported by a Cabinet sub-committee. That not only gives clear leadership but ensures that all departments play their part. It does not separate drugs—a pervasive and insidious issue that affects every area of government in Scotland—from day-to-day government, as the Tory amendment would do. It does not try to carve  out separate funding by unifying budgets in a way that would make it seem that work on drugs was something extra or separate from the work of our departments. We believe that it is the best way to promote concerted action on drug misuse. We have taken specific steps on drug action teams. We have asked them to report to the centre annually, so that their plans can be tied in. A number of members expressed doubts about the effectiveness of drug action teams. Brian Adam characterised them as having lots of strategy but no action. Although that is true, it will have to change. Angus MacKay is meeting every drug action team in Scotland—he is often accompanied by me or other members of the Cabinet sub-committee. His key message is that the drug action teams are about action. There are good examples; Des McNulty spoke about the successes of the greater Glasgow drug action teams. Drug action teams are vital if local action is to be locally sensitive. They are the arena in which a specific Glasgow strategy to deal with the conditions in Glasgow, about which several members have spoken, can be created. They are a recognition of the SNP's point, which was well made by Roseanna Cunningham and others, that there is not a single problem and we cannot have a single solution. However, we do not favour the formation of a new parliamentary committee on substance misuse. That is partly for the practical reason that it would create pressure for committee members. Even some members who spoke in favour of such a committee said that, although they supported it in principle, they understood that it would pose difficulties for many people who wanted to be members of it.

Keith Raffan makes a good point. I expressed the Executive's view that such a committee would cause practical problems, but I will say something about the alternative places to discuss the subject.  Another reason against having a parliamentary committee on drugs was raised by Johann Lamont, who powerfully argued that drugs should be a concern of all our committees in their day-to-day business and should not be separated. We are pleased that the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee has led the way on the issue. Practical reasons, and the fact that the SNP amendment deletes so much of the motion, are why we oppose the amendment. However, as Keith Raffan said, a number of members have said that they will pursue the idea of a committee on drugs, and that is their prerogative. Specific steps have been taken to improve treatment and prevention: additional funding of £6 million per annum for drug treatment services over the next three years; £1 million for the community programme of Scotland Against Drugs; £2 million over two years—

I note that point, which is well made. The Executive has taken steps towards understanding what works, so that when money is spent, it is effectively spent. We have established a drugs information team at the Executive and will be setting up a new website covering the matters that Andy Kerr mentioned earlier. We have established the first ever drugs research programme and an all-Scotland drugs prevalence study. We have allocated £300,000 for a new prevention and effectiveness unit. I can assure members that we want further through care development. Many members have, quite rightly, raised that issue. We are committed to through care for prisoners after they leave prison. Today's comments about the pointlessness of providing in-prison rehabilitation if there is no follow-up were absolutely correct and cannot be refuted. That is why the Scottish Prison Service is working on a holistic strategy, and its representatives sit on drug action teams and co-operate with all the other key agencies. Members referred to the CARATs scheme in England, but that was introduced to deal with the complete lack of drugs services in prisons in the past, and the situation is different in Scotland.  The Executive is taking steps forward on enforcement. Over the next two years, £10 million will be allocated for the drugs enforcement agency, which will be dedicated to tackling drug-related crime. In this country, as in Ireland, we must consider the international experience. We have examined the evaluations of the drug courts in the United States, to which Roseanna Cunningham referred. We believe that the drugs testing and treatment orders that are being piloted in Glasgow and in Fife strip out the most effective aspects of the drug courts in a way that is appropriate to our legal system. Offenders can be placed on drug programmes lasting for periods of six months to three years, with failure to comply leading to revocation and an alternative sentence. I must tell Lyndsay McIntosh that, although we will give serious drug criminals no quarter, the distinction between user and pusher is not always easy to make. Almost all users also sell. Does that mean that, with a promise of minimum two-year sentences, almost all drug users would end up in prison? How does that square with her welcome indication that the Tory group in this Parliament believes with the rest of us in a combination of enforcement and treatment? As for the balance of enforcement, treatment and prevention to which Keith Raffan referred, we must get it right. That is one reason for the audit of Executive expenditure in Scotland rather than of expenditure figures for the UK to which he referred. That audit covers enforcement. To know how to strike that balance and where money must be spent—

The central priority must be to make enforcement, rehabilitation and prevention work together to have real impact. We must take effective action to interrupt the supply of drugs and to cut the demand for drugs. There is no either/or. That approach must permeate the work of every agency. Last week, Angus MacKay and I met Fife police officers working with children at Kelty Primary. The police service resources and delivers drug prevention programmes in schools. Projects such as Alter8 2000, which I visited in Dundee, are led by the police, facilitated by the voluntary sector and funded by business through Scotland Against Drugs. They target the young people who show all the early indications of future involvement with drugs. The police are preventing drug use to avoid  enforcement later. Health services are educating in schools to avoid treating in rehab later. Businesses are funding projects to avoid paying the cost in crime later. There is no quick solution, no single solution and no simple answer. However, we must build on a single, simple objective. We must cut the cost of drugs that is paid day in, day out by Scotland—the opportunity cost, the property cost and, above all, the human cost, which is paid in young lives and which we cannot afford.

I thank Margaret Smith for drawing the Parliament's attention to this important and difficult subject. I also take the opportunity afforded by the debate to acknowledge the efforts of the social work profession over the millennium and winter period. We have heard about the efforts of national health service staff a number of times, but we should not forget that it is also a time of particular pressure for social work departments in their work in community and social care. I agree with Margaret Smith that it is an unacceptable state of affairs that committed and dedicated social workers should be subject to verbal abuse, the threat of violence or even violent attack by some of the people for whom they provide services. As Margaret said, it is unacceptable that social workers are also sometimes undermined by ill-judged and sensationalist reporting of cases in which they have been involved. However, we need to acknowledge—as a number of members have done—that this is not an easy problem to resolve. The origins of that violent behaviour are many and complex, and we must recognise that the perpetrators are among the most damaged and excluded members of our society. Their behaviour may be fuelled by drink or drugs, which is not to excuse such behaviour. We simply need to realise, as I think we have done during this short debate, that a considerable level of understanding is required so that managers and staff can work together to reduce and eliminate the unacceptable attacks on a key group of public sector workers. The responsibility for supporting staff who may be subject to abuse or attack rests clearly and most directly with their employers, whether they be local authorities, or voluntary or private agencies. However, we are happy to accept that the Scottish Executive also has a responsibility—we have been active in supporting those employers in fulfilling their responsibilities. I would like to give three or four examples of the initiatives that are under way, many of which have already been mentioned by members. Margaret Smith, for example, pointed out that a year before the launch of Community Care magazine's "no fear" campaign in July 1999, Sam Galbraith—who was then the Scottish Office minister with responsibility for social work—highlighted the problem in a seven-point plan that he outlined in a speech to the annual conference of the Association of Directors of Social Work. It is good to report that the ADSW took up that challenge, consulted the local authorities and the social work services inspectorate and has now published the resource pack, "Supporting Front Line Staff", the  publication and distribution of which was funded by the Scottish Executive. The pack gives guidance on a number of the points that have to be addressed to improve safety for staff: practical procedures to avoid risk situations; management practices; staff training; and a comprehensive monitoring system. It also points towards examples of good practice by local authorities. It is important to acknowledge that there are such examples, not least in Edinburgh. Several members have acknowledged that City of Edinburgh Council is currently revising and improving its guidelines in response to the motion that was lodged there, but there are other examples. I would not want to suggest for a moment that we believe that the problem will be resolved simply by producing a resource pack. The ADSW is well aware of that and has set up a task force that is currently considering what the second stage of the campaign should be. We will collaborate with the association as it decides which direction we should take. I believe that that puts us ahead of Frank Dobson's task force and maintains ownership by the profession in a very direct way. That addresses a point that was made from the Scottish National party benches. The other key initiative that is under way is the consultation paper on "Regulating Care and the Social Services Workforce" that came out last December. It proposes the establishment of the Scottish social services council, which will regulate the work force and its education. It will also provide leadership for the profession and the recognition that it deserves, as several members have said. The council will be required to prepare, publish and keep under review employers' codes of conduct and practice. That will include a code of practice for all employers of social services staff, whether local authority, voluntary or private. The code will include management responsibilities concerning the reduction of abuse and violence towards the work force. The Scottish commission for the regulation of care, proposed in the same document, will regulate the delivery of care in care settings. Part of that will involve ensuring that properly trained staff are in place and that there are proper procedures such as recording of incidents, to meet the requirements of commission inspection. Unhappily, the statistics that have been quoted throughout the debate show that a significant group of perpetrators of abuse and violence towards staff are children who are looked after by the local authority, particularly those in residential care. Staff in that setting need to be particularly skilful and sensitive when providing care, as they are particularly at risk. That is why the Scottish  Executive has recently awarded a major grant to a partnership of agencies, led by the University of Strathclyde, to enhance and develop the education and training of all staff providing residential child care services. That is aimed at ensuring proper and continuing training for all residential children's care staff in Scotland—exactly the kind of measure referred to, quite correctly, by Lord James Douglas-Hamilton in his speech. We need to train people in ways of ensuring that they minimise risk to themselves in their work setting. This has been a short debate, in which a number of issues have been raised that will return to the chamber, for example, as the legislation to set up the council and commission develops. There is a Vietnamese proverb that translates as:  "Those who bring light suffer burning". The truth is that we ask our social workers to work in some dark and difficult corners of society. It is too often a thankless and dangerous task. We will not accept that, tacitly or otherwise, and will continue to work with the profession to ensure that we minimise the risks that social workers face.  Meeting closed at 17:40.

We expect the £10 million to be used to enhance existing quality services—including  respite care—that are of direct benefit to carers, as well as to develop new and more innovative services. A copy of the department's letter to local authorities advising them of their share of the £10 million is available in the Scottish Parliament information centre. It is for individual authorities, in consultation with local carers groups, to decide how best to use those resources.

In the debate in which the £10 million for carers was announced, I made it clear that it is well understood that the health service and the community care systems could not continue without the informal care that is carried out by 500,000 or more Scots—we cannot match that. In that debate, we also agreed, as did carers organisations, that the money was a first step in giving the needs of carers a much higher priority. It is a step in the right direction.

When the carers strategy was announced, the Executive acknowledged that there was not enough in it for young carers. I have asked officials to work on research and to bring forward further proposals, which I hope to present to the Parliament. I would expect that one area on which the £10 million that has been allocated to local authorities will be spent will be better information and services for young carers, perhaps through schools.

How long do I have, Presiding Officer?

Thank you. On the first day of this term—I do not know whether that is what we call the part of the year between recesses—the Parliament debated health. It is right and fitting that we should also devote this last meeting before the recess to health. On that occasion, members united around the public health agenda, which was good. We freed that debate from the terms of the past, according to which there was no link between poverty and ill health. We all embraced the challenge of the unacceptable health inequalities in our society. A modern, efficient and effective NHS is central to that challenge. We had the chance to embrace that challenge today. What a pity that so much of the debate has failed to free itself from the past—from narrow, party-based point scoring and from crass, personal attacks. This debate is about people—Scotland's people. Cathy Jamieson was right when she highlighted that in her excellent speech. That is what we should have been discussing instead of the other things that have been talked about. Let me deal with the Scottish National party's two obsessions: money and England. I am sure that visitors to the chamber will be astonished to hear how much time the SNP spends speaking  about England. It is no surprise to the rest of us in the chamber—

If it is short, Tommy.

I will come to the change in services. As Tommy well knows, the Arbuthnott report, which members have mentioned, is about beginning to examine NHS spending and addressing the inequalities to which Tommy draws attention. Let us get the figures out of the way. Planned health expenditure this year is £5.075 billion; next year it is £5.243 billion; and the following year it is £5.556 billion. Those are real increases. They certainly dwarf the £35 million of annual additional spending promised to the Scottish people by the SNP manifesto in 1997. Those figures mean that health spending in Scotland this year is 20 per cent higher than in England. That is the reality. While we are on comparison, Kay Ullrich referred to Professor Gordon McVie.

No, I am sorry. I do not have enough time. Kay Ullrich omitted to mention that Professor McVie said specifically that Scotland was ahead of England in developing cancer services. We can do better—and we are doing better.

No, there is not enough time. The Administration's initiatives are about Scotland and about people. NHS Direct will provide people with advice 24 hours a day. Redesigned health care will slash the time that people wait for operations such as those for cataracts. One-stop clinics will give people immediate diagnosis without the agonies of waiting; walk-in-walk-out hospitals will provide  care where and when people require it, and there will be an appointments system that lets people know when they will see a consultant. Today, maximum waiting time targets were announced to ensure national standards for those waiting for treatment. The Administration's initiatives—real initiatives—are about the technologies and developments of the future. They include a £17 million meningitis programme. The Scottish health technology advisory centre will assess properly new drugs and new procedures. The clinical standards board will ensure the standards of the future, not the past. The biggest hospital building programme that our health service has seen will provide facilities in which the health care of the future might be delivered, instead of old buildings that build us into the health care of the past. The Administration's initiatives are about Scotland and are accountable to Scotland. An interesting point about what that means was raised by Duncan Hamilton. What a pity that it came so late in the debate. What a pity none of his colleagues chose to address such issues. Susan Deacon addressed those issues, however. She announced a drive to maximise grass-roots representation on NHS trust boards, in which every one of us was challenged to take part and which we were all challenged to promote. What a pity that Kay Ullrich interpreted that challenge as an invitation to put SNP placemen on health trusts. Are the SNP's roots in communities so weak that the only people it knows and can promote are its own party members? That is the all-encompassing challenge for us today. I say to Mr Hamilton that that is what is meant by meeting us halfway and by addressing the debate. Are we big enough and grown-up enough to show the leadership and vision that will take our NHS into the next century? Susan Deacon spoke of the giants Beveridge and Bevan. We cannot hide behind them—rather, we must stand on their shoulders better to see the way. Bevan said: "This service must always be changing, growing and improving". He also said: "This is the answer I make to some of the Jeremiahs and defeatists". We cannot allow this Parliament to be a platform for Jeremiahs and defeatists. Because the NHS must change, we must show political leadership by letting go of old, well-loved but outdated buildings, to build the new NHS. When Mary Scanlon spoke, I was put in mind of  something else that Bevan said: "Warm gushes of self-indulgent emotion are an unreliable source of driving power in the field of health organisation."

A certain anticipation of the holidays has been evident this week in Parliament. Holiday moods can vary. We have a choice. We could have a Hallowe'en debate about our NHS—searching out the dark side, working it up to a scary horror story and painting a nightmare vision of our health service. That gets the headlines, but it is a mask. It is guising and it serves us ill. We are certainly ill served by attempts to make a scare story— [Interruption.] We are ill served by attempts to make a scare story out of proper attempts to liberate learning-disabled people from long-stay hospitals. We are ill served by those who talk about spin doctors and then wave headlines at me. I have spoken to hundreds of learning-disabled people and they all say the same thing: "Close those hospitals down." That is what we are doing. Ben Wallace said that it is nearly Christmas. We could also have the Christmas wish-list debate, with its endless demand for resources. Duncan Hamilton admitted that the demands are endless. That wish list is unfocused and uncosted, and size is the only criterion—massive size, according to Dorothy-Grace Elder. Quality is not considered. Resentment is fuelled by endless comparisons with others: "Look what they have in England." Look what we have here—an excellent health service, driven forward by staff— [Interruption.]

We have a health service that is driven forward by   staff who will be working day and night while we are on holiday. We should acknowledge that.

Hugh can read what I said in the Official Report  tomorrow. I suggest that he read what some members on other benches have said today, because it has been a disgrace. This is our last full debate this century. That is why the holiday that we must hold to is the new year. The new year debate must be about our resolution to modernise the NHS, to make it better as well as bigger. We must make it a health  service that is delivered in modern buildings, using modern techniques that are not separate from but are in partnership with social care and social support, and which minimise anxiety as well as physical pain. The partnerships must respond to the patients' needs, not the service's procedures. I tell Tommy Sheridan that it will be a health service that addresses inequalities in health as well as inequalities in access to health. Beveridge and Bevan built the health service for their century. If we are big enough to build our health service for our people, for our century, we will have a 21 st -century service for 21 st -century men and women, for that is what we will be when we return to the chamber. That is the challenge to which we must rise. I ask members to support the motion.

Will the member give way?

Our monitoring of the implementation of "Modernising Community Care: An Action Plan" indicates good progress in many areas. As I said to Parliament this morning, I will be chairing a working group to take forward the views expressed at last month's seminar for health and local authority leaders on joint working in community care.

Joint working of the kind to which Mr Muldoon refers is exactly the sort of thing that we want to see. There was another recent example of such joint working in Aberdeen, where the local authority and the health board worked together to spend resources where they could best be used. I know that recently there have been some problems with joint working in West Lothian. However, senior staff from my department have met health board and local authority officials; Mr Muldoon quite properly—as the local member—took an interest in those meetings. I am pleased that the difficulties have started to be overcome and that joint working is allowing issues to be moved forward.

Our proposals to modernise community care will improve service for all client groups, including people with disabilities.

We have covered this ground before. The grant-aided expenditure for social work services in Scotland has increased since last year by £51.3 million, or 4.9 per cent. It will increase next year and the following year as well. Mr Matheson has an interest in these matters as a result of his previous profession. He will know that important initiatives can be taken on the way in which those resources are spent. For example,  there is the carers strategy initiative, which was announced last week; the review of direct payments, which makes it possible for better and more flexible services to be provided for people with disability; and the Scottish accessible information forum report, which was published last week. Resources are increasing, but we can do more to spend them better.

There is no difference between us on those points. I said earlier that those initiatives are being taken forward. As I said, the Minister for Health and Community Care and I agree that those are not being taken forward quickly enough, so I have announced today how we intend to do so.

Will the member give way?

Mr McNeil has pointed out that he has been heckled by boilermakers. Does he agree that that heckling was almost certainly of a higher quality than the heckling that we are hearing now?

The issue of heart transplants has come up a couple of times today, but I think that it was addressed recently in a parliamentary question. There is a balance to be struck between the benefit of a transplant and the risk that the patient might not survive such invasive surgery.  Judgments about when to conduct surgery are based on clinical assessments. It is not true that there is a ban on transplants for the over-60s.

I am not leaving.

Mr Gibson raises an important point, but does he recognise that the chancellor made exactly the same point yesterday? The chancellor also said that, by co-ordinating action, we could do something about that situation.

The Executive believes that Scotland must value and support its older people. I am happy to begin with a point on which I agree with Alex Neil's remarks, because I fear that there will be little more that I agree with. We believe that we must value and support our older people. That is exactly why the "Social Justice" report, launched last week, pledged that we will tackle poverty and injustice for older people; why yesterday a joint ministerial action committee on pensioner poverty was announced; and why, as lead minister for older people, I have been attending—with Westminster colleagues—the inter-ministerial group on older people. Honestly addressing the needs of older people demands co-ordination across Parliaments and across Administrations. It is too important a matter for us not to do that. That co-ordination is the way in which we can build, for example, on the national minimum income guarantee that addresses the needs of the poorest pensioners and will benefit 125,000 people in Scotland when it rises next April, in line with the increase in earnings. We can build on initiatives such as the winter fuel payment for all pensioners, which is rising from £20 to £100, free eye tests for the over-60s and free television licences for the over-75s. Such initiatives are making the new politics work, not for politicians—there is more to the new politics than us addressing one other by name—but for our people, by adding value to the efforts of each Administration. To do that, the Scottish Parliament must strive to maximise the impact on older people's quality of life of those policy areas for which we have full responsibility. That is an honest approach, and we intend to take it. I was glad to hear Alex Neil say that this is not just about pensions. I was surprised, however, that he found very little to say about anything else. The Scottish Executive is devoting significant energy and resources to the needs of older people—by, for example, investing millions of pounds in the warm deal to upgrade 100,000 Scottish homes. Half the social work budget of £1.1 billion and nearly 40 per cent of the health budget—some £2 billion—is being spent on older people. We are determined to increase the effectiveness as well as the amount of those resources, to get away from the never-mind-the-quality-feel-the-width approach to the issue that is taken by so many others.  We can do that only by listening to older people to identify their priorities. We can do that through initiatives such as the better government for older people network and the recent listening event in Aberdeen. We have to listen to older people and to respond honestly.

If Mr Neil had genuinely listened to organisations that represent pensioners and older people, he would have found that older people—which means people more than 50 years old, an age that I rapidly approach, never mind the Presiding Officer—do not view this issue as being solely about pensions. On every occasion that I have spoken to older people, I have found that they mention the report of the Royal Commission on Long-Term Care, which got a passing reference at the end of Mr Neil's speech. It seems appropriate to respond to it in this debate on older people. Sir Stewart Sutherland's report ably analyses the problem that he and the other members of the commission identified. He powerfully expresses the views of older people over the funding of long-term care and he defuses the mythical demographic time bomb that is so often a feature of the debate around old people. When I took up this post, I asked what older people wanted. I was told that they wanted to stay in their own homes and be independent as long as possible. I asked for the evidence and I was shown it. Better still, I asked older people themselves. They all said the same thing. I asked myself what I would want, and the answer was the same. We all want to live in our own homes for as long as possible, perhaps moving to more suitable homes. One of Sutherland's recommendations is that more people should be able to receive high-quality care that allows them to stay in their own homes. There are proportionately fewer people in care homes in Scotland than in the UK as a whole. There are over 340,000 people over the age of 75 in this country, 33,000 of whom are in care homes. If we are to benefit older people—both those who need care towards the end of their lives and those who do not—we must ensure access to flexible and imaginative home-care services should they need them. Those services should enable them to get up or go to bed when they want and should be available seven days a week, not just Monday to Friday.

As we have discussed, the financial resources that are going into community care will rise this year, next year and the year after. I accept the important point that Mrs Ewing makes: this debate is not just about the scale of resources, it is about how we spend them in order to get the maximum benefit for our older people. That will mean addressing bureaucracy and systems. People expect personal care delivered in a person-centred way, not in a bureaucratic way and they expect that care to be of a consistent, guaranteed standard.  One of the royal commission's two main recommendations is that there should be a national care commission to ensure national standards of care, monitor trends, represent the consumer and encourage the development of better services. We already have in preparation specific Scottish legislation to meet those aims. As was promised in our programme for government, we will legislate for two new bodies. The first will register the social care work force, regulate its training and produce codes of conduct to provide assurances on quality. The second—the Scottish commission for the regulation of care—will regulate the care that is provided. For the first time ever, home care, delivered to so many of our older people, as well as residential care, will be regulated. All providers, including local authorities, will be covered and there will be national standards drafted from the perspective of the person using the service. The commission will be responsible for ensuring that all social care is provided to national standards. It will create a national database of care services and use that and demographic and resource data collected by the Scottish Executive to advise on trends into the future. It will have the power to investigate complaints about care services and report on them. It will advise us on changes needed to the care standards and provide advice on how those standards should be met and improved. National care standards are already under development, and the establishment of the commission will meet the royal commission's recommendation. Sir Stewart Sutherland's commission made two further recommendations regarding carers: better services for people with carers and a national support package. He recognised that many older people depend on informal carers and that many are themselves informal carers. What was  recommended is exactly what we announced last week: a doubling of resources earmarked for carers services and setting in train new carers legislation. The royal commission specifically identified direct payment schemes whereby users are able to purchase care packages to match their needs as a way of increasing flexibility for older people and cutting through the bureaucracy. It recommends that older people who wish it, should have access to direct payments. We have commissioned research on the present use of direct payments and the barriers to them and we expect to implement that recommendation for older people next year. At least four recommendations of the royal commission demand for older people more joint working and more pooling of resources by local authorities and the national health service. We are already promoting those measures through implementation of the modernising community care action plan. However, the Minister for Health and Community Care and I agree that that is not happening quickly enough for our older people, as well as others who need those services. Following a seminar with local authority and health service leaders last month, we are setting up a joint future working group—chaired by me—by the end of the year, to begin work in January, to address a range of joint working and funding issues in community care. All of its work will be of direct relevance to older people and the recommendations of the commission. I want the group to do two further things that relate to the royal commission report. First, I want it to come to an agreement over what the balance should be between residential and home-based care; secondly—and crucially—I want it to address another point that received a passing reference from Mr Neil: charging for personal care delivered at home. As Sir Stewart Sutherland said, the present system is perceived as unfair and inconsistent and it can cost a good deal to administer. It is a perverse disincentive to local authorities that provide intensive packages of care to people at home and a real obstacle to services being provided jointly with the NHS, which of course does not charge. I am determined to address that. The joint future group will tackle that and come up with proposals in time for them to be considered during the next spending review, which will begin early in the new year, and will reach its conclusions by the autumn. Those are all measures that will benefit hundreds of thousands of older Scots. However, I am not forgetting the 8,000 or so people in care homes in Scotland who are contributing to the cost  of their care at present. To benefit that group, Sir Stewart recommends changes to the funding system that would cost about £1.1 billion per annum for the UK, rising to £6 billion by the middle of the century, and suggests various intermediate steps along the way. As I have said, we want gradually to reduce the proportion of people in traditional care homes and to use the resources thus made available to support people more effectively at home. However, I know that there are real concerns about the present funding system for residential care. The needs of older people—including those funding their own care—and the way in which residential care is funded, will be key issues to resolve during the forthcoming spending review. I have taken the opportunity presented by today's debate to address one of the key priorities for older people in Scotland—long-term care. Building a Scotland where every older person matters means ensuring that all older people are financially secure and that they can lead active, independent and healthy lives. Alex Neil is right—it is not just about pensions. What a pity that he did not address any of the other issues relating to older people in Scotland. Alex Neil said that he was sending his words out to our pensioners, but words are not enough. We are taking action—now, next year and into the next century—to build a Scotland where every older person matters. The Executive will use the power of the Parliament to pursue relentlessly pensioners' issues. We will not use our pensioners to pursue the issue of the Scottish Parliament's powers. I move amendment S1M-327.1, to leave out from "recognises" to end and insert: "notes the Executive's vision of a Scotland in which every older person matters and every person beyond working age has a decent quality of life, and welcomes the measures the Executive has already taken and has planned to support older people in line with its Programme for Government commitment to deliver person centred health and community care."

Will Mr Hamilton give way?

I welcome to the public gallery carers who have travelled from all over Scotland to be here today. Given the caring responsibilities that they have, that represents a considerable effort. In a sense, we are in the presence of 500,000 Scots who look after sick, disabled, vulnerable or frail relatives or friends. Some have done so for many years; others will have, suddenly and shockingly, found themselves in the situation as a result of accident or diagnosis. The Scottish Executive's programme for government committed us to producing a strategy for carers in Scotland. The strategy document was issued by way of a parliamentary question yesterday, so that members of the Parliament would receive it before anyone else. The first ministerial engagement that I undertook was a carers event. I promised then to bring their concerns to the chamber. I have met many carers and have learned from them something of what caring means. It has been a sometimes searing experience. Carers will speak passionately about the difference that services have made, but they will not mince their words about the struggle to provide care for loved ones, sometimes with little support and in isolation. Before drawing up our proposals, we discussed priorities with carers organisations in Scotland, notably the Carers National Association, the coalition of carers in Scotland, Crossroads Scotland, the Princess Royal Trust for Carers and Shared Care Scotland. I want to put on record an acknowledgement of my gratitude for their help. Together, we identified four main areas for action. The first priority of carers is that respite services should be of a better quality, more readily available and more flexible, as those services allow them to take a break with confidence and without guilt. We have therefore told the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities that we expect the resources spent on those services to double. We are identifying £10 million of grant-aided expenditure for 2000-01 specifically for carers services and respite care. That doubles the £5 million that is already notionally allocated for such  services in the GAE system. We have already announced that the total GAE for social services will increase by £40 million next year, and it is from those resources that the additional £5 million will be found. Every local authority on Scotland will receive its share of the £10 million, and local carers groups will be advised of the resources that are available to their authority for developing new services and enhancing existing ones. Local authorities must consult local carers organisations on spending plans for those resources. We will encourage imaginative and innovative services that meet carers' needs. We expect authorities to take into account the needs of carers from ethnic minority and rural communities and those who care for someone with a learning disability. Carers want a consistent standard of service across Scotland. We have already set up a national care standards committee to agree national standards for residential care, day care and home care services. National standards for residential respite care will be introduced in 2000 and for home-based care in 2001. Carers are represented on the working groups already set up to discuss standards across the services and will be included in the groups that will discuss the proposals as they emerge. It is widely believed that new carers legislation is required. I agree. I am determined to get it right and not to rush it. I have therefore decided to set up a carers legislation working group by the end of this year, on which representatives of the Scottish Executive, service users and carers, carers organisations and local authorities will work together to draw up legislative proposals for public consultation next year. Those proposals will consider the rights of carers—and users—to a direct assessment of their needs. In particular, we want and expect the legislation to enable carers under 16 to have, for the first time, a direct assessment of their needs. All carers want more information. We can have as many services as we wish and services of the highest quality, but if carers do not know that they are there and how to access them, they are of no use. Too often, services are stumbled across almost by accident. It is no coincidence that the excellent carers centre in Perth is called Gateway. The handbook of the services that it helps carers to access includes many such services, but in the Gateway centre, carers will say that it is often an accidental meeting with someone from the centre that allows them to begin to access the services that already exist. We must increase and open up such gateways to services. All agencies and professionals in the  caring professions have a role to play. Working with the Carers National Association training unit that the Scottish Executive funds, we will take the needs of carers into account in future training of general practitioners, primary care teams and social workers. The next planning and priorities guidelines for the national health service will require health boards and trusts to recognise carers' needs. In spring 2000, the Scottish NHS helpline will be extended to include information on services for carers. When NHS Direct is brought on stream in Scotland, it will be extended to include social care and carers advice, as well as medical advice. Early in the new year, we will launch a leaflet and local media campaign to publicise the carers strategy and services for carers. Too many carers remain hidden completely—the 500,000 figure that I used is a notional one. We do not know how many carers there are. It is our intention that the census in 2001 should be the first one to include a question on carers, seeking information on the time that people spend on unpaid caring. We will consider extending the Princess Royal Trust for Carers pilot project to identify hidden carers and examine the potential use of GP databases to identify and include information on carers. The four priorities are respite, standards, legislation and information. Priorities are all very well, but carers are concerned—and have expressed that concern to me—that the impact of the strategy should be monitored. Therefore, from April 2000, local authorities will be required to report in detail on the use of the resources allocated to them for carers and respite services through community care plans and annual updates. Further, in future we will require those plans to be accompanied by a letter from local carers groups, confirming that they have been consulted in the planning and development of services and that they are satisfied that their authority's share of the £10 million has been used appropriately. In addition, we have tasked the Scottish Executive's community care implementation unit to review practice in involving carers in service planning and provision. The unit will identify and promote good practice, and—importantly—will report to me on any barriers to the development of good-quality services for carers. Further, carers' needs will in future be included as part of the existing statutory performance indicators and assessments currently required of local authorities by the Accounts Commission. I have asked that the new, national data set that is being devised by the Scottish Executive, COSLA and the Accounts Commission to monitor social care on a national basis should include information  on carers assessments and respite care. I mentioned young carers in the context of legislation, but they are a particularly disadvantaged group, whose specific needs we must address further. In Dundee, we are providing £210,000 over the next three years to a project aimed at identifying and supporting young carers. I have asked my officials to work up proposals for research on the support that is available to young carers in Scotland and the guidance that is needed for professionals in health education and social care. In the meantime, we will make available to directors of education a young carers pack, which I expect to inform the work that is currently undertaken by guidance teachers. It would be wrong to conclude without acknowledging the contribution that carers make. We could not deliver community care without them. They care unpaid, unsung and unwaveringly. The package is a significant step towards addressing their needs, but it is only a step. Some people will try to calculate how much the contribution of carers is worth in cash terms, but that misses the point. Carers care because they want to, and because they love the people for whom they care. We cannot put a price on something that is priceless, or a value on what is invaluable. Caring is what holds our society together. It is the practical, most powerful, profoundest solidarity between husband and wife, parent and child, friend and neighbour. It touches us all. Like most people, when I think of carers, I think first of my mother caring for her father, my aunt and uncle for my cousin, and my friend for his son. We all know carers. Today, we place them at the centre of our Parliament and at the heart of Scotland. They will never go away. Whoever stands here can never ignore their needs again. I move the motion on their behalf. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Executive's commitment in its Programme for Government to introduce a Carers' Strategy for Scotland to assist unpaid carers, and approves the Executive's proposals for that strategy.

The Executive has already received advice from the Millan committee about non-medical matters in the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Bill, and in due course will wish to consider carefully any advice from the committee about the health care matters that are covered in part 5 of the bill, or indeed about the interrelationship between mental health and incapacity legislation.

I have tried to indicate that that interplay and communication has already taken place. We have made it clear that, in the longer term, following the debate and legislation, we will amend the adults with incapacity legislation to take account of the conclusions of the Millan committee if that is required. I assure Mrs Ewing that the hope and intention is to modernise legislation on incapacity without delay, while allowing a proper re-examination of mental health legislation through the Millan committee. We must get both those things right.

I appreciate that sentiment but, two weeks after this Parliament was constituted, a conference was held by the alliance for incapable adults, as it then was. I recall seeing in the media a woman at that conference weeping because of the problems that she had in caring for her husband, who was suffering the early onset of dementia; the closure of their bank account meant that she had no access to their resources. We believe that the adults with incapacity legislation cannot wait. People have waited for it since 1994 and we do not want to hold it up any longer. We want to ensure that the Millan committee will impact on adults with incapacity without making people wait any longer.

We expect that the legislation will be covered by the concordat between the Scottish Executive and the Home Office. We will be evaluating the effects of the new support scheme for asylum seekers in Scotland in due course.

As members will know from previous discussions, immigration and asylum are reserved matters, over which we have no legislative competence. We are determined to ensure that Scotland plays its part in fair, effective and fast support for asylum seekers. That is why I have announced today that we will review the operation of these measures some 18 months from their inception. It is important that the Executive and the Parliament concentrate on what it can do rather than on what it cannot.

The short answer to that question is no. I reiterate that, in matters where we have devolved responsibility, we will take measures to ensure that we can give the assurance—in response to questions or in any other way—that we are playing our part in providing the support that is required for those who seek asylum on our shores. That is the correct way forward.

I understand that the full committee reviewing the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 has met seven times and has received written submissions from 130 organisations in Scotland in response to a consultation document that it published in April. In addition, more than 160 responses have so far been made to a leaflet issued by the committee, which was particularly designed to obtain the views of users and carers on mental health legislation.

I acknowledge Mrs Ewing's continuing interest in this matter. I believe that it was in response to a parliamentary question that she asked in another Parliament that Mr Galbraith first announced the Millan commission.  Clearly, the progress of the commission's work is its responsibility, but I am happy to report that 1,000 copies of the consultation document have been distributed. As I mentioned, a leaflet for users and carers has gone out. Various visits have been made to day-care services and psychiatric institutions and there are public seminars this month. The commission plans to produce a further consultation document early next year and we expect it to report to Scottish ministers in summer 2000.

The latest estimate is that in the 35,500 staffed NHS beds in Scotland there are 2,015 patients who have, for a variety of reasons, waited two or more days for discharge. Some, although not all of them, will be awaiting a care home placement.

I have given this answer before—the responsibility for resolving that problem in the short term lies with health boards and local authorities working together. Last Friday, the two health ministers met the most senior members of staff from every local authority and every health trust in Scotland, bar one, so that we could make exactly that point, among others—that it is they who must resolve the problem. There is a problem of information, however. There are 40 possible reasons for delayed discharge; the point under discussion is one of  them. A pilot exercise is looking at ways of securing consistent, coherent data to enable us to find solutions to delayed discharge instead of placing blame for it.

Our view remains that a section 211 inquiry is not appropriate. However, I am happy to meet Mr Mundell to discuss that further, as I indicated in my letter to him of 19 October.

I thank Mr Mundell for pointing out why a section 211 inquiry would not be appropriate at the moment. The controller of audit is already investigating the decision-making process that resulted in the externalisation. Several other people, including the local government ombudsman and the council's monitoring officer, could address some of the concerns Mr Mundell has raised. The possibilities have not been exhausted, which is why an inquiry is not appropriate. On the policy of delayed discharge, I understand that the council and the health board agree that 13 people are in hospital awaiting placement because the council does not have the resources to accommodate them. The delay in discharge is approximately two months and my officials have been encouraging the local authority and the national health service trust to work together to improve the situation as soon as possible, as is their responsibility.

Between last year and this, the total grant-aided expenditure allowances for social work services in East Lothian have increased by around 9 per cent—more than £18 million. GAE allowances are not hypothecated and it is for the council to determine its expenditure plans. East Lothian Council has indicated that it plans to spend £1.2 million more—7 per cent—on social work than it budgeted last year.

Responsibility for the allocation of budgets in East Lothian lies, quite properly, with East Lothian Council. The social work GAE has risen by 9 per cent, the council social work budget has risen by 7 per cent, the overall GAE for East Lothian Council has risen by 6.6 per cent and the council's expenditure guidelines for this year have been raised by 5.5 per cent. Those are increases, not cuts. I am concerned about delays older people and other client groups experience in receiving services in line with their assessed needs. I have asked the head of the community care division of the Scottish Executive to meet the council to discuss the matter. That should happen this week and a report should be made soon.

He was 49 th .

I think I get to answer because I live in and represent Currie and Balerno, where rural and urban Lothian meet in a particularly pleasing synthesis. We have no such plans. Pest control is a matter for the local authorities and property owners concerned.

It is for the local authorities to deal with foxes moving to the urban environment. As far as I am aware, no local authority has made representations to the Scottish Executive for help, although I believe that one authority has asked its officials to make a report on the problem. With regard to what I think Mr Johnstone was really asking, as I believe he knows, the Scottish Executive has no plans to introduce the legislation to which his question alluded.

Is Mary Scanlon clear about the fact that the additional money relates to the new vaccine, which is not yet available or in production? The supply problems have been with the older vaccine, and those problems have been resolved. In terms of the money, we are talking about two different vaccinations.

Will the member give way?

Every winter places additional demands on the NHS and I pay tribute to the NHS staff who respond to those peaks in demand year in, year out. We require all parts of the NHS in Scotland to prepare plans for the coming months. Officials are currently visiting all health boards and trusts to ensure that adequate local arrangements are in place. Members will wish to note that agreement has been reached with staff in the NHS on pay for the millennium period, which will ensure that our health services are able to operate effectively throughout the Christmas and new year period.

The NHS has to deal with admissions day in, day out, year in, year out, and there will be times of peak demand. In every NHS service—be it acute services or psychiatric services—there are contingency plans that can be put in place. As I have said, officials are speaking to all health boards and trusts, including the ones to which Mrs Ullrich referred. They will check the existing situation and the plans for the coming months to ensure that contingency plans will allow hospitals to cope with the peak period over Christmas and  new year and throughout the winter months.

The Scottish Executive aims to provide services that respond to patients' needs. Health boards are responsible for meeting the health care needs of their regional populations, including, of course, those who are terminally ill. Where there is an element of social care, the aim is to provide services that are as responsive and seamless as possible. We and the services concerned are always willing to consider ways to improve responsiveness.

Palliative care is an area in which I have a particular interest. There are two hospices in my constituency, and I will make an address tomorrow for Marie Curie Cancer Care at its annual review. The situation is clear: where diagnosis reveals that a person is terminally ill and requires specialist palliative care, it falls to the NHS to provide that care and meet its costs. Guidance on further care packages asks local authorities to treat terminally ill people with sensitivity and, where possible, to exempt the clients from any charge.

Our purpose in today's debate has been to make it clear that the Executive is serious about food safety and standards. Confidence in the food we eat is a fundamental requirement for the quality of life of our people. As many members have said, that confidence has been rocked in recent years. I say to Mr Fergusson that, as Bristow Muldoon reminded us, it was not any dictatorship in bureaucracy of this Administration that rocked that confidence; it was the BSE catastrophe under the previous Tory Government that wrecked it, and we have had to deal with the consequences ever since. We are committed to rebuilding that confidence, which is why we have presented our strategy to Parliament for open debate. The tone of the debate has been welcome. Much of the debate has, quite properly, been about the food standards agency, because the agency in Scotland is central to our commitment. It is a unique body: it is a repository of expertise; it is authoritative; it can stand above the fray; and it is not tainted—as we heard a moment ago—by any dual role as a result of industry sponsorship. The food standards  agency will be able to—and will be seen to—put the protection of the public at the heart of decision making on food safety. I am pleased at the welcome—qualified as it was, but that is understandable—given to the agency by Kay Ullrich and Mary Scanlon. One of the strengths of the agency is that, although it is UK-wide, it will be able to do things differently in Scotland if circumstances indicate that it should and if European Union legislation permits. That set-up has clear advantages for Scotland; the same advantages apply today as they did on 23 June, when we debated this matter before. We will have access to UK-wide scientific expertise, which will avoid costly duplication. We will ensure a share of the research for Scotland. The agency's funding arrangement will mean that members of the Scottish Parliament will have control and that the agency is accountable to them. The Scottish food safety advisory committee will feed information on Scottish issues to ministers, MSPs and the UK food standards agency board, two members of which will be from the Scottish committee. I can tell Mr Fergusson that the committee and the board will, of course, be appointed according to Nolan principles.

All the members of the Executive are in close contact with their colleagues in Westminster and can take part in the discussions that take place in the framework of the European Union, as has been explained in a number of previous debates. Exactly such constitutional structures as the FSA ensure that we get the maximum benefit from that arrangement. The fact that we will have a UK-wide agency that can do things differently in Scotland means that we can have our cake and eat it—I say that in response to the point made by Mr Hamilton, who seemed to want both things at once. Richard Simpson asked a question about the Meat Hygiene Service. The arrangement is clear; the Scottish element of the service will be accountable to the Scottish arm of the food standards agency and will be audited by it.

I can assure Mr Rumbles that the decision will be based on factors that are important and that are in line with the policy of dispersal of Scottish Executive jobs throughout Scotland, which was announced by the minister today and to which I will return in a moment.  Mary Scanlon asked whether the Scottish Executive will be able to overrule the FSA's recommendations. The answer is yes. However, as the FSA's advice will be published, the Scottish Executive will have to be able to justify any such decision to the Parliament. The FSA will not give advice on animal welfare, which will remain a matter for the department of rural affairs. As a result, some of the issues that Mary Scanlon mentioned rightly remain within that department's remit. The FSA will audit local authority food safety functions to ensure that resources are spent effectively and that the required service is delivered. The location of the FSA has been discussed at some length. I thank members for trying their absolute best to avoid making a planned sales-pitch for their locality, although some members managed it better than others. I want to emphasise to Mr Lochhead that this is only the first example of a general policy of dispersal—it is not a one-off involving 35 or 40 jobs. We have made that clear in the written answer that has been made available at the back of the chamber this afternoon. I also want to emphasise the fact that the Scottish Executive has not only talked about dispersing Scottish Executive jobs throughout Scotland, but has done so for the first time. [Applause.]  I stress the point that, although the agency is a welcome development, we are not hanging about waiting for things to happen. That is why we do not support the amendment, which narrows the debate to the two areas that the SNP would, for its own purposes, like to discuss. I guess that Shona is right: that is politics. We want to look at the bigger picture, however, not to narrow down the debate.

No, it is getting too late to take interventions. We have taken action. We have undertaken two consultations with the aim of improving public safety. The first is on the proposal to remove unpasteurised drinking milk and the second is on proposals to reduce, through the butcher licensing system, the risk of cross-contamination. Heartening signs from recent food poisoning statistics indicate some success in reducing the incidence of E coli and salmonella. However, that is only a sign of encouragement and we will not let up in our determination to keep making improvements. That is why we are prepared to take hard decisions and to demand the highest standards of research.

No, it is too late.

I am about to try to answer that question, but Kay is using up my time. Because we are prepared to take hard decisions, we have decided to retender the sample testing work that is currently being done by Aberdeen reference laboratories. Some members have muddied the waters by, for example, referring to the research lab under Professor Pennington, whose work is not at issue here. We have to be clear about the matter. For years, the reference lab working group, which is an expert group, has had major concerns that have not been addressed.

I have already said that it is too late to give way. [Interruption.] Concerns have not been addressed and contracts should be reviewed. That advice was given after the group's consideration of the ARL annual report submitted on 31 July 1999. We have to be clearer still. Despite the expert working group's advice, there has been no cut in funding and no laboratory has been closed. There has simply been a review of specific contracts.

I have made it clear three times that I will take no more interventions. There has been further confusion about campylobacter work. Again, we have to be clear about the matter. There is consensus in the public health community that the data being produced by the reference lab are of little public health use. It is widely agreed, north and south of the border, that a better typing scheme is required. Several members referred to an increase in research in England; that research is on improving the typing scheme. Further research on campylobacter is still being done by the research laboratory in Aberdeen that is run by Professor Pennington. In other words, there are two different kinds of research, which have been confused—deliberately or otherwise—during the debate. For clarity, our expert advice is the advice that has been followed. I said that the Executive would not shirk difficult decisions. There has been much talk about the beef-on-the-bone ban, including some play on the risk and some talk about the consequences. Dr Richard Simpson made it absolutely clear that the risk is small. However, the consequence is a new and terrible disease. Our clear, consistent and continuing advice from the chief medical officer—of Scotland, to answer an earlier question—is that, at the moment, there is no evidence to suggest  that the ban should be lifted. The partnership agreement document, which was presented to and agreed by this Parliament, is clear: we will lift the beef-on-the-bone ban when the medical advice says that we should. That remains the case. I cannot imagine a clearer and more responsible position, in the aftermath of BSE, for a Scottish Executive that is trying to rebuild confidence, both here and in Europe, in our food and in the industry. The Executive's position—on GM foods and on food safety issues—is that the health ministers take the lead. We have heard calls today for a further debate on GM organisms and we will consider those calls. In conclusion, we are serious about improvements in food safety; the establishment of the food standards agency is a major plank in that policy. We will not sit back and wait for improvements to happen. We are committed to restoring consumer confidence in our food and the only way in which we can do that is to put public health first, last and always. We will do that.

I will endeavour to be brief, as a number of the points that have been raised have been debated fully. For Mr McLetchie's benefit, I will try to respond without a safety metaphor. [Laughter.] I want to return to the purpose of what we are doing. A number of members-and they are right-have said that we must focus on our narrow purpose, which is to close the loophole. The question then was why we need to make this clarification-for that is what we believe it is-in the definition of mental disorder.  We must be open: this is a belt and braces measure. We believe that personality disorder is included in mental disorder, and has been for many years. We want to make that absolutely clear so that there is no possibility of opening up a slightly different loophole. We do not intend to widen the definition of personality disorder.  All these amendments seek to qualify the reference to personality disorder and, in different ways, to limit its scope. We have studied them very carefully and I am grateful-particularly to Mr Matheson, Mr McLetchie and Mr Canavan-for setting out so clearly the reasoning behind their amendments. We have listened to them very carefully. We have also listened to the concerns of the mental health community. I reiterate, however, that this is a topic on which psychiatrists hold very different views, as do the various bodies in the mental health community.  Several members have mentioned the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland, the important views of which have been considered. Reference has also been made to the Scottish Association for Mental Health, which thinks that the clarification that we have made is useful, correct and does not broaden the definition of mental disorder at all.  Amendment 28 seeks to reduce the scope of the definition by including the words:  "including a persistent personality disorder manifested principally by abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible conduct".  It is our belief that the amendment is not necessary. The tests from section 17 will apply. The reaction of the chamber to Mrs Ullrich's suggestion that those who have obsessive handwashing syndrome would be brought into the ambit of the act showed how far behind the terms of the debate that kind of suggestion is.

I have only two minutes, Ms Cunningham, and I am summing up, so I should move on.  Amendment 29 would add "anti-social" to the  definition, and amendment 30 suggests the addition of "dangerous anti-social". Both fail on two counts the test that we have tried to set. First, personality disorder is the term that has been used for many years and with which we are familiar. By tinkering with it, both proposals run the risk of opening a new gap in the definition.  The more serious concern is that the amendments stray far into the territory of MacLean and Millan. Mr Canavan's question about clarification of the term psychopath is a good indication of how complex that territory is. It is not a term favoured by psychiatrists, but many psychologists use it. To make changes such as "anti-social" or "dangerously anti-social" is to go down a road that we do not have time to explore properly today. For those reasons we cannot accept the amendments.

In debating stage 1 of the bill last week, we made it clear that this was emergency legislation and that it was about one thing and one  thing only. It was and is about public safety. It was and is about ensuring that there are no further releases from detention of those patients whose diagnosis and condition is similar to that of Noel Ruddle. It is about closing that door-that is all. The bill is certainly not about reforming or modernising mental health legislation. That is why the insertion of "personality disorder" as a mental illness, which was always implicit in the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984, is made express in the bill. The amendments which we move, 37, 38 and 39, make it plainer still that "personality disorder" was included under mental illness-and it still is. It has been the aim not to change that, but to clarify it.  This is not the time or place to change that; this is about closing the door-that is all. It is not about, as some have implied, opening the doors of the state hospital to a cohort of new people with mental illnesses, whether they are currently in the community or in prison. The bill will not do that because hospital admission will still require section 17 of the 1984 act to be satisfied: it will still need to be shown that, if the mental disorder from which a patient suffers is persistent, manifested only by abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible conduct, treatment in hospital is likely to alleviate the condition or prevent it from deteriorating, and that it is necessary for the health or safety of the person, or for the protection of others, for him to receive such treatment in hospital. That is a very important sentence, although a particularly difficult one to read.  It is clearly for doctors to reach that view; in our view, the bill imposes no new responsibilities on doctors or psychiatrists in that respect. The bill affects those seeking to leave detention in hospital; it does not change the process of admission. I gave this assurance yesterday to the Royal College of Psychiatrists and I am happy to give it again in this chamber. We are closing a door; that is all. We are not opening new ones.  The Executive is in no doubt about the importance of mental health and the issues surrounding it. We well understand the complexity and difficulty of the definitions of mental disorder, and are conscious of the differing and deeply held convictions regarding such matters, even within the mental health community. That is why we will not open the door to that debate today. Involved in that debate is the MacLean committee, which is examining how to deal with serious offenders, including those with personality disorders. Also involved is the Millan committee, which is, as we asked, reviewing mental health legislation-a difficult job. We will not and must not burst in on those deliberations-they are too important. I acknowledge that even to think about such matters without beginning to stray into MacLean's and Millan's territory is extremely difficult, but to  start tinkering with the definition of mental disorder now-which it may be tempting to do-would be irresponsible. Mr Millan's letter, which has been referred to and has been made available, made it very clear that he wishes us to stay out of his room for the moment.  The Minister for Health and Community Care and I will throw open the doors to the debate on modernising mental health when the time is right. We will examine all the issues fully in the light of all the experience and expertise available, but we will not do it today because this bill should do as little as possible, commensurate with its aim of improving public safety. As drafted, with the clarifying amendments, improving public safety is what the bill does, and it goes no further.  I say again: the bill does not seek to allow anyone to be admitted to hospital who could not be detained under the existing law. For those few-and it is a few-whom the bill affects, we give the assurance, as the Deputy First Minister has already done, that resources will be available for treatment which is considered to be appropriate by clinicians in the state hospital. However, we will not try to define that today, which is why Susan Deacon has asked the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland to report on this matter properly and separately from the consideration of public safety, with which we are involved today. All around us are interesting and important doors that we need to open, but not today. Today, we have one door to close and these amendments will help us to do that. We all know what we have to do-let us close that door now.  I move amendment 37.

We must get beyond the confusion about this. Is Mr Hamilton aware that until 9 March this year the RMO was convinced of the treatability of Mr Ruddle? On that date he changed his view on the basis of discussions with his colleagues and decided that Mr Ruddle was not treatable. On 10 March, the appeal began. The basis of Mr Ruddle's appeal and release is that he was considered to be untreatable, not the lack of treatment, as Mr Hamilton says. Criticisms were made in the sheriff's report and that is why the Mental Welfare Commission report has been asked for. Let us be clear that the decision was that Mr Ruddle was not treatable.

In two debates today we have placed under close scrutiny the Ruddle case and the bill that is designed to prevent its repetition. It is a testing process for the Parliament because the existing law and procedures are complex, and big issues are at stake. The tone of the debate, particularly the second one, has recognised that.  Today we do not have the comfort-and we have to say comfort-of legislating when there has been full prior scrutiny and full consultation. That is the nature of emergency legislation and of the urgency with which we have been told we should act. It means that some of the important and  broad-ranging issues that have been raised will not be dealt with today, but I will return to how they will be dealt with later.  It could have been so much worse. If we had listened to those-and to be fair, most of them are not in the chamber-who insisted that we should do six impossible, probably unlawful, things before breakfast, to keep Noel Ruddle in detention, while we recalled Parliament by lunchtime and legislated before tea, we would have risked tears at bedtime. We would have faced legislation so hasty that it might have been struck down on its first application. Of equal importance, we would have compromised the on-going work to modernise our mental health legislation in a right and proper manner.  By contrast, I recap some of the essential points of the emergency bill. First, it is a short bill with a clearly defined purpose-public safety. Secondly, it will introduce practical and immediate steps to close the loophole exposed by the Ruddle case. Thirdly, the protections that are essential to an approach based on the European convention on human rights are there; I am happy to assure members who have asked, that the legislation has been fully considered against the convention, including articles 7 and 5. Our view is that the legislation meets the requirements of the convention.  In that context, several members referred to the therapeutic regime in the state hospital. It is true that the sheriff criticised that regime. That is why, on 2 August when that judgment became available to me, my officials and I began to look at the best way to respond to those criticisms. It was decided that we should ask the Mental Welfare Commission to look into the Ruddle case. As members know, we did that. Its report will inform our response to those criticisms. The judgment was made that Ruddle's condition was not treatable. That was the opinion of Ruddle's responsible medical officer at that time.  Fourthly, this legislation bites as of yesterday. It will therefore apply to all future appeals in the sheriff court against continuing detention of a restricted patient. A question has been raised about the difference in timing of the different sections of the bill; I reassure members that the difference in timing for the appeal provision is to allow the Court of Session appeals procedures to be put in place. We expect that to be a matter of days rather than weeks.  As Deputy Minister for Community Care, I strongly endorse the need to act in this way to prevent serious harm to the public by the small group of patients who will be affected by the legislation. I am happy to give the assurance that has been sought by several members, that the legislation will apply only to those who have a  mental disorder and who manifest abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible behaviour. The other tests, in particular section 17 of the 1984 act, will apply.  We will do ourselves and our people no service if, in passing this legislation, we jeopardise the current review of mental health legislation by the Millan committee. That is why, with a view to the longer term, we clarified the existing position that personality disorder is legally within the scope of mental disorder. I thank Richard Simpson for his helpful comments.

The Lord Advocate has agreed to reply in writing.  One in four of us-this point was made by a number of members-will suffer from a mental illness at some time in our lives. It is important to recognise-I welcome Robert Brown's intervention on this-that most people who suffer a mental illness are no danger to the public. The mental health framework that was launched in September 1997 is modernising the services. The mental illness specific grant invests £18 million per year in improving those services. A few weeks ago, I announced a further £2 million for the mental health development fund. In answer to Mr MacAskill's question, I can say that forensic psychiatric services-two in Glasgow, one in Edinburgh and others around Scotland-are being developed.  Not only do one in four of us, at some time in our lives, need to have confidence in those services; so do the hundreds of staff in many different professions who undertake difficult work on our behalf. I thank Karen Gillon and Lewis Macdonald for their interventions that reminded us of that.  The 1984 act is the legal framework for all those services. That framework cannot be determined solely by the tip of the mental health iceberg-the conjunction of disordered personality and acute violence-and this legislation will not do that. The Millan committee will be allowed to complete its work; it will be informed by Lord MacLean's committee on violent offenders. The legislation that follows their recommendations will be afforded the full normal scrutiny of the Parliament and its committees. We have given that assurance to bodies such as the Law Society of Scotland and the Scottish Association for Mental Health. Jim Wallace repeated that assurance today, and I am happy to do so one more time.  I will also ensure that the many important points that were raised in this debate are passed on to MacLean and Millan for their committees'  consideration. As members know, we have already asked Lord MacLean's committee to consider the Ruddle case specifically.  The bill is deliberately limited to the steps that are essential to close the Ruddle loophole now. That responsibility was placed on the Executive. I hope that members are ready to endorse the principles of the bill, to clear the way for the more detailed scrutiny at stage 2.  On 2 August-a month ago-we said that we would legislate if necessary; it is. We said that we would not legislate in haste; we have not. We said that we would legislate quickly and before any further similar releases; we are doing that.  This bill is concise, careful and considered. Above all, it is the correct thing to do now. I commend it to members.

rose  -

Will Mr McLetchie give way?

I want to clarify the points that Mr McLetchie made. Does he not agree that-at the meeting to which he referred-we discussed clearly with him and Ms Cunningham the possibility of laying emergency legislation before the Parliament immediately on its return after the recess, which is what we are doing? There followed a discussion on how long that process would take. We now know that it will take a week, but that was not clear at the time of the meeting. We said that we would bring the legislation to the Parliament when it returned. Ms Cunningham's response, as I recall, was that the Scottish National party had never asked for Parliament to be recalled. Is not that Mr McLetchie's recollection of the meeting?

If we are to show how serious we are about dealing with the big issues in Scotland, we could not have begun today with a better subject. We have shown, during the debate, that we are serious about Scotland's health. After all, what could be more important than the health of our nation, especially when we have so far to go? We know that from one city or town to another-even from one street to another in those cities and towns-life expectancy differs significantly. For a newborn child that one statistic can mean as much as twice the chance of surviving to the age of 15. Such inequality cannot continue. When we talk of deprivation, what is it that our fellow Scots are deprived of? They are deprived of their health and ultimately of life itself. Of course, we must tackle the poverty and inequality that are at the root of those statistics.  Sadly, there is no of course about it. I am pleased that our debate has shown so much consensus. For almost 20 years the link between ill health and poverty and inequality was denied, in the face of all the statistics and facts. However, I am saddened that some of the speakers in the debate continue to try to deny that link or to say that addressing individual responsibility is somehow mutually exclusive with recognising that link. Those approaches are not mutually exclusive. I refer Mrs Scanlon to paragraph 129 in the conclusion to the white paper, in which individual responsibility is clearly flagged up. Saddest of all, though, was the fact that David McLetchie was not only unable to engage in consensus politics on such an issue but unable even to bear to watch someone else engaged in consensus politics. David, those are the old ways and everyone else  has left them behind. I think that the Scottish people will leave you behind, as they have done already.  I cite one example of how ways of thinking must change. Several Conservative members, including Mrs Scanlon, have made efforts to move in the direction of consensus. Mary said that health spending is one third of our budget. This is the key to understanding the new approach: the health department budget is one third of this Executive's budget, but every budget is a health budget. I advise Tricia Marwick that that is why our budgets include measures such as the warm deal and other measures to improve Scotland's housing. That is part of our approach to the issue of health.

I confirm that by the end of our period in office we will have spent-if I remember the figure-£600 million more than the budgets that we inherited. We are investing hundreds of millions of pounds in order to build new houses and to improve our housing stock.

I should not take interventions in a summing-up, and I have already taken one.  To make the real difference we must pursue and develop effective partnerships. That is important. Those partnerships will include general practitioners. In the course of my duties as Deputy Minister for Community Care I have yet to find a focus group, but I have spoken to many GPs and I have visited their practices. They are at the centre of health promotion for us.  I refer to page 38 of the white paper where the role of primary care trusts and local health care is referred to specifically. The Executive is at the moment co-funding a study to provide guidance to improve early recognition by GPs of signs that might lead to suicide, which is a problem that we take very seriously. Access to learning disability nurses for each practice is a suggestion that I find attractive, but as you will know, there is a learning disability review under way and I expect that they will have a view on that, and we will take it forward. When it comes to general practice, what we are about is breaking down barriers between professions; we are not about promoting turf wars between different parts of our health service, as it seemed Mary Scanlon was doing at one stage.  We have to seek new and innovative ways of working to our common purpose. One reason for that is to maximise resources. The white paper pledges resources to this strategy, including resources for HEBS-there is no question of cuts  in health promotion budgets. We could argue for a long time about resources, but I want to say two things quite quickly. We are investing £1.8 billion in our health services over the next three years because it is one of our spending priorities, and there must be priorities in spending. But I say to Phil Gallie, whatever the previous Conservative Government invested in the health service is essentially irrelevant because it did not work. The appalling statistics that we are discussing and that are referred to in the white paper are the statistics that we inherited from them. Perhaps-

No

Perhaps if they had acknowledged the underlying causes at the time, as both Robin Harper and Des McNulty said, you would have had more impact.  Most crucially, we must engage with the communities where the greatest impact must be made. Des McNulty and Robert Brown made that point. We will lay regulations in this Parliament to ban tobacco advertising. Yesterday I was in Wester Hailes, my own constituency, where over 40 per cent of people smoke. I was launching "Breathe Easy, A Guide to Stopping Smoking". It is a partnership between the Scottish Executive, Lothian Health Board, Edinburgh University and the local community health agency. It was produced by an expert, Irene Keltie, who lived in Wester Hailes, worked in Wester Hailes, smoked in Wester Hailes and gave up in Wester Hailes. It does not lecture but engages with the people it tries to address. That is the kind of innovation and partnership approach that we need to make what we are doing work.  When I left Wester Hailes Irene showed me the pages of names of people that she had signed up to the cessation programme in an hour. She said to me, "This is what it is about". It must be what we are about as well. The Parliament has the power to make the difference. The Executive is determined to pursue the delivery of this strategy across all departmental and other boundaries. We have a real opportunity today in this chamber to cut across our own traditional boundaries and stand four-square for better health, for a better life and more of it for all of Scotland's people. Let us take that chance.

We are considering our response to the recommendations of the royal commission on long-term care relating to social work, health and housing.

I am grateful to Mrs Ullrich for raising this matter. The position of carers is something to which we give great importance, and she will know that I launched Carers Week last week and that I undertook a number of engagements during that week. Over the next three years, £5 million is earmarked in Scotland for increasing respite care to help carers in the task that they undertake. It is important that respite services are provided in ways that meet local needs. I am working with officials in the local authorities so that we can ascertain at the end of the year that the money has been used to increase the respite care available.

I have explained to Mrs Ullrich that it is a prime concern that the £5 million over each of the next three years is used to increase respite services to help carers. I have already begun the process of ensuring that we will be able to ascertain that with the local authorities.